                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          WITHIN-JOB WAGE INEQUALITY:
                     PERFORMANCE PAY AND JOB RELATEDNESS

                                       Rongsheng Tang
                                         Yang Tang
                                         Ping Wang

                                      Working Paper 27390
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27390


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We thank Daniel Parent, Carl Sanders and David Wiczer for sharing their codes and Gaetano
Antinolfi, Michele Boldrin, Fatih Guvenen, Tim Lee, Rodolfo Manuelli, B. Ravikumar, Raul
Santaeulalia-Llopis, Yongseok Shin, Guillaume Vandenbroucke, David Wiczer for helpful
comments. We have also benefited from comments by participants at the Asian Meeting of the
Econometric Society, China Meeting of Econometric Society, Midwest Macroeconomics
Meeting, North American Meeting of Econometric Society, QMUL-SUFE Workshop in
Economics, and Taipei International Conference on Growth, Trade and Dynamics. Rongsheng
Tang is grateful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No.71803112). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Rongsheng Tang, Yang Tang, and Ping Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Within-Job Wage Inequality: Performance Pay and Job Relatedness
Rongsheng Tang, Yang Tang, and Ping Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 27390
June 2020
JEL No. E24,I24,J31

                                         ABSTRACT

Over the past few decades, we find that about 80% of the widening residual wage inequality to be
within jobs. We propose performance-pay incidence and job relatedness as two primary factors
driving within-job inequality and embed them into a sorting equilibrium framework. We show
that equilibrium sorting is positive assortative both within-job and across jobs. While
performance-pay position amplifies within-job wage inequality through self-selection, the overall
relationship between job relatedness and within-job wage inequality is found generally
ambiguous. To quantify the role played by these factors, we calibrate the model to the US
economy in 2000, where the model can account around 92%of the changes in within-job
inequality among the highly educated from 1990 to 2000. Counterfactual analysis shows the
contributions of performance-pay incidence and job relatedness are about 42%and 26%,
respectively, both higher than that of job-specific productivity. While performance-pay incidence
is particularly crucial for within-job wage dispersion in business/professional industry and
professional occupation, job relatedness is the most important for mining/goods/construction
industry and sales occupation.

Rongsheng Tang                                            Ping Wang
Institute for Advanced Research                           Department of Economics
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics              Washington University in St. Louis
Shanghai                                                  Campus Box 1208
China                                                     One Brookings Drive
tang.rongsheng@sufe.edu.cn                                St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
                                                          and NBER
Yang Tang                                                 pingwang@wustl.edu
Department of Economics
Nanyang Technological University
50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798
tangyang@ntu.edu.sg
1      Introduction
It has been extensively documented in the literature that residual wage inequality accounts

for a major proportion of the overall wage inequality and residual wage inequality tends to

increase faster over time among individuals with higher education.            In this paper, we go

beyond by showing that four-fths of residual wage inequality have been driven by wage

dispersion within jobs, dened by industry-occupation pairs. Understanding the causes of

within-job inequality is thus crucial for us to understand the main sources of the overall

inequality. We propose performance-pay incidence and job relatedness as the two important

channels.

    We classify individuals into the high and low education groups according to their years

of schooling. We then compute residual wage inequality for both groups during 1983-2013.

The results suggest inequality within the high education group not only appears to be higher

but also increases faster than the low education groupthe pattern becomes more promi-

nent in the 1990s and the 2000s. In the high education group, even if we control for more

job characteristics including industry, occupation, rm size, location, citizenship etc., about

                                                      1
90% of residual wage inequality still remains.            This implies that wage inequality is pri-

marily driven by within-industry/occupation inequality.            To further conrm this nding,

we decompose residual wage inequality into between-job and within-job components over

all industry-occupation pairs.        The decomposition result shows that within-job inequality

accounts for more than 80% of residual wage inequality between 1983 and 2013, and its

                                                                                     2
contribution to the change ranges from 70% to 110% between 1990 and 2002.                To the best

of our knowledge, this pattern has not been explored in the literature.

    In order to explain the aforementioned facts, we propose performance-pay incidence and

job relatedness as the two potential causes of within-job inequality, in addition to dierential

job productivities. Workers in performance-pay position are paid according to how much they

contribute, and such payments usually include bonus, commission, piece-rate and tips. The

counter-part to this is the payment of a xed hourly wage. While the literature has identied


    1 More details can be found in section 2.2.
    2 See more details in section 2.3.




                                                  1
                                                 3
a positive wage eect of performance-pay,             we further examine the relationship between

within-job wage inequality and performance-pay incidence.           We nd a signicant positive

relationship: jobs with higher performance-pay incidence usually have higher wage inequality.

This hints the importance of the rising performance-pay incidence for the widening wage

dispersion as observed.

   With regard to job relatedness, we measure it as the relatedness between the eld of

                                                                                   4
study of the highest degree earned and the occupation at the current job.              We show that

job relatedness has positive wage eect: among workers with similar schooling levels, those

whose majors are more related to their jobs usually receive higher compensation than oth-

ers. Moreover, we nd a negative relationship between job relatedness and within-job wage

inequality: jobs with more related matches are paid more equally. This implies that a re-

duction in job relatedness as observed in data could also serve to explain within-job wage

inequality.

   The empirical analysis have only established simple correlation between performance-pay

incidence or job relatedness and within-job inequality. However, in the reality, job relatedness

may in turn aect performance-pay incidence, and within-job inequality may also inuence

the magnitude of job relatedness and performance-pay incidence. This thereby requires a

model to discipline the interactions between them. In this paper, we embed both channels

into a sorting equilibrium framework and quantify their importance in driving within-job

wage inequality among highly educated workers. Workers are heterogeneous in their innate

abilities, whereas jobs dier in their productivities.        Each job is associated with dierent

productivities and contains two positions with dierent payment schemes: performance-pay

and xed-pay. In the xed-pay position, a worker earns a pooled wage which is independent

of worker and job characteristics.       In performance-pay position, a worker's pay positively

depends on his contribution to production.           Job relatedness is modeled as the probability

that the worker nds the job related to his major. The worker at a related job gets to draw

an idiosyncratic productivity premium, which leads to higher wage payment compared with


   3 See, for example, Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2009).
   4 The terminology varies from skill mismatch, education mismatch, overeducation, overemployment and
so on, see Leuven and Oosterbeek (2011) for a survey.




                                                     2
an identical worker at an unrelated job.

   Job-specic disutilities are incurred for workers in performance-pay position.      This is

to capture the monitoring cost to prevent workers from shirking. Job relatedness and the

resulting productivity premium also vary by jobs. In sorting equilibrium, workers optimally

choose over jobs and positions. Under proper assumptions, we show that equilibrium sorting

is positive assortative, with the least talented workers choosing xed-pay position and the

more talented workers selecting performance-pay position at dierent jobs based on job

productivities and the random draw of productivity premium induced by job relatedness.

   Within-job wage inequality can be decomposed into the wage inequality within performance-

pay position and the dierences in the average wage between performance-pay and xed-pay

positions.   Analytically we can establish a positive relationship between performance-pay

incidence and within-job inequality. We are also able to prove that, given sorting, the wage

inequality within performance-pay position increases with job relatedness, but the overall

relationship between job relatedness and within-job wage inequality is generally ambiguous.

   To quantify the importance of performance-pay incidence and job relatedness for the

rising wage inequality, we calibrate the model by matching several key job-specic features

on wage inequality and employment of the US economy in 2000. The overall tness of the

calibrated model is decent.   To further disentangle how performance-pay, job relatedness,

job-specic productivities and sorting aect the pattern of within-job inequality, we conduct

a counterfactual based decomposition exercise. This is done by changing the value of each

job-specic series in 2000 into their correspondent values in 1990, while maintaining all other

parameters at their benchmark value.

   The quantitative results show that our model can account around 92% of the changes in

within-job wage inequality among the highly educated from 1990 to 2000. While the rising

performance-pay incidence explains 42% of the widening wage inequality, the reduction in

job relatedness contributes to 26% of such changes. Thus, the two primary factors proposed

together account for over two-thirds of observed changes in wage dispersion, while job-specic

productivity only accounts for about a quarter of such changes.

   By performing additional decomposition analysis by dierent grouping, we nd the

contribution of each channel vary greatly across jobs.    Specically, performance-pay inci-



                                              3
dence is found particularly crucial for within-job wage dispersion in business/professional

industry and professional occupation.      Job relatedness is the most important for min-

ing/goods/construction industry and sales occupation. The conventional factor  job-specic

productivity  is found more essential for wage dispersion in personal service/trade industry

and sales/clerical/operative labor occupation.

   We further look into grouping by changes in ranking of job earnings and employment

shares.   We nd performance-pay incidence playing the greatest role in jobs with stable

ranking, job relatedness most crucial for jobs dropped in ranking, whereas job-specic pro-

ductivity most important for jobs rising in ranking. Finally, for the rise in wage inequality in

individual jobs, performance-pay incidence contributes greatly to such change in the business-

professional pair, job relatedness crucially in the transportation-sales pair and job-specic

productivity in the goods-clerical pair.

   Our ndings suggest that any policies aiming at reducing the wage inequality should

focus more on the source of the wage dispersions within jobs.       While the rising provision

of performance-pay jobs and the widening job-specic productivity are natural causes of

inequality that need not require policy intervention, the dispersion stemming from reduction

in the relatedness between the college major and the job may deserve more policy attention.




Related Literature
A large number of studies document the trend of wage inequality that has generally been

increasing since the 1970s. (e.g. Katz and Autor (1999), Card and DiNardo (2002), Piketty

and Saez (2003), Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008), Acemoglu and Autor (2011), Piketty

and Saez (2014), Beaudry, Green and Sand (2014), Lee, Shin and Lee (2015)). One clas-

sical theory on explaining increase of wage inequality is the change of skill premium due

to skill biased technology change (SBTC). (e.g. Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993), Krusell

et al. (2000), Galor and Moav (2000), Shi (2002), Acemoglu (2003), Beaudry and Green

(2005).   Literature on the high education group suggests that it is fruitful to study wage

inequality within education group (e.g. Altonji, Kahn and Speer (2014)). Altonji, Kahn and

Speer (2016) argue that earning dierence across college majors can be larger than the skill

premium between college and the high school.


                                               4
   Recent literature focuses on the decomposition of wage inequality. Barth et al. (2011)

emphasize the role of plant dierence within industry and argue that this could explain 2/3 of

the wage inequality in the US. Card, Heining and Kline (2013) show that plant heterogeneity

and assortativeness between plants and worker explains a large part of the increase of wage

inequality in West Germany. Mueller, Ouimet and Simintzi (2017) study the skill premium

within rms, and nd that rm growth has contributed to the increase of wage inequality.

Papageorgiou (2010) highlights the labor markets within rms and concludes that the within

rm part might explain      12.5%   to   1/3   of the rise in wage inequality.   Song et al. (2018),

however, argue that the between-rm component is more important.

   There is also a number of literature founded on the decomposition across occupations.

While Kambourov and Manovskii (2009) argue that the variability of productivity shocks on

occupations coupled with endogenous occupational mobility could account for most of the

increase in within-group wage inequality between the 1970s and middle 1990s, Scotese (2012)

shows that changes in wage dispersion within occupation are quantitatively as important as

wage change between occupations for explaining wage inequality between 1980 and 2000.



Performance-pay       Some literature on performance-pay studies incentives and productiv-

ity. (e.g. Jensen and Murphy (1990), Lazear (2000)). Other literature explains the White-

Black wage gap through the dierence of tendency on performance pay across races (Heywood

and Parent (2012)). The most relevant paper to our study is Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent

(2009).   In their paper, the authors suggest performance-pay as a channel through which

the underlying changes in return to skill get translated into higher wage inequality. Their

results show that 21% of the growth in the variance of wage can be explained between the

late 1970s and the early 1990s. Performance-pay position tends to be concentrated in the

upper end of the wage distribution; for this reason, it provides a potential channel to study

within-group inequality.



Job relatedness     The general idea of job relatedness is that people with the same char-

acteristics might have dierent productivity from the job or machine they are working on.

Violante (2002) provides a channel through vintage capital to decompose residual wage




                                                   5
inequality into worker's ability dispersion, machine's productivity dispersion and the cor-

relation of these two.   The author argues that this channel could explain most transitory

wage inequality and 30% of residual wage inequality.    Jovanovic (2014) builds a model of

learning by doing to emphasize the role of match between employees and employers; under

this framework he discusses the role of improving signal quality and assignment eciency.

    In terms of measurement, there are generally two approaches in the literature. The rst

one is to measure the distance between skill requirement and acquirement based on scores

of skills from NLSY79 and O*NET (e.g. Sanders (2014), Guvenen et al. (2020), Lise and

Postel-Vinay (2015)). The second approach is to measure job relatedness between eld of

study in the highest degree and current occupation from data in NSCG (e.g. Robst (2007),

Arcidiacono (2004), Ritter and West (2014), Kirkeboen, Leuven and Mogstad (2016)).



Organization of the paper        The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the

data source and several stylized facts; Section 3 develops a model with performance-pay in-

cidence and job relatedness; Section 4 presents the equilibrium concept and some theoretical

results; Section 5 provides quantitative analysis and discusses an extension with multiple

dimensions of ability. Section 6 oers the conclusion.




2    Stylized Facts
In this section, we document several stylized facts on wage inequality, and its relation with

performance-pay position and job relatedness. We rst compute wage inequality using dif-

ferent measurements, and decompose it into the between-job and within-job components.

We then examine the relationship between performance-pay incidence and within-job wage

inequality. Finally, we document the wage eect of job relatedness, and its relationship with

within-job wage inequality.




                                             6
2.1 Data
Data in this paper are collected from several sources: the March Current Population Survey

                 5
(March CPS),         Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), National Survey of College Grad-

uates (NSCG). The March CPS includes the longest high frequency data series enumerating

labor force participation and earnings in the US economy. PSID contains detailed informa-

tion on earnings including commission, bonus, piece-rate and tips. NSCG has information

on relatedness between workers' elds of study and current occupations.



CPS        In the March CPS, the education level is grouped into six categories: primary, high

school dropout, high school graduate, some college, college graduate and post college. The

implied schooling years are 6, 9, 12, 14, 16, 18, respectively.              The potential experience

is then computed according to the dierence between the year after graduation and the

       6
age.       The highly educated includes workers who have college degree and above, and the

                                                                                7
proportion of this group increased from 17% in 1983 to 34% in 2013.                 Center for Economic

and Policy Research(CEPR) provides 2-digit and 3-digit occupation and industry code, but

the classication are not consistent during 1983-2013. To solve the issue, we build a consistent

1-digit industry and occupation code following the approach in Lemieux, MacLeod and

Parent (2009). A consistent 3-digit code is also built following the way proposed by Dorn

                                                                                      8
(2009). The same method is also used to group a consistent 2-digit code.

   Only full time and full year workers, dened as those work at least 40 weeks in a year

and 35 hours in a week, with age between 16 and 65 are kept in our sample. The wage is

dened to be the real hourly earnings, and we drop the earnings which are less than half of

minimal wage in 1982 dollar or higher than 1000. In some literature, this top value is pretty

low. For example, in Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2009) it is 100 (in 1979 dollar), and

in Acemoglu and Autor (2011) it is around 180. Since we only focus on the highly educated

individuals, we have managed to keep as many observations as possible.


  5 The data is collected from Center for Economic and Policy Research(CEPR).
  6 Specically, the formula to compute the years of experience is given as max(age - schooling   - 6, 0).
  7 An alternative way is to include people with some college, the reason we don't use it is that the job
match data in NSCG only has information on college graduated.
  8 The original 2-digit code is consistent in the following two sub-periods: 1983-2002 and 2003-2013.



                                                    7
PSID      The dataset of PSID has been intensively discussed in the literature.   We follow

Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2009) and use the data in this paper to estimate performance-

pay incidence for the year 1990 and 2000.     Performance-pay includes bonus, commission,

piece-rate and overtime payment.     A major challenge is to identify workers who are in

performance-pay position. PSID reports the format of the payment that a worker has re-

ceived in a given year, such as bonuses, commissions, or piece rates. However, for workers

without those payments, we cannot distinguish whether it is because they work in a xed-pay

position or they do not merit a bonus in the given period. Fortunately, the longitudinal na-

ture of the PSID data enables us to track the payment history to examine whether a worker

has ever received any form of performance-pay at his current job, which provides a much

more accurate measure (see Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2009)). The dataset covers year

from 1976 to 1999. In order to estimate performance-pay incidence for the year 1990 and

2000, we restrict the data up to 1990 and 1999 in this data set, respectively .



NSCG       Every ten years, NSCG provides information on the relatedness between the eld

of study from the highest degree and the current occupation. It asks people who claimed

to have a college degree in the census survey how close the current occupation is related to

their elds of study. The three possible responses in the survey include: close, some close

and not at all. We take these three responses as the proxy of job relatedness. In particular,

the job relatedness is computed as the fraction of people who reported close in the survey.

The calculation is weighted by the sample weight.

    In addition, we have also regrouped the four types of schooling levels in the dataset16,

18, 19 and 21into three types: Bachelor (16), Maser (18,19) and PhD (21). The potential

experience or tenure is calculated in the same way as in the March CPS dataset. The major

code is regrouped as in Altonji, Kahn and Speer (2014). Occupation code is regrouped to

be consistent with that in the March CPS. We keep only the full time workers with the age

between 16 and 65 and drop those with annual earnings higher than 4 million or less than

2800 USD.

    Table A.3 and A.4 present some summary statistics for the year 1990 and 2000, respec-

tively.   In the sample, the total observation are 94,360 in 1990 and 55,465 in 2000.   The




                                              8
average tenure are 19.11 and 20.92, and the annual earnings are 67514.19 and 78042.82 un-

der current year price, respectively. The overall inequality calculated by the variance of log

annual earning has increased from 1990 to 2000.

   Job relatedness has not changed very much, and it is around 0.6 in both years. As shown

in Table A.5, job relatedness does not vary much over gender or race groups. However, there

is an increasing trend in the education level.         In particular, job relatedness is 0.5 among

individuals with Bachelor degree, 0.88 among individuals with Ph.D. degree. The trend is

similar in 2000.   More importantly, job relatedness also vary greatly over occupations, in

addition, the relatedness has increased at certain occupations, but decreased at others.




2.2 Wage inequality
In this subsection, we compute the wage inequality using the March CPS dataset.               We

measure the wage inequality as the variance of log hourly earnings.           The upper panel of

Figure 1 documents the evolution of wage inequality by education group from 1983 to 2013.

In general, the wage inequality has been increasing since the 1980s among all the groups.

However, the patterns also vary over education groups. Compared with low education group,

the highly educated group has a higher level of wage inequality, meanwhile it also increases

at a faster speed especially since the late 1990s.

   Following the convention in the literature (e.g. Kambourov and Manovskii (2009)), we

compute residual wage as the residual from the following regression:




                                    ln(wageit ) =   Xit +      it .



where   ln(wageit ) is log hourly earnings. Xit   controls gender, race, experience and education.

Residual wage inequality is then computed as the variance of the residuals. As shown in the

lower panel of Figure 1, residual wage inequality takes up a large proportion of the overall

wage inequality. The two series also evolve in a similar pattern over time. As a robustness

check, we calculate the Gini coecient and 90/10 ratio as well. Figure A.1 shows that the

Gini coecient has similar pattern as the variance of residuals. For 90-10 ratio, the pattern

for high education group still remains similar. In sum, both facts conrm a high within-group



                                                   9
inequality. In addition, residual wage inequality within the group of the highly educated is

higher than the overall average, and it also increased faster especially between 1990 and

2000.




                                        (a) Overall Wage Inequality




                                       (b) Residual Wage Inequality


                          Figure 1: Wage inequality by education group

Notes: In the upper (lower) panel the inequality is measured as the variance of log value of hourly wage
(wage residual). In both panels, the blue line represents the inequality for the whole sample, and green line
only includes those highly educated. The red line is for low education group. Data source: March CPS from
CEPR (1983-2013).




    We take a closer examination of the inequality within the highly educated group in Figure

2. The upper panel presents the evolution of both the overall wage inequality and residual


                                                     10
                                 (a) Overall and Residual Wage Inequality




                           (b) Overall, Redidual and Within-job Wage Inequality


                   Figure 2: Residual Wage inequality of the highly educated

Notes: In both panels, the inequality is measured among the highly educated.        The blue line represents
the inequality of raw wage. The red line is residual wage inequality after controlling for only demographic
characteristics. The green line is residual wage inequality after further controlling occupation and industry.
The yellow line is residual wage inequality after further controlling for location, rm size, citizenship etc.
Data source: March CPS from CEPR (1983-2013).




wage inequality, and it shows that residual wage inequality accounts around 80% of the overall

wage inequality among the highly educated ones. This number is higher than the number

commonly documented in the literature for the whole sample (e.g., Lemieux (2006)), in which

individuals of dierent education levels are pooled together.                The lower panel documents




                                                     11
the trend of residual wage inequality when controlling more job characteristics including

industry, occupation, location, rm size, citizenship and so on.                            It shows that controlling

industry and occupation could explain 10% more, but the result does not change much when

more variables such as location, rm size, are controlled. These facts suggest that the wage

inequality within industry and occupation greatly contribute to the overall wage inequality.

To consolidate this nding, we decompose residual wage inequality in the next subsection.




2.3 Decomposition
In this subsection, we decompose both the level and the change of residual wage inequality

into two components: within-job and between-job inequality. A job is dened as an industry-

occupation pair.          Examples of jobs include sales in FIRE industry, managers in business,

clerical workers in retails/wholesales trade and production workers in durable/nondurable

goods, among others. To circumvent the miss-classication problem over dierent years due

to changes in the content of either occupation or industry and the problem of empty cells,

we use 1-digit code in both the industry and occupation, while checking occasionally the

inclusion of 2-digit occupation when there is a potential concern.



Decomposition of the level                     Suppose there are         J   jobs indexed as    j = 1, ...J .   At job   j,
we denote       Pj   to be the employment share,              Vj   to be within-job wage inequality, and        Ej   to be

the average earnings. Then                j   Pj V j   is the average within-job wage inequality weighted by

employment share, and              j   Pj (ln Ej -        j   Pj ln Ej )2    is the weighted average of between-job

wage inequality, where            j    Pj ln Ej        is the weighted average of log earnings in the economy.

Finally, the total wage inequality                 var(ln E )      can be decomposed into the between-job and

within-job components as follows:




                            var(ln E ) =           P j Vj +         Pj (ln Ej -       Pj ln Ej )2 .                    (1)
                                               j               j                  j


The contribution of within-job wage inequality to the overall inequality is then the ratio of


  j   P j Vj   to   var(ln E ).
      It is shown in Figure 3 that the contribution of within-job inequality is persistently large.



                                                                12
                              (a) 1-digit industry and 1-digit occupation code




                              (b) 1-digit industry and 2-digit occupation code


                       Figure 3: Decomposition of residual wage inequality

Notes: Both panels show the proportion of within-job inequality to total residual inequality (blue) and the
proportion of the between-job to total residual inequality (red). The upper panel is for 1-digit industry and
occupation code, and the lower panel is for 1-digit industry and 2-digit occupation code. Data source: March
CPS from CEPR (1983-2013).




Specically, it is around 85% under the 1-digit industry and 1-digit occupation codes as

shown in the upper panel. There may be a concern that the large contribution of within-job

inequality may be a result of broad occupation categorization. We thus perform a robustness

check using 1-digit industry and 2-digit occupation codes, As shown in the lower panel, the

contribution of within-job inequality is still large, at about 80%.              More importantly, the



                                                     13
contribution of the within-job component has been rising especially since the late 1990s.



Decomposition of the change                            We also decompose the changes of residual wage inequal-

ity over time into job related components. At job                         j   in year    t,   let   Vj,t   be the wage inequality,

ln Ej,t   be the average log earnings,                 Pj,t   be the employment share, and                   ln Et   be the average

log earning among all the jobs. Then the change of within-job wage inequality from                                        t to t + 1
is   Vj,t+1 - Vj,t ,   the change of between-job wage inequality is                       (ln Et+1 - ln Ej,t+1 )2 - (ln Et -
ln Ej,t )2 , and the change of employment share is Pj,t+1 -Pj,t .                        Therefore, the change of wage in-

equality between year              t+1 and year t, Vt+1 -Vt , can be decomposed into four components:                           the

                                                                                  J
weighted average change of within-job wage inequality                             j =1   Pj,t [Vj,t+1 -Vj,t ], the weighted av-
                                                                   J
erage change of between-job wage inequality                        j =1   Pj,t [(ln Et+1 - ln Ej,t+1 )2 - (ln Et - ln Ej,t )2 ],
                                                                              J                                              2
the weighted average change of employment share                               j =1 (Pj,t+1 - Pj,t )[Vj,t + (ln Et - ln Ej,t ) ],

and an interactive term that is the products of changes in the employment share and changes

in the sum of within and between-job wage inequalities (to be simply referred to as inter-

action in the decomposition exercise),


             J
                   (Pj,t+1 - Pj,t ){(Vj,t+1 - Vj,t ) + [(ln Et+1 - ln Ej,t+1 )2 - (ln Et - ln Ej,t )2 ]},
            j =1


Formally, we decompose the change of wage inequality as follows


                         J
Vt+1 - Vt =                    Pj,t [Vj,t+1 - Vj,t ]
                        j =1
                         J
                   +           Pj,t [(ln Et+1 - ln Ej,t+1 )2 - (ln Et - ln Ej,t )2 ]                                            (2)
                        j =1
                         J
                   +           (Pj,t+1 - Pj,t )[Vj,t + (ln Et - ln Ej,t )2 ]
                        j =1
                         J
                   +           (Pj,t+1 - Pj,t ){(Vj,t+1 - Vj,t ) + [(ln Et+1 - ln Ej,t+1 )2 - (ln Et - ln Ej,t )2 ]}.
                        j =1


      Similarly, the contribution of each component is dened as the ratio of its change to

the total change in residual wage inequality. Table 1 presents the result between 1990 and




                                                                  14
2000. Under the benchmark denition of jobs using 1-digit industry and occupation code,

the within-job component plays a dominant role, accounting for about 83% of the change in

residual wage inequality. Again, we also check the result with 1-digit industry and 2-digit

occupation code. The within-job component is still found to be the main driver, accounting

for about 80% of the change in residual wage inequality.


      Table 1: Decomposition of the changes in residual wage inequality: 1990-2000



                               Within-job     Between-job      Employment        Interaction

              1-d code           82.6%             9.2%             2.7%            3.5%

          1-d ind, 2-d occ       79.5%             8.1%             8.5%            0.3%

    Notes: This table computes the contribution of within-job, between-job inequality, employment

    share and interactions to the changes in residual inequality from 1990 to 2000. The row 1-d code

    indicates 1-digit industry and occupation code, 1-d ind, 2-d occ indicates 1-digit industry and

    2-digit occupation code. Data source: March CPS from CEPR.




2.4 Performance-pay incidence
Since 1990 there is a growing number of performance-pay positions. Lazear (2000) has an

example showing the coexistence of performance pay and xed pay positions within the same

job which we quote as follows:

   Safelite Glass Corporation is located in Columbus, Ohio, and is the country's largest

installer of automobile glass. In 1994, Safeline, under the direction of CEO Garen Staglin

and President John Barlow, implemented a new compensation scheme for the auto glass in-

stallers. Until January 1994, glass installers were paid an hourly wage rate, which did not

vary in any direct way with the number of windows that were installed. During 1994 and

1995, installers were shifted from an hourly wage schedule to performance pay-specically,

to a piece-rate schedule. Rather than being paid for the number of hours that they worked,

installers were paid for the number of glass units that they installed. The rates varied some-

what. On average installers were paid about $20 per unit installed. At the time that the piece

rates were instituted, the workers were also given a guarantee of approximately $11 per hour.

If their weekly pay came out to less than the guarantee, they would be paid the guaranteed

amount. Many workers ended up in the guarantee range.


                                                  15
Wage eect         It has been shown that wage in performance-pay position is generally higher

than that in xed-pay position(e.g. Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2009)). In the litera-

ture, performance-pay incidence describes how likely the job will provide performance-pay

position. Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2009) measure performance-pay incidence during

1976-1998 by estimating a linear probit model and the result is presented in Table A.1. In

this paper, we follow their approach and estimate performance-pay incidence among 80 jobs

                                                                  9
separately for year 1990 and 2000 using data from PSID .



Wage inequality eect            We further show the relationship between performance-pay inci-

dence and within-job wage inequality. Within-job wage inequality is again measured using

CPS dataset. We classify industries and occupations each into 5 categories to have a con-

sistent classication with those in PSID. In total there are 25 jobs are available. Merging

                                                                      10
PSID with CPS dataset, we nally have 24 jobs available.

    Figure 4 plots performance-pay incidence against within-job wage inequality for each

of the 24 jobs in 1990 and 2000, respectively. It shows that there is a signicant positive

relationship between performance-pay incidence and within-job wage inequality.                     That is,

jobs with higher performance-pay incidence usually have higher within-job wage inequality.




2.5 Occupation/Job relatedness
Job relatedness is measured as the correlation between the eld of study from the highest

degree and the occupation at the current job. In this subsection, we document the eects of

job relatedness on both wage level and within-occupation wage inequality.



Wage eect         Since industry information is not available in NSCG 1990 dataset, and thus

we cannot have a consistent denition of job for both years. We have to turn to an alternative

                                                                                             11
denition of job relatedness and instead measure within-occupation inequality.                     We use 3-


   9 In each year, PSID dataset has 10 industries and 8 occupations, and thus in total 80 jobs.
  10 We drop 1 job with less than 30 observations.
  11 As a robustness check, we have also shown the relationship between job relatedness and within-job
inequality in Figure A.4 using NSCG 2000 dataset. We have 1-digit 9 industries and 7 occupations, and in
total 45 jobs after dropping jobs with less than 50 observations. The results remain qualitatively the same.




                                                    16
                                                 (a) 1990




                                                 (b) 2000


             Figure 4: Performance-pay incidence and within-job wage inequality

Notes:   In both panels, each dot represents a job.    In total we have 24 jobs.   x-axis is performance-pay
incidence. y-axis is within-job wage inequality. Upper panel is based on 1990 data, and lower panel is based
on 2000 data. Data source: PSID and March CPS.




digit occupation classication.        There are 67 and 66 occupations from NSCG dataset in

year 1990 and 2000, respectively. In particular, at each year we separately regress the log

annual earnings against measures of job relatedness while controlling for demographic and

occupational characteristics, major and other factors such as parents education and degree




                                                      17
                                                 (a) 1990




                                                 (b) 2000


               Figure 5: Job relatedness and within-occupation wage inequality

Notes: In both panels, each dot represents an occupation(3-digit). x-axis is job relatedness. y-axis is the
wage inequality within each occupation. The upper panel is based on 1990 data, and the lower panel is based
on 2000 data. Data source: National Survey of College Graduate.




location:




         ln(earnings)ijm = Di + Zj + Mm + 1 closejm + 2 somejm + Xi +                        ijm ,



where   ln(earnings)ijm    is the log earnings of worker       i   in occupation   j   and major     m. D
includes a vector of demographic variables (tenure, age, gender, race and etc.),               Z     denotes



                                                    18
the occupation, and    M   denotes the major.    close and some are dummies to indicate whether
the occupation is closely or some related to the major, respectively.           X   includes all other

                                                                           12
factors: parents education, degree location, work location and so on.

   Table A.6 presents the main regression results. It shows that         1 = 0.171    and    2 = 0.118
in 1990;   1 = 0.229    and   2 = 0.170      in 2000.   The fact that   1 > 2 > 0         suggests that

there exists a positive and signicant relationship between job relatedness and earnings.

In comparison with worker whose occupation is not related to his major, worker whose

occupation is somewhat related or related to the major receives            11.8%     or   17.1%   higher

annual earning in 1990, respectively. Similar pattern can be found in year 2000, in addition,

the eect of job relatedness on wage becomes larger in 2000 than that in 1990. This sheds

light on the potential of explaining rising wage inequality.



Wage inequality eect            To show the relationship between job relatedness and wage in-

equality, we measure the job relatedness by the percentage of workers who reported closely

related. Figure 5 plots job relatedness and wage inequality across occupations under 3-digit

classication.    In this gure, each point represents one occupation and wage inequality is

residual wage inequality in NSCG. It shows that there is a signicant negative relationship

between job relatedness and within-occupation wage inequality in both 1990 and 2000. As a

robustness check, we have also plot the relation between the two under the 2-digit occupation

classication in Figure A.3. The results remain.




2.6 A rst look at the impact on wage inequality
The evidence established enables us to take a rst look at how performance-pay incidence

and job relatedness may aect within-job wage inequality.            We restrict the analysis to a

selection of 24 jobs, which commonly show up in CPS, PSID and NSCG dataset.

   By comparing data from 1990 and 2000 as depicted in Figure 6, we learn that performance-

pay incidence rises in 23 of 24 jobs with the only (sizable) fall in the business-sales pair. On

the contrary, job relatedness falls in 19 of 24 jobs, with all rises by negligible margins.


  12 Guvenen et al. (2020) show that skill mismatch has signicant and persistent negative eect on the
wages and earnings as copied in Table A.2.




                                                  19
   Thus, given the relationships identied in the previous subsections, namely, the positive

relationship between performance-pay incidence and within-job wage inequality and the neg-

ative relationship between job relatedness and within-job wage inequality, we expect wage

inequality to rise when performance-pay incidence is higher but job relatedness is lower.


                                                        1990
                                              0.9       2000
                                                        Dif
                                              0.8

                                              0.7
                      Performance incidence




                                              0.6

                                              0.5

                                              0.4

                                              0.3

                                              0.2

                                              0.1

                                                0

                                              -0.1
                                                           5         10             15     20
                                                                           Job id

                                                     (a) Changes in Performance-pay Incidence



                                                         1990
                                              0.9
                                                         2000
                                                         Dif
                                              0.8

                                              0.7

                                              0.6
                      Job relatedness




                                              0.5

                                              0.4

                                              0.3

                                              0.2

                                              0.1

                                                 0

                                              -0.1

                                                           5         10             15     20
                                                                           Job id
                                                          (b) Changes in Job Relatedness


        Figure 6: Changes in performance-pay incidence and Job relatedness by job

Notes: We report the levels of performance-pay incidence and job relatedness in 1990 and 2000, and their
changes from 1990 to 2000 among a selection of 24 jobs.




                                                                          20
    To understand the impact of these two channels on wage inequality, we thus build a

sorting equilibrium model to which we now turn.




3     The model
The empirical analysis have only established simple correlation between performance-pay

incidence or job relatedness and within-job inequality. However, in the reality, job relatedness

may in turn aect performance-pay incidence, and within-job inequality may also inuence

the magnitude of job relatedness and performance-pay incidence. This thereby requires a

model to discipline the interactions between them.



Environment            There are   J    jobs available in the economy, dened as industry-occupation

pairs and indexed by        j = 1, 2, ...J .   At each job, two types of positions are oered: xed-pay

(F P ) position and performance-pay (P P ) position.               Workers are heterogeneous in innate

ability   a   and will choose jobs, positions and eorts to maximize utility. Job characteristics

and worker's ability are both public information.



Performance-pay position                 A worker's ecient labor supply at performance-pay posi-

tion depends on his ability        a,   the job-specic productivity     A,    an idiosyncratic productivity

premium       ,   and his eort level     e.    Specically, the ecient labor supply is given by,




                                                      h = Aae.                                          (3)



                                                                        1 a
    Ability     a   follows a Pareto distribution       a  G(a) = 1 - ( a ) , a  1, a > 2,        with the

minimum ability normalized to 1. The assumption of                 a > 2     is to guarantee nite variance,

which is essential for the analysis of wage inequality measured by the variance of logged

wage. To capture the idea of job relatedness in the data, we consider that with probability

pj  (0, 1)        the worker may nd job          j   related to his major.   Under this circumstance, the

worker gets to draw an idiosyncratic productivity premium                     s   from a job-specic Pareto

distribution dened over          [1, ),       otherwise the productivity premium is 1.       Formally, the




                                                          21
idiosyncratic productivity premium                  of job   j   obeys

                
                s
                
                        with probability    pj                              1
          =                                           , and s  F (s) = 1 - ( )sj , s  1, sj > 2,                   (4)
                                                                            s
                1                           1 - pj
                
                        with probability



where    sj   captures the dispersion of productivity premium distribution at job                   j , and similarly
the assumption of         sj > 2   is maintained.

   We denote       Hj (a,  )    to be the joint distribution of the ability and the productivity pre-

mium at job       j.    The total ecient labor supply in performance-pay position of job                      j    are:




                                       Hjp =                 hjp (a,  )dHj (a,  ),                                 (5)
                                                 aDjp    

where    DjP    is the ability domain for workers,                hjp (a,  )   is the ecient labor supply from

a worker of ability        a   and productivity premium                .   To simplify the analysis, we further

assume the distribution of ability and productivity premium are independent.                               That is,

Hj (a,  ) = G(a)Hj ( ),        where    Hj ( )   is the distribution of the productivity premium, and it

equals   Hj ( ) = (1 - pj ) + pj Fj ( ).


Fixed-pay position              Individual worker's ecient labor supply at xed-pay position de-

pends neither on the innate ability nor the eort level. It is assumed to be only linear in

the job-specic productivity. Specically, at job                    j   the ecient labor supply from a worker

in xed-pay position is         Aj .   The total ecient labor supply in xed-pay position of job                 j   are

thus:

                                                    HjF = Aj NjF ,

where    NjF   is the employment level at xed-pay position of job                    j.


Production and payment                   The production function in job              j   is a CES aggregator of the

ecient labor supply from performance-pay position and xed-pay position. Specically, the

output of job     j    is given by,


                                                                           1
                                                            
                                      Yj = j HjF + (1 - j )Hjp             
                                                                               ,  < 1,                             (6)



                                                             22
         1
where      is the elasticity of substitution between the labor supply from the two positions
        1-

 they are substitutable (complementary) if                   > 0 ( < 0); j        is job specic to reect the

intensity of xed-pay position at each job.

   We denote        w   to be the wage rate per worker at xed-pay position. In each job                 j,   given

wage rate     w,   the representative rm decides the employment level at xed-pay position to

maximize the prot net of payment to workers at xed-pay position. That is,




                                                   max Yj - wNjF .
                                                   NjF



It is straightforward to show         NjF     satises:


                                                                - 1
                                                     
                                          
                                             ( jw
                                                Aj
                                                   ) 1- - j           HjP  j HjP
                              NjF =                                              .                             (7)
                                                  1 - j               Aj    Aj

                                                                                                       w
We show in Appendix D that the total payment to workers at xed-pay position,                             H ,
                                                                                                       Aj j jP

is equivalent to:




                                                  EjF =    ~j HjP ,
                                                        ~j A

                                      1                      j 
where   ~j = j  + (1 - j )
        A                             
                                          , and   ~j =
                                                           
                                                               j
                                                                     .   We also show in Appendix D that the
               j                                         j j +(1-j )

total output can be expressed as                  ~j HjP .
                                             Yj = A          Therefore, the residual prot at performance-

pay position is     EjP = (1 -      ~j HjP .
                               ~ j )A
   Firms and workers at performance-pay position share the residual prot.                            We assume

workers' bargaining power is        µ.    Therefore, the total payment to workers at performance-pay

position is   EjP = µ(1 -      ~j HjP ,
                          ~ j )A                  and the payment for an individual worker of ability             a
and productivity premium              at performance-pay position is thus          µ(1 -      ~j Aj aej (a,  ).
                                                                                         ~ j )A


Workers        A worker's utility positively depends on his own consumption                  c,   and negatively

depends on his eort level        e.   In addition, for workers at performance-pay position, he also




                                                           23
                                                                   13
suers from a job-specic disutility of being monitored.                  We further assume worker's utility

function is linear in consumption and quadratic in his eort level.                      Specically, worker's

utility function from working at performance-pay position of job                 j   takes form:



                                                  1
                                         UjP = c - be2 - Mj ,                                             (8)
                                                  2

where   b   measures the degree of disutility on eort and           Mj     is the disutility level from job   j.




    Workers make decision on jobs, positions and eorts.                     We summarize the timeline of

worker's decision in Figure 7.         The worker chooses the job and the position before the

realization of job relatedness and the productivity premium. In contrast, the optimal eort


  13 The purpose for monitoring is to prevent workers in performance-pay position from shirking. To simplify
the analysis, we make the following two assumptions. First, when there is shirking, worker's eort decreases
to (1- ) of the optimal eort level. Second, we assume the following condition which rules out the equilibrium
with shirking, for any   j
                                                       2µbMj
                                        1 > 2 >                        .
                                                  [µ(1 -      ~j Aj ]2
                                                         ~ j )A



                                                     24
level is chosen after the worker observes the outcome of job relatedness and the productivity

premium.

    Before the realization of the job relatedness and the productivity premium, the expected

utility from performance-pay position at job              j    is thus




                                          EUjP (a) = E [UjP (a,  )].                                       (9)




    To simplify the analysis, we assume xed outside option such that the utility from working

at xed-pay position is constant, denoted as            U.      Finally, a worker chooses the job and position

which delivers the highest expected utility.




                                        EV (a) = max{U , EUjP (a)}.                                      (10)
                                                      j



Thus, a xed-pay position is chosen by a worker of ability                  a if U > max{EUjP (a)}; otherwise,
                                                                                     j
a worker of ability    a   would choose a performance-pay position at job




                                        j  (a) = arg max{EUjP (a)}.
                                                          j




4     Theoretical analysis

4.1 Equilibrium
Given job-specic characteristics          {Aj , j , Mj , sj , pj },      a sorting equilibrium is described by

the wage rate per unit of raw labor             w   and the labor allocation across jobs and positions

{DjF , Djp }   such that:



    1. Given the wage rate       w   per unit of raw labor supply, and the ecient labor supply from

      performance-pay position          HjP ,   rms decide the employment at xed-pay position             NjF
      to maximize their prots as in equation (7).



    2. Given the employment at xed-pay position, workers optimally choose jobs and posi-

      tions    {DjF , Djp }   as in equation (10).




                                                          25
   3. The labor market clears:




                                                                 dG(a) = 1,
                                              j   a{DjF DjP }



      where the total amount of labor force is normalized to be 1.




4.2 Analytical Results
In the following, we solve worker's decision in a backward fashion. Specically, a worker of

ability   a   at performance-pay position of job          j   after realizing the productivity premium   
chooses eort to maximize his utility:



                                                             1
                               UjP (a,  ) = max cj (a, , e) - be2 - µMj .
                                             e               2

Consumption       cj   equals to the total earnings:




                                         cj = µ(1 -      ~j Aj ae,
                                                    ~ j )A


and thus the resulting eort level is:




                                     ej (a,  ) = µ(1 -      ~j Aj a/b.
                                                       ~ j )A


   Given the eort level above, worker's ecient labor supply is thus:



                                                   µ[(1 - ~ j )A~j Aj a ]2
                                    hjp (a,  ) =                           .
                                                              b

and the ex-post utility from working at job           j   can be derived as:



                                              1             ~j Aj µa)2 - µMj ,
                               UjP (a;  ) =      ((1 - ~ j )A
                                              2b

and the expected utility is

                                                    ~j a2 - M
                                         EUjP (a) = C       ~j.



                                                      26
where



                                   ~j = 1 ((1 - 
                                   C                 ~j Aj µ)2 Ej ( 2 ),
                                                ~ j )A
                                         2b
                                   ~ j = µMj ,
                                   M


and
                                                       sj
                                      Ej ( 2 ) = pj          + 1 - pj .
                                                      sj - 2

4.3 An equilibrium with positive assortative sorting
To circumvent the potential issues associated with multiple equilibria in a general setting,

we restrict our attention to the case of monotone job ranking under which we order                          n   such

that               ~n } are increasing sequences of n.14
        ~ n } and {C
       {M                                                            In this case, we are able to characterize

the sorting equilibrium.

      We start with the following lemma to show that within performance-pay position, workers

of higher ability will choose the job of larger index.



Lemma 1       If a worker of ability      a   chooses to work at performance-pay position of job                  k,
then workers of ability     a >a    will prefer performance-pay position at any job                nk      than at

job   k.

      We further impose the following assumption to ensure the existence of a sorting equilib-

rium.



Assumption 1 :
                            ~ n-1
                       ~ n -M
                       M
                       ~n -C
                       C    ~n-1 is increasing in      n   for all   n > 1.


      When the assumption above holds, we can further characterize workers' preferences over

jobs within performance-pay position in the following lemmas.



Lemma 2       Under Assumption 1, workers of ability                 a           M
                                                                                 ~n -C
                                                                                 C
                                                                                      ~ n-1
                                                                                 ~ n -M
                                                                                      ~n-1 ,
                                                                                               M
                                                                                               ~n+1 -C
                                                                                                      ~n
                                                                                               ~ n+1 -M
                                                                                               C      ~n     prefer


  14 In the remaining of this section, we re-label job index as   n = 1, 2..J   to denote the ranking of jobs in the
sorting equilibrium.




                                                       27
performance-pay position at job            n   to that at    n-1    and    n + 1.



Lemma 3           Under Assumption 1, if a worker of ability              a   prefers performance-pay position at

job   n   to   n - 1,   then he also prefers performance-pay position at job                  n   to any job   k < n - 1.



Lemma 4           Under Assumption 1, if worker of ability             a      prefers performance-pay position at

job   n   to   n + 1,   then he also prefers performance-pay position at job                  n   to any job   k > n + 1.



      The proof of the above three lemmas can be found in Appendix C. These lemmas to-

gether imply that conditional on workers at performance-pay position, workers of ability                              a
      ~ n -M
      M    ~ n-1        ~ n+1 -M
                        M      ~n                                                                               ~ n -M
                                                                                                                     ~ n-1
                                                                                                                M
      ~    ~
      Cn -Cn-1
                 ,      ~      ~
                        Cn+1 -Cn
                                    would nd it optimal to work in job                  n.   Denote   an :=     ~    ~
                                                                                                                Cn -Cn-1

to be the cuto ability, we can thus conclude that workers of ability                              a  [a     
                                                                                                       n , an+1 )   would

prefer performance-pay position at job              n   than at any other jobs.

      The previous analysis are restricted to workers at performance-pay position.                                  In the

following, we explore how workers choose between performance-pay position and xed-pay

position. We need to impose the following additional assumption.



Assumption 2:              a < a2   s.t.   ~1 a2 - M
                                           C                ~1 (a )2 - M
                                                   ~1 < U < C
                                                                 2
                                                                       ~1                holds.




                                                                                  1/2
Lemma 5           Under Assumption 2, workers of             a  a,     U +M
                                                                         ~1
                                                                         C
                                                                           ~1
                                                                                         choose to work in xed-pay

                                               ~1   1/2
                                           U +M
position, and workers of            a        ~1
                                             C
                                                          , a2    choose to work in performance-pay position

of job 1.



      Combining all the Lemmas above yields the following proposition.



Proposition 6            Under Assumptions 1 and 2, there exists a sorting equilibrium that is positive

assortative both within and across jobs.




                                                             28
(i)    Sorting across jobs:     Workers of ability       a            M
                                                                      ~n -C
                                                                      C
                                                                           ~ n-1
                                                                      ~ n -M
                                                                           ~n-1 ,
                                                                                     M
                                                                                     ~n+1 -C
                                                                                            ~n
                                                                                     ~ n+1 -M
                                                                                     C      ~n    nd it opti-

        mal to work at performance-pay position of job n > 2, whereas workers of                          a 
          U +M~ 1 1/2
            ~1
            C
                      , a2 chooses to work in performance-pay position of job 1.


                                                                1/2
(ii)   Sorting within jobs: Workers of      a  a,      U +M
                                                         ~1
                                                         C
                                                           ~1
                                                                      choose to work in xed-pay position

        of any job.




                                   Figure 7: Job and position choice

Notes: The x-axis represents the ability level.     y-axis represents 4 jobs in dierent colors.    The top axis
represents the two positions: on the left of the dash line is xed-pay position, and on the right of the line is
performance-pay position. The solid blue line represents the ability distribution. Hence in the gure there are
four cuto abilities which are  amin = a                          
                                         1 = 2, a2 = 4, a3 = 6, a4 = 8. Then workers will be indierent between
jobs in xed-pay position if   a < a1 , and choose job n with performance-pay if a
                                                                                              
                                                                                   n  a < an+1 , n = 1, 2, 3, 4.




An illustration of job and position choices                 To illustrate the sorting equilibrium dened

above, we make a simple example in Figure 7. There are four jobs (job one (green), job two

(red), job three (blue), job four (black)), and hence there are four cuto abilities which, in

the gure, are     amin = a                        
                          1 = 2, a2 = 4, a3 = 6, a4 = 8. Workers will work in xed-pay position

if   a < a1,   and choose performance-pay position of job             n   if   a        
                                                                                n  a < an+1 , n = 1, 2, 3, 4.


                                                       29
Therefore, in each job there are some workers in performance-pay position and others in

xed-pay position.




4.4 Wage inequality
Denote performance-pay incidence as          np      and the fraction of related jobs as          pn ,   whose eects

on within-job wage inequality will be characterized in this subsection.                       Within-job wage

inequality at any job   n,    denoted     Vn ,   can be decomposed into the following within- and

between-position component:




                            Vn = np Vnp + np (1 - np ) (ln Enp - ln EnF )2 ,                                    (11)




where   Vnp is the wage inequality within performance-pay position of job n, and ln Enp -ln EnF
captures the dierence in average wages between performance-pay (ln Enp ) xed-pay (ln EnF )

position.

   Within performance-pay position, the mean of log wage is the weighted average of wages

among related(ln Enps ) and un-related workers(ln Enpm ):




                               ln Enp = pn ln Enps + (1 - pn ) ln Enpm ,


where
                                      a                                 ~n An as]2
                               1       n+1                 [µ(1 - ~ n )A
                  ln Enps   =                        ln{                           }dHn (a, s),
                              Nnp    an          s                    b
                                             a                          ~n An a]2
                                   1          n+1           [µ(1 - ~ n )A
                     ln Enpm    =                     ln{                         }dG(a).
                                  Nnp      an
                                                                      b
   Similar to the denition of     Vn , the inequality within performance pay position can be fur-
ther decomposed into inequality within related(Vnps ), unrelated(Vnpm ) workers and inequality

between them    (ln Enps - ln Enpm ):


                Vnp = pn Vnps + (1 - pn )Vnpm + pn (1 - pn )(ln Enps - ln Enpm )2 ,




                                                            30
where



                                        (µ(1 -  ~ n )A~n An as)2
               Vnps = varn (ln[                                   ])
                                                    b
                                      a                           ~n An as)2
                            1           n+1        (µ(1 -   ~ n )A
                      =                       {ln[                           ] - ln Enps }2 dHn (a, s)
                           Nnp        
                                     an     s                   b

and



                                           (µ(1 -         ~n An a)2
                                                     ~ n )A
                 Vnpm = varn (ln[                                   ])
                                                        b
                                         a                        ~n An a)2
                                 1         n+1      (µ(1 -   ~ n )A
                            =                  {ln[                         ] - ln Enpm }2 dG(a).
                                Nnp      
                                        an                      b




Performance-pay incidence                     To explore the impacts of performance-pay incidence on

within-job wage inequality, we can obtain the following proposition:




Proposition 7         If
                                1
                           np < 2 ,   then   Vn   is increasing in performance pay incidence (np ).




      The proposition above establishes a positive relationship between performance-pay in-

cidence and within-job inequality.                Everything else being equal, jobs with larger share of

employment in performance-pay position have higher wage inequality.



Job relatedness             We further analytically examine the role of job relatedness played in

with-job wage inequality in the following proposition.



        Proposition 8           A sorting equilibrium possesses the following properties.



(i)    The wage dierence between performance-pay and xed-pay position is increasing with

        job relatedness       pn .

(ii)   The wage inequality within performance-pay position                    Vnp   is increasing with with job

        relatedness    pn .

                                                            31
     However, the relationship between job relatedness and within-job wage inequality remains

ambiguous. To see this, we derive



Vn      Vnp                                  ln Enp np
   = np     +2np (1-np ) (ln Enp - ln EnF )        +    [Vnp + (1 - 2np )(ln Enp - ln EnF )2 ] .
pn      pn                                   pn      pn
                                         >0
              >0                                       >0                          ?


As shown in Proposition 8, the rst two terms are positive.              Yet, in sorting equilibrium,

greater job relatedness need not induce higher performance-pay incidence. As shown in Sec-

tion 2.6, from 1990 to 2000, we have seen a drop in job relatedness and a rise in performance-

pay incidence. In this case, the third term becomes negative if       np < 1/2, which may outweigh
the rst two terms, leading to an overall negative relationship between job relatedness and

wage inequality as observed in data (recall Section 2.6).




5      Quantitative Analysis
We perform quantitative analysis in this section.           We rst calibrate the model to mimic

inequality patterns of the US economy in 2000. The calibrated model successfully matches

several key job-specic moments in the data. To evaluate the contributions of dierent po-

tential channels to changes in inequality from 1990 to 2000, we then conduct a decomposition

exercise.




5.1 Calibration
We calibrate the benchmark model to the US economy in 2000. Similar to Section 2.6, we

focus on a selection of 24 jobs, which can be observed in CPS, PSID and NSCG dataset.

µ   governs workers' bargaining power at performance-pay position, and we let it be 0.6.         a
is the shape parameter of the Pareto distribution for workers' innate abilities.         We assign

a value of    8.0   to it so that the 90-10 earning ratio in our calibrated economy is roughly at

5.0.      captures the elasticity of substitution between ecient labor supply in the production

function. We target it to match between-job inequality.          b   is the parameter governing the

disutility from exerting eort.       We normalize it such that the least talented individual at




                                                  32
performance-pay position chooses to exert the same eort level as those in xed-pay position,

i.e., the minimum eort (emin ).

    In total we have ve job-specic series:                {Aj , Mj , pj , j , sj }J
                                                                                  j =1 . {Mj }             is the job-specic

monitor costs, and we calibrate it to match the fraction of workers at performance-pay

position in each job.         {pj }   captures job relatedness, and we directly use the estimation

results from Section 2 using data from NSCG.                {j } is the coecient on the raw labor supply
in the production function. We calibrate it to match the employment share of performance-

pay position at each job.           {Aj }   is the job-specic productivities, and we have it to match

                                                                                 15
the average pay relative to the overall mean at each job                              . Finally,   {sj }   is the job-specic

shape parameter that governs the distribution of the productivity premium.                                        We choose

them to match within-job inequality. We summarize the parameter values and their targets

in Table 2. In Table 3, we report the model predicted within-job, between-job and overall

inequalities as opposed to the data counterpart in 2000. The model has reasonably matched

the untargeted between-job inequality and overall inequality.

                                   Table 2: Benchmark Parameterizations

 Para.    Targets                                                        Targeted Value              Para. Value

 µ        Literature                                                                   0.6                  0.6
 a        90-10 earning ratio                                                          5.0                  7.8
          between-job inequality                                                      0.04                 0.42
 b        minimum eort level                                                            1                  0.16
 {Mj }    fraction of workers at each job                                        Figure A.5
 {pj }    job relatedness                                                         Figure 6
 {j }     performance-pay incidence                                               Figure 8
 {Aj }    average earning at each job over the overall mean                      Figure A.5
 {sj }    within-job inequality                                                   Figure 8




                                                                  16
    Of course, due to strict parameter restriction,                    it is impossible to exactly match the data

counterparts. Nonetheless, the model is still capable of matching the key features regarding

to the inequality patterns and performance-pay incidence at each job. To see this, we plot in

the left panel of Figure 8 within-job inequality in the data versus the model, and in the right

panel performance-pay incidence in the data versus the model. It is clear that our model


  15 The average pay at job    j                  Ej =
                                                         Njp           Njf
                                   is dened as:
                                                         Nj Ejp    +   Nj    w
  16 For example,   {j }   need to be between 0 and 1 and          needs to be smaller than 1. In addition,         {Mj }   are
required to be sorted ascending.



                                                           33
                                                        Table 3: Benchmark Results




                                                                             1990                              2000
                                                                     Data           Model               Data       Model

                                        Within-job                   0.164          0.199               0.231        0.240
                                        Between-job                  0.032          0.035               0.040        0.043
                                        Overall                      0.196          0.234               0.270        0.283

    Note: Data on each type of inequalities are computed from CPS-March. Model implied patterns
    on inequalities are based upon calibration.


                  0.5                                                                          1

                 0.45                                                                        0.9

                  0.4                                                                        0.8

                 0.35                                                                        0.7
         model




                                                                                     model
                  0.3                                                                        0.6


                 0.25                                                                        0.5


                  0.2                                                                        0.4


                 0.15                                                                        0.3


                  0.1                                                                        0.2
                     0.1   0.15   0.2   0.25     0.3    0.35   0.4    0.45    0.5               0.2    0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9   1
                                                data                                                                     data

                             (a) Withi-job Inequality                                                 (b) Performance-pay Incidence

    Note: On the left panel, each dot represents a job. x-axis is the inequality from data, and y-axis
    is the inequality computed from model. On the right panel, x-axis is performance-pay incidence
    from data, and y-axis is performance-pay incidence from model.


                                                       Figure 8: Model tness in 2000



tness in these important measures is quite good.




5.2 Decompose the changes in within-job inequality
To further disentangle how performance-pay, job relatedness, sorting as well as job-specic

productivities aect the pattern of within-job inequality, we conduct the decomposition

analysis in this section.                      Our exercise is to change the value of each job-specic series in

2000 into their respective values in 1990, while maintaining all other parameters at their

benchmark value.

   In order to obtain those job-specic series in 1990, we have also re-calibrated the model

to year 1990 following identical strategy as the exercise in 2000.                                                              Table 3 also compares

the aggregate results between the data and model.                                                        Similar to the outcome in 2000, the


                                                                                34
model slightly overpredicts both within- and between- job inequality. In Figure 9, we have

also plotted the job-specic inequality and performance-pay incidence between the data and

model in 1990. We can see that the over-predictions of the 1990 within-job inequality stem

primarily from 4 jobs. Overall, the calibrated model still decently mimics the data counter-

part.


                                                                                                0.9
                         0.4

                                                                                                0.8
                        0.35
                                                                                                0.7

                         0.3
                                                                                                0.6




                                                                                        model
                model




                        0.25                                                                    0.5


                                                                                                0.4
                         0.2
                                                                                                0.3

                        0.15
                                                                                                0.2


                         0.1                                                                    0.1
                            0.1     0.15         0.2          0.25       0.3     0.35              0.1    0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9
                                                       data                                                                 data

                                  (a) Within-job Inequality                                              (b) Performance-pay Incidence

       Note: On the left panel, each dot represents a job. x-axis is the inequality from data, and y-axis
       is the inequality computed from model. One the right panel, x-axis is performance-pay incidence
       from data, and y-axis is performance-pay incidence from model.


                                                              Figure 9: Model tness in 1990



      In the benchmark decomposition analysis, we avoid potential problems arising from mis-

t by focusing on the 20 jobs with good t, where the correlation between the model predicted

within-job inequality and the data counterpart is 0.936. We leave the analysis for the full

sample of 24 jobs to the Appendix B. The main results remain qualitatively similar, despite

a few large percentage contribution gures distorted by large residuals.

      To evaluate the contribution of factor                                    s   to the changes of inequality from 1990 to 2000

                                           j
at job     j,   denoted as                 s ,   we apply the following formula:


                                                        j                         j            j
                                  j              (model2000 - counters )j model2000    - model1990
                                  s =                     j              j  (                      ),
                                                  s (model2000 - counters )   dataj          j
                                                                                  2000 - data1990


                j                                j
where      model1990               and      model2000           denote the model predicted inequality in 1990 and 2000 at

job   j,   respectively.               dataj
                                           1990          and         dataj
                                                                         2000   in turn denote the inequality in the data over the

                                j
two years.               counters          is the inequality obtained from the counterfactual economy, in which we




                                                                                    35
move the job-specic factor     s   from their values in 2000 to those in 1990.

   In total, we have evaluated 4 contributing factors from the model: performance-pay inci-

dence, job relatedness, job-specic productivity, and sorting-induced changes in employment

shares. The fraction that cannot be accounted by the model is due to residuals arising from

missing factors, which is small in the benchmark with 20 jobs. Specically, the contribution

of residual is expressed as:


                                                  j             j
                               j             model2000 - model1990
                               res =1-(                            ).
                                              dataj
                                                  2000 - data j
                                                              1990


   Finally, the overall contribution of factor       s, denoted as ¯s , is an average of its contribution
at each job weighted by the employment share of each job:


                                                             j
                                                         j   s Nj
                                         ¯s =                    j      ,
                                                     k       j   k Nj

where   Nj   is the employment share in job     j.

                          Table 4: The Contribution of Each Channel


 Channel       Performance     Relatedness  Productivity  Sorting    Residual    Total

 Contribution     41.75%         25.54%       26.03%       -1.33%     8.01%    100.00%

   Note: The result for each channel is computed as average across jobs weighted by
    employment share.



   In Table 4, we have reported the overall contribution of each channel.                The contribu-

tion of performance-pay incidence, job relatedness, job-specic productivity and sorting is

41.75%, 25.54%, 26.03%      and    -1.33%,   respectively.          Thus, the model can capture around

92% of the changes in within-job wage inequality from 1990 to 2000, among which the rising
performance-pay incidence and the reducing job relatedness alone can account for more than

two-third of the widening wage dispersion.

   To gain further insight, we proceed with additional decomposition analyses by dierent

grouping, by industry or occupation, and by changes in ranking of job earnings or employ-

ment shares from 1990 to 2000.          We will focus on those with large deviations in group

outcomes from the overall aggregate outcomes.




                                                     36
   To examine the contribution of each factor at the industry level, we aggregate its contri-

bution at the job level into the industry level adjusted by the employment share:


                                                                j
                                                i       j i   s   Nj
                                               ¯s   =                ,
                                                            j i Nj


where   i is the industry index and j     denotes the job index that belongs to industry i. Table 5

presents the results. We nd that performance-pay incidence becomes much more important

in business/professional service industry contributing more than 3 quarters of the change

in within-job inequality. On the contrary, its role is negligible in personal service/trade in-

dustry. While job relatedness is crucial for wage dispersion in mining/goods/construction

industry contributing almost half, it is far less inuential in business/professional service.

Furthermore, job-specic productivity plays an essential role in personal service/trade indus-

try contributing almost half, it is inconsequential to business/professional service industry.

Throughout all industries, sorting is never important. Most interestingly, the widening wage

inequality in business/professional service industry is largely driven by performance-pay in-

cidence only in which none of the other factors contribute more than 10%.


                                  Table 5: Decomposition by industries


 Industry                                       Performance      Relatedness   Productivity   Sorting   Residual

 mining, durables/non-durables, construction        0.316            0.491        0.402       0.048      -0.257
 transportation and utility                         0.539            0.125        0.397       -0.056     -0.006
 FIRE                                               0.125            0.272        0.315       0.053      0.235
 business, professional service                     0.765            0.070        -0.025      -0.086     0.275
 personal service, whole/retail trade               0.014            0.249        0.476       -0.004     0.265
 Aggregate                                          0.418            0.255        0.260       -0.013     0.080

    Note: The result for each industry is weighted sum across occupations within the industry.




   Similarly, we can compute the contribution of each factor at the occupation level by

aggregating its contribution at the job level into the occupation level adjusted by the em-

ployment share. As shown in Table 6, performance-pay incidence turns out to be the only

inuential channel in the professional occupation contributing almost three quarters, but

plays little role in sales occupation. Somewhat surprisingly, in manager occupation, its con-

tribution is only one-sixth, much lower than the overall contribution. This may be due to

the well-known agency problem.           In sales occupation, the contribution of job relatedness




                                                        37
and the productivity are much higher than the overall outcome, while they contribute little

in professional occupation.       Job-specic productivity also contribute much more than the

overall in craftsmen/operative/labor and clerical occupations. Throughout all occupations,

sorting is never important, which contrasts the occupational demand eect emphasized in

the literature (e.g., see Burstein, Morales and Vogel (2019)).


                            Table 6: Decomposition by occupations


      Occupation                   Performance   Relatedness    Productivity   Sorting   Residual

      Professional                    0.724         0.043          -0.042      -0.032     0.307
      manager                         0.166         0.425          0.229       0.060      0.119
      sales                           0.056         0.767          0.881       0.033      -0.736
      craftsmen,operative,labor       0.132         0.332          0.587       -0.046     -0.004
      Clerical,service                0.185         0.226          0.678       -0.095     0.006
      Aggregate                       0.418         0.255          0.260       -0.013     0.080

    Note: The result for each occupation is weighted sum across industries within the occupation.




   In the benchmark economy, jobs are sorted by average wages. From 1990 to 2000 the

ranking of jobs may change.        In our exercise, ranking at the rst slot implies the job has

the lowest average wage among all the jobs. In the following analysis, we group jobs with

similar changes in ranking to examine how the role of each channel may vary over dierent

categories. If the job's job bin rises, then this job stands at a higher ranking in 2000 than

in 1990 and thus there are more jobs with lower average wage than this job in 2000 than

in 1990. We can also group by ranking of each job's employment share also changed from

1990 to 2000 with ranking at the rst being one having the lowest employment share. We

group the jobs with similar changes in ranking.             If the job's employment bin rises, then

there are more jobs with lower employment share than the specic job in 2000 than in 1990.

Table 7 and Table 8 present the results grouped by job bin and employment bin changes,

respectively. We nd performance-pay incidence playing the greatest role in jobs with stable

ranking in either job bin or employment bin. While job relatedness is most crucial for jobs

dropped in ranking, job-specic productivity is most important for jobs rising in ranking.

   The ranking of within-job inequality also changed from 1990 to 2000. Ranking at the

rst slot implies the job has the lowest inequality among all the jobs. We group the jobs by

similar changes in their rankings and conduct the exercise in Table 9. If the job's inequality

bin rises, this implies the specic job rank higher in 2000 than in 1990 and thus there are


                                                  38
                               Table 7: Decomposition by job bin change


           Job bin                Performance        Relatedness        Productivity       Sorting     Residual

           Drop by 3 or more         0.143              0.228              0.316           0.070         0.243
           Drop by 1 or 2            0.274              0.459              0.427           0.050        -0.210
           Stay                      0.674              0.084              0.008           -0.083        0.316
           Rise by 1 or 2            0.223              0.232              0.585           -0.046        0.007
           Rise by 3 or more         0.071              0.435              0.540           -0.040       -0.005
           Aggregate                 0.418              0.255              0.260           -0.013        0.080

    Note: In the column of Job bin , jobs are grouped with similar change of the ranks of average
    wage.


                        Table 8: Decomposition by employment bin change


                 Emp. bin     Performance     Relatedness        Productivity       Sorting     Residual

                 Rise            0.159           0.196              0.516            0.011           0.118
                 Stay            0.525           0.143              0.124            -0.048          0.256
                 Drop            0.321           0.474              0.409            0.038          -0.241
                 Aggregate       0.418           0.255              0.260            -0.013          0.080

    Note:    In the column of Emp.          bin, jobs are grouped with similar change of the ranks of
    employment share.




more jobs with lower equality than the specic job in 2000 than that in 1990. We nd that

performance-pay channel is most important for jobs with relatively stable wage dispersion

ranking. For jobs dropped in ranking with much less dispersed wages, both job relatedness

and job-specic productivity become key drivers of changes in inequality.                                     For jobs rising

in ranking with much more dispersed wages, the relative importance of performance-pay,

relatedness and productivity channels turns out to be similar to the overall outcomes.


                            Table 9: Decomposition by inequality bin change


    Inequality                           Performance      Relatedness        Productivity       Sorting        Residual

    Rise by 2 more                           0.361              0.222              0.265            0.020        0.132
    Rise by 1 or stay or drop by 1           0.540              0.122              0.052           -0.044        0.330
    Drop by 2 or more                        0.138              0.851              1.021           -0.005        -1.006
    Aggregate                                0.418              0.255              0.260           -0.013        0.080

    Note: In the column of inequality, jobs are grouped with similar change of the ranks of inequal-
    ity.




   Finally, we select 6 jobs based on their characteristics on earning and employment share

to perform the decomposition exercise.                 Table 10 shows that performance-pay incidence

contributes greatly to widening wage dispersion in the business-professional pair, While job




                                                         39
relatedness is crucial in the transportation-sales pair, job-specic productivity is particularly

important in the goods-clerical pair. Of particular interest, sorting turns out to be highly

relevant in the FIRE-manager pair, accounting for about 15% of the rising within-job wage

inequality.


                                 Table 10: Decomposition by selected jobs


           job                           Performance        Relatedness           Productivity        Sorting        Residual

           business, production                0.071           0.435                     0.540        -0.040             -0.005
           transp, sales                       0.279           0.696                     0.008        0.036              -0.019
           trade, sales                        0.000           0.223                     0.412        -0.040             0.405
           business, professional              0.855           0.044                 -0.126           -0.092             0.319
           FIRE, manager                       0.080           0.326                     0.241        0.154              0.200
           goods, clerical                     0.336           0.033                     0.744        -0.117             0.003

       Note: In the column of job, jobs are dened by industry-occupation pairs.




5.3 Discussion: job relatedness on multiple dimension skills
One may inquiry whether our ndings are robust to inclusion of multiple dimensions of skills.

Specically, workers' skills are in multiple dimensions, and jobs have dierent requirements

on dierent dimensions. In this case, there is no simple way to rank people by skills. People

with high skills in some dimensions may have low ones in other dimensions. Hence as job

becomes more specialized in skill types, wage inequality may change as well.

      We model the job relatedness in the world of multiple dimension skills. Worker's skills

have N dimensions          a = (a1 , · · · , aN ), and job g has skill requirement on Ng ( N ) dimensions.
Let   Ng   also the set of abilities eective in job                    g,   and the eective labor in job                          g   is   g =
{gk |k  Ng }.     Let time allocations are                (lk )kNg ,   and assume eort level is 1 for every one,
                                                                                                                -1
then the eective labor in an unit time is                        h(a, g ) = Ag [              kNg (ak gk lk )        ]   -1 ,   where       is

the elasticity of substitution between abilities in dierent dimensions.                                         The optimal time
                                                                                  1
                                                                         -1
allocation implies that         h(a, g ) = Ag [           kNg (ak gk )        ]   -1 .    If there is only one dimension in

both the skill and the requirement, then                    h(a, g ) = Ag ag ,           which is exactly the same as that

in benchmark model. If there is only one type of skill but multiple job requirements then
                                             1                                               1
                                    -1                                              -1
h(a, g ) = Ag a[      kNg (gk )          ]   -1 ,   and    = [     kNg (gk )             ]   -1   is the productivity premium

adjusted by the optimal time allocation. Therefore, in this case, given data availability it




                                                                 40
is possible to have a more accurate measurement on productivity premium, but in terms of

contribution to wage inequality, it would be similar to the benchmark.




6    Conclusion
In this paper, we have documented that within-job inequality greatly contributes to residual

wage inequality. To explain this fact, we have developed a model in which within-job wage

inequality is inuenced by both performance-pay incidence and job relatedness.       Workers

with higher abilities are sorted into performance-pay positions across jobs.     The overall

relationship between job relatedness and within-job wage inequality is generally ambiguous.

The main quantitative results suggest that the model accounts for around 92% of within-job

wage inequality increase among the highly educated from 1990 to 2000.        Job relatedness

explains 42% and performance-pay position explains 26%. In addition, the decomposition

exercise reveals that the role of each channel may vary substantially over dierent categories

of jobs. The paper has shed light on the main source of residual wage inequality within jobs.

While performance-pay or job-specic productivity induced wage inequality is seen natural,

the inequality driven by reduction in the relatedness between the college graduates' major

and their jobs may deserve policy attention.

    The model could be extended to discuss the underlying reasons for job relatedness. In

particular, a worker in an unrelated job may do so because of search friction, or the rising

role of multi-tasking, or the trade-o between personal interests and earnings. By incorpo-

rating these underlying reasons, the model could generate richer policy implications. The

model could also be extended to include multiple dimension skills to study the eects of

job specialization wage inequality, where job specialization is modeled as the decline in the

dimensions of skill requirement. Arguably, a worker who ts the job well will have higher

wage increase than those less tted, but one with the highly specialized skill may become a

loser in re-sorting. Within-job wage inequality may change as the degree of specialization

changes over dierent types of jobs.




                                               41
References
Acemoglu, Daron. 2003.      Patterns of skill premia. The Review of Economic Studies

  70(2):199230.



Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor. 2011. Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for

  employment and earnings. Handbook of Labor Economics 4:10431171.



Altonji, Joseph G, Lisa B Kahn and Jamin D Speer. 2014. Trends in Earnings Dieren-

  tials across College Majors and the Changing Task Composition of Jobs. The American

  Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 104(5):387393.


Altonji, Joseph G, Lisa B Kahn and Jamin D Speer. 2016. Cashier or consultant? Entry

  labor market conditions, eld of study, and career success. Journal of Labor Economics

  34(S1):S361S401.



Arcidiacono, Peter. 2004.   Ability sorting and the returns to college major. Journal of

  Econometrics 121(1):343375.


Autor, David H, Lawrence F Katz and Melissa S Kearney. 2008. Trends in US wage inequal-

  ity: Revising the revisionists. The Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2):300323.



Barth, Erling, Alex Bryson, James C Davis and Richard Freeman. 2011. The contribution

  of dispersion across plants to the increase in US earnings dispersion..



Beaudry, Paul and David A Green. 2005. Changes in US Wages, 19762000: Ongoing Skill

  Bias or Major Technological Change? Journal of Labor Economics 23(3):609648.



Beaudry, Paul, David A Green and Benjamin M Sand. 2014. The declining fortunes of the

  young since 2000. The American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 104(5):381

  386.



Burstein, Ariel, Eduardo Morales and Jonathan Vogel. 2019. Changes in Between-Group

  Inequality: Computers, Occupations, and International Trade. American Economic Jour-

  nal: Macroeconomics 11(2):348400.




                                             42
Card, David and John E DiNardo. 2002. Skill-biased technological change and rising wage

  inequality: Some problems and puzzles. Journal of Labor Economics 20(4):733783.



Card, David, Jörg Heining and Patrick Kline. 2013. Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise

  of West German Wage Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3):9671015.



Dorn, David. 2009. Essays on inequality, spatial interaction, and the demand for skills PhD

  thesis Verlag nicht ermittelbar.



Galor, Oded and Omer Moav. 2000. Ability-biased technological transition, wage inequality,

  and economic growth. The Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 469497.



Guvenen, Fatih, Burhan Kuruscu, Satoshi Tanaka and David Wiczer. 2020. Multidimen-

  sional Skill Mismatch. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12(1):21044.



Guvenen, Fatih, Burhanettin Kuruscu, Satoshi Tanaka and David Wiczer. 2015. Multidi-

  mensional Skill Mismatch..



Heywood, John S and Daniel Parent. 2012.      Performance pay and the white-black wage

  gap. Journal of Labor Economics 30(2):249290.



Jensen, Michael C and Kevin J Murphy. 1990.       Performance pay and top-management

  incentives. Journal of Political Economy 98(2):225264.



Jovanovic, Boyan. 2014.    Misallocation and Growth. The American Economic Review

  104(4):11491171.



Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M Murphy and Brooks Pierce. 1993. Wage inequality and the rise in

  returns to skill. Journal of Political Economy 101(3):410442.



Kambourov, Gueorgui and Iourii Manovskii. 2009. Occupational mobility and wage inequal-

  ity. The Review of Economic Studies 76(2):731759.



Katz, Lawrence F and David H. Autor. 1999. Changes in the wage structure and earnings

  inequality. Handbook of Labor Economics 3:14631555.




                                            43
Kirkeboen, Lars J, Edwin Leuven and Magne Mogstad. 2016. Field of study, earnings, and

  self-selection. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(3):10571111.



Krusell,   Per,   Lee E Ohanian,   José-Víctor Ríos-Rull and Giovanni L Violante. 2000.

  Capital-skill complementarity and inequality: A macroeconomic analysis. Econometrica

  68(5):10291053.



Lazear, Edward P. 2000.    Performance Pay and Productivity. The American Economic

  Review 90(5):13461361.


Lee, Sang Yoon, Yongseok Shin and Donghoon Lee. 2015. The option value of human capital:

  Higher education and wage inequality. Technical report National Bureau of Economic

  Research.



Lemieux, Thomas. 2006.     Increasing residual wage inequality: Composition eects, noisy

  data, or rising demand for skill? The American Economic Review 96(3):461498.



Lemieux, Thomas, W Bentley MacLeod and Daniel Parent. 2009.        Performance Pay and

  Wage Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1):149.



Leuven, Edwin and Hessel Oosterbeek. 2011.       Overeducation and mismatch in the labor

  market. Handbook of the Economics of Education 4:283326.



Lise, Jeremy and Fabien Postel-Vinay. 2015. Multidimensional Skills, Sorting, and Human

  Capital Accumulation..



Mueller, Holger M, Paige P Ouimet and Elena Simintzi. 2017. Wage inequality and rm

  growth. American Economic Review 107(5):37983.



Papageorgiou, Theodore. 2010. Large Firms and Internal Labor Markets. Working paper.



Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. Income Inequality in the United States, 1913-

  1998. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1):139.



Piketty,   Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2014.          Inequality in the long run.   Science

  344(6186):838843.



                                            44
Ritter, Joseph A. and Kristine L. West. 2014. Field of Study and Earnings Inequality among

  the Highly Educated: 1993-2010. Working paper.



Robst, John. 2007. Education and job match: The relatedness of college major and work.

  Economics of Education Review 26(4):397407.


Sanders, Carl. 2014.   Skill Uncertainty, Skill Accumulation, and Occupational Choice.

  Working Paper.



Scotese, Carol A. 2012. Wage inequality, tasks and occupations. Working Paper.



Shi, Shouyong. 2002. A directed search model of inequality with heterogeneous skills and

  skill-biased technology. The Review of Economic Studies 69(2):467491.



Song, Jae, David J Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom and Till Von Wachter. 2018.

  Firming up inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1):150.



Violante, Giovanni L. 2002. Technological acceleration, skill transferability, and the rise in

  residual inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1):297338.




                                             45
                            Appendix
                  (Not Intended for Publication)



A   Tables and Figures

A.1 Wage inequality




                               (a) Gini Coecient




                            (b) 90-10 Percentile Ratio


         Figure A.1: Wage inequality: Gini and 90-10 percentile ratio

                        Source: March CPS from CEPR.




                                       46
A.2 Performance pay incidence
Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2009) estimate performance-pay incidence for all the workers,

and Table A.1 presents their results.


                    Table A.1: Incidence of performance-pay jobs: PSID 1976-1998


                         Professionals   Managers   Sales    Clerical   Craftsmen   Operatives   Laborers   Services   Total

 Min.&durables           0.46            0.60       0.74     0.35       0.21        0.26         0.26       0.19       0.33

 Nondurables             0.52            0.62       0.79     0.38       0.26        0.42         0.25       0.06       0.43

 Transport&utils.        0.23            0.52       0.82     0.28       0.27        0.37         0.44       0.37       0.35

 Fin.insur.,&real est.   0.75            0.72       0.87     0.38       0.29        0.04         0.22       0.33       0.65

 Bus.&prof.serv          0.41            0.57       0.73     0.39       0.46        0.40         0.18       0.25       0.43

 Personal serv.          0.42            0.63       0.61     0.24       0.33        0.20         0.29       0.49       0.46

 Whol-tr.&oth serv.      0.65            0.66       0.82     0.45       0.29        0.46         0.29       0.03       0.58

 Retail trade            0.27            0.57       0.72     0.33       0.48        0.32         0.21       0.46       0.50

 Construction            0.72            0.47       0.81     0.20       0.33        0.30         0.30       0.17       0.36

 Agriculture&shing       0.72            0.78       0.88     0.24       0.16        0.42         0.45       0.77       0.46

 Total                   0.45            0.59       0.78     0.34       0.30        0.33         0.31       0.34       0.42

     Notes:Lemieux, MacLeod and Parent (2009).




A.3 Skill mismatch
A.3.1 Negative wage eect of skill mismatch
As shown in Guvenen et al. (2015), there is a negative wage eect of skill mismatch.


                                   Table A.2: Wage Losses from Mismatch



                                Mismatch Degree                     Mismatch eect
                                  (High to Low)             5 years     10 years 15 years
                                         90%                -0.052      -0.088       -0.124

                                         70%                -0.034       -0.057      -0.080

                                         50%                -0.023       -0.039      -0.054

                                         30%                -0.015       -0.026      -0.036

                                         10%                -0.008       -0.014      -0.020
     Source: Guvenen et al. (2015)




                                                              47
                                                 (a) 1990




                                                 (b) 2000


                          Figure A.2: Skill mismatch and wage inequality

Source: O*NET and NLSY79. The upper panel is based on 1990 data, and lower panel is based on 2000
data. Each dot represents an occupation under 2-digit code, y-axis is the inequality within each occupation,
x-axis the log value of skill mismatch.




A.3.2       Skill mismatch from O*NET and NLSY79
                                                                                                        R
O*NET has scores of importance of skills (skill requirement) for each occupation:                      Sj ,

j = 1 · · · J.   We compute weighted mean of scores as          ES R =           R
                                                                             j S j ,   given the standard
                                                                         R -ES R
                                                                        Sj
deviation   S R ,   we measure the deviation from mean as        sR
                                                                  j =      S R
                                                                                 . In addition, NLSY79

                                            A     A             A
has scores of skills for individuals:      Sij ; Sj =       ij Sij .   We also compute the weighted

mean as     ES A =          A
                         j Sj ,   given standard deviation     S A ,   the deviation from the mean is
         A -ES A
        Sj
sA
 j =       S A
                 . Then the skill mismatch is the distance between skill requirement and ac-




                                                    48
quirement   sj = d(sR    A
                    j , sj ).   Based on this measurement, there is also a positive correlation

between mismatch and wage inequality.




A.4 Job relatedness
                         Table A.3: Statistic description: NSCG1993



                                observations   tenure    earning    inequality   proportion


                    Female          34467      18.17    53814.12      0.20          0.37
      gender
                     male           59893      19.73    76401.97      0.25          0.63

                   Bachelor         58063      18.77    61039.09      0.23          0.62

    education       Master          25757      20.17    68416.25      0.20          0.27

                     PhD            10540      18.68    104475.17     0.28          0.11

                    White           79175      19.16    68444.02      0.23          0.84

       race          Black          9478       19.20    55785.14      0.19          0.10

                   Hispanic         5707       17.27    62247.22      0.20          0.06

                     Close          55613      18.96    70803.82      0.21          0.59

    relatedness      Some           24066      19.04    67695.83      0.24          0.26

                      Not           14681      19.69    57021.46      0.28          0.16

    all sample                      94360      19.11    67514.19      0.23           1




                                                49
                       Table A.4: Statistic description: NSCG2003



                             observations         tenure    earning       inequality   proportion


                Female          21180             20.13    60732.11         0.28          0.38
  gender
                    male        34285             21.51    90929.36         0.38          0.62

               Bachelor         31915             20.95    69964.33         0.34          0.58

education       Master          16202             21.31    77226.22         0.28          0.29

                    PhD            7348           19.72    131856.72        0.45          0.13

                White           47212             21.07    79947.82         0.34          0.85

   race             Black          4411           20.70    61798.49         0.25          0.08

               Hispanic            3842           18.50    65085.11         0.33          0.07

                    Close       33377             20.45    83487.92         0.30          0.60

relatedness         Some        13871             21.14    77929.15         0.34          0.25

                    Not            8217           22.05    61807.33         0.41          0.15

all sample                      55465             20.92    78042.82         0.34           1




                       Table A.5: Proportion of relatedness: NSCG



                                                    1993                    2003

                                          close     some   not    close     some   not


                            Female        0.63      0.21   0.16   0.63      0.22   0.15
             gender
                            Male          0.57      0.28   0.15   0.58      0.27   0.15

                            Bachelor      0.50      0.30   0.20   0.50      0.30   0.20

             education      Master        0.68      0.23   0.09   0.68      0.23   0.09

                            PhD           0.88      0.08   0.04   0.87      0.10   0.04

                            White         0.59      0.26   0.15   0.60      0.25   0.15

             race           Black         0.60      0.22   0.18   0.59      0.24   0.17

                            Hispanic      0.61      0.23   0.15   0.66      0.21   0.13

             all sample                   0.59      0.26   0.16   0.60      0.25   0.15




                                                   50
            Table A.6: Wage eect of job relatedness: NSCG(1993,2003)



                      VARIABLES           1990              2000




                      closely related     0.124***          0.242***
                                          (0.00437)         (0.00791)

                      some related        0.0985***         0.177***
                                          (0.00481)         (0.00866)

                      age                 0.0128***         0.00859***

                      male                0.203***          0.260***

                      education level     0.0762***         0.0820***

                      black               -0.0850***        -0.108***

                      Constant            9.133***          9.156***

                      Observations        92,786            55,410

                      R-squared           0.249             0.165

                      Standard errors in parentheses;

                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Source: NSCG(1993,2003). This table only shows part of results of the regression.




                                             51
                                              (a) NSCG 1993




                                              (b) NSCG 2003


              Figure A.3: Job relatedness and within-occupation wage inequality

Source: NSCG(1993,2003). The upper panel is based on 1993 data, and lower panel is based on 2003 data.
Each dot represents an occupation under 2-digit classcation. y-axis is the inequality within each occupation,
x-axis job relatedness.




                                                     52
                 Figure A.4: Job relatedness and within-job wage inequality

Notes: Each dot represents a job. We have extracted 45 jobs from NSCG 2000 dataset after dropping those
with observation less than 50. CPS from CEPR.




                                                  53
A.5 Calibration Targets

                     0.25                                                                            1.3


                                                                                                     1.2

                      0.2
                                                                                                     1.1




                                                                             Wage relative to mean
                                                                                                       1
  Employment share




                     0.15

                                                                                                     0.9

                      0.1                                                                            0.8


                                                                                                     0.7
                     0.05
                                                                                                     0.6


                        0                                                                            0.5
                            0   5      10            15     20     25                                      0        5       10            15   20   25
                                            Job id                                                                               Job id

                                (a) Employment share                                                           (b) Average wage relative to mean


                                                      Figure A.5: Calibration Targets




                                                                        54
B        Decomposition analysis for the full sample

                                  Table B.7: Decomposition by industries


 Industry                                         Performance     Relatedness    Productivity    Sorting   Residual

 mining, durables/non-durables, construction         0.316           0.491          0.402         0.048      -0.257
 transportation and utility                          0.539           0.125          0.397        -0.056      -0.006
 FIRE                                                0.085           0.265          0.313         0.051       0.286
 business, professional service                      0.338          -0.157          -0.003       -0.058       0.880
 personal service, whole/retail trade                0.019           0.218          0.431         0.005       0.327
 Aggregate                                           0.262           0.140          0.237        -0.007       0.367


Notes: The results are based on 24 jobs. The result for each industry is weighted sum across occupations
within the industry.




                               Table B.8: Decomposition by occupations


 Occupation                         Performance     Relatedness      Productivity      Sorting     Residual

 Professional                           0.724             0.043          -0.042         -0.032       0.307
 manager                                0.094             0.243          0.157           0.037       0.470
 sales                                  -0.466            0.043          0.703           0.039       0.682
 craftsmen,operative,labor              0.132             0.332          0.587          -0.046       -0.004
 Clerical,service                       0.185             0.226          0.678          -0.095       0.006
 Aggregate                              0.262             0.140          0.237          -0.007       0.367


Notes: The results are based on 24 jobs. The result for each occupation is weighted sum across industries
within the occupation.




                              Table B.9: Decomposition by job bin change


    Job bin                    Performance       Relatedness      Productivity     Sorting      Residual

    Drop by 3 or more               0.064           0.102            0.141          0.031        0.661
    Drop by 1 or 2                  0.274           0.459            0.427          0.050        -0.210
    Stay                            0.674           0.084            0.008          -0.083       0.316
    Rise by 1 or 2                  0.166           0.198            0.493          -0.022       0.165
    Rise by 3 or more               -1.347         -1.217            0.369          0.041        3.154
    Aggregate                       0.262           0.140            0.237          -0.007       0.367


Notes: The results are based on 24 jobs. In the column of job bin change, jobs are grouped with similar
change of the ranks of average wage.




                                                     55
                     Table B.10: Decomposition by employment bin change


         Emp. bin      Performance      Relatedness      Productivity    Sorting   Residual

         Rise              -0.284          -0.292            0.251        0.008        1.317
         Stay              0.451            0.149            0.148        -0.035       0.286
         Drop              0.321            0.474            0.409        0.038        -0.241
         Aggregate         0.262            0.140            0.237        -0.007       0.367


Notes: The results are based on 24 jobs. In the column of employment bin change, jobs are grouped with
similar change of the ranks of employment share.




                      Table B.11: Decomposition by inequality bin change


 Inequality                           Performance        Relatedness    Productivity     Sorting   Residual

 Rise by 2 more                           0.230             0.169          0.212          0.019     0.369
 Rise by 1 or stay or drop by 1           0.540             0.122          0.052         -0.044     0.330
 Drop by 2 or more                        -0.530            0.071          0.972          0.002     0.485
 Aggregate                                0.262             0.140          0.237         -0.007     0.367


Notes: The results are based on 24 jobs. In the column of employment bin change, jobs are grouped with
similar change of the ranks of employment share.




                                                    56
C       Proofs

C.1 Lemma 1
Proof:     worker of ability   a chooses to work in job k              if   Ck a2 - Mk  Cn a2 - Mn , n = k .   That

is,

                                    (Ck - Cn ) a2  Mk - Mn , n = k .

      For job   n < k,   we have    Ck - Cn > 0.             It is then straightforward to have the following

hold:




                          (Ck - Cn ) a 2 > (Ck - Cn ) a2  Mk - Mn , n < k .

      This implies for workers of ability             a > a,       the utility from working at job    k   is always

higher than working at any job               n < k.        Therefore, workers with ability higher than         a   will

choose to work in job       j  k.       Q.E.D.




C.2 Lemma 2
 Proof:    Worker prefers job       n   to   n-1      if




                                        Cn a2 - Mn > Cn-1 a2 - Mn-1 .


      Similarly, worker prefers job          n   to   n+1     if




                                        Cn a2 - Mn > Cn+1 a2 - Mn+1 .


      Ability   a   thus satises:



                             Mn+1 - Mn        Mn - Mn-1
                                       > a2 >           .                        Q.E.D.
                             Cn+1 - Cn        Cn - Cn-1




                                                              57
C.3 Lemma 3
 Proof:    If worker of ability   a   prefers job   n   to   n - 1,   then




                                      Cn a2 - Mn > Cn-1 a2 - Mn-1 .

                                               Mn -Mn-1
   The above is equivalent to:          a2 >   Cn -Cn-1
                                                        .      When assumption 1 holds, we also have

       Mn-1 -Mn-2
a2 >   Cn-1 -Cn-2
                  , which is equivalent to:




                                  Cn-1 a2 - Mn-1 > Cn-2 a2 - Mn-2 .


   Therefore,   Cn a2 - Mn > Cn-2 a2 - Mn-2                 also holds, and worker thus prefers job     n   to

n - 2.
   By similar induction, it is straightforward to show worker prefers job              n   to any job   k<
n - 1.    Q.E.D.




C.4 Lemma 4
Proof:    If worker of ability   a   prefers job   n   to   n + 1,   then




                                      Cn a2 - Mn > Cn+1 a2 - Mn+1 .

                                               Mn+1 -Mn
   The above is equivalent to:          a2 <   Cn+1 -Cn
                                                        .      When assumption 1 holds, we also have

       Mn+2 -Mn+1
a2 <   Cn+2 -Cn+1
                  , which is equivalent to:




                                  Cn+1 a2 - Mn+1 > Cn+2 a2 - Mn+2 .

   Therefore,   Cn a2 - Mn > Cn+2 a2 - Mn+2                 also holds, and worker thus prefers job     n   to

n + 2.
   By similar induction, it is straightforward to show worker prefers job              n   to any job   k>
n + 1.    Q.E.D.




                                                        58
C.5 Lemma 5
 Proof:    The previous arguments imply that workers of ability                        a2 <   M2 -M1
                                                                                              C 2-C1
                                                                                                     gains more

utilies from performance-pay position at job               1   than job   2.    Therefore, the two remaining

options for the worker is either xed-pay position or performance-pay position at job                         1.
   When   C 1 a 2 - M1 < U ,   the employment level at xed-pay position is positive since those

least-abled ones gain higher utility from xed-pay position. In addition, when



                                                2
                                        C1 (a2 ) - M1 > U ,



   performance-pay position at job       1   is also non-empty.            Q.E.D.




C.6 Proposition 1
Proof:   It is a direct consequence of Lemma 2-5.                Q.E.D.




C.7 Proposition 2
Proof:   Dierentiating the expression of           Vn   in equation(11) with respect to          np ,   we have:



             Vn                                                                       1
                = Vnp + (1 - 2np )(ln Enp - ln EnF )2 > 0                 if   np <     .   Q.E.D.
             np                                                                       2


C.8 Proposition 3
Proof:
   (i) Within performance-pay position, the mean of log wage is in turn the weighted average

of wages of matched(ln Enps ) and un-matched workers(ln Enpm ):




                               ln Enp = pn ln Enps + (1 - pn ) ln Enpm .


Dierentiating above with respect to          pn   gives:



                                  ln Enp
                                         = ln Enps - ln Enpm > 0.
                                  pn

                                                        59
   (ii) the inequality within performance-pay position can be decomposed into inequality

within matched (Vnps ), unmatched (Vnpm ) workers and inequality between them           (ln Enps -
ln Enpm ):
                 Vnp = pn Vnps + (1 - pn )Vnpm + pn (1 - pn )(ln Enps - ln Enpm )2 ,

Dierentiating the expression above with respect to             pn ,   we have:



                     Vnp
                         = (Vnps - Vnpm ) + (1 - 2pn )(ln Enps - ln Enpm )2 .
                     pn

   In the following, we compare     Vnps - Vnpm     with      (ln Enps - ln Enpm )2



                                                 (µ(1 - ~ n )A~n An as)2
                              Vnps = varn (ln[                           ])
                                                            b
                                   = varn [2 ln (as)] = 4varn [ln (as)]


                                                 (µ(1 -      ~n An a)2
                                                        ~ n )A
                             Vnpm = varn (ln[                          ])
                                                           b
                                   = varn [2 ln (a)] = 4varn [ln (a)]



   so

                    Vnps - Vnpm = 4varn (ln (s)) = 4 E (ln s)2 - E [ln s]2

   In addition




                                                          a
                                              1            n+1
                      ln Enps - ln Enpm    =                          ln s2 dG(s)G(a)
                                             Nnp         an       s
                                                          a
                                                  2         n+1
                                           =                          ln sdG(s)G(a)
                                                 Nnp     an       s

                                           = 2          ln sdG(s) = 2E [ln s]
                                                    s




                                                   60
   We compute     E [ln s]   in the following:



                                                             s
                             E [ln s] =              ln s           ds
                                                 s          ss +1
                                                                             
                                       = - ln s  s-s |1 +                        s-s -1 ds
                                                                         1
                                                     
                                                                    1
                                       =                s-s -1 ds =
                                                 1                  s


   In addition,




                                                             s
                   E (ln s)2       =           (ln s)2             ds
                                           s                s s +1
                                                             
                                                                             
                                   = - (ln s)2  s-s |1 +2                         ln s  s-s -1 ds
                                                                             1
                                                                             
                                               s-s                               s-s -1
                                   = 2 - ln s      | -                                  ds
                                                s 1                      1         s
                                          -s -1
                                           s          2
                                   = 2           ds = 2
                                       1     s       s

   so




                             Vnps - Vnpm = 4 E (ln s)2 - E [ln s]2
                                              2    1     4
                                         = 4 2- 2 = 2
                                             s    s      s

   and
                                                                         4
                                       (ln Enps - ln Enpm )2 =            2
                                                                         s
   so it is straightforward to have:




                          (Vnps - Vnpm ) + (1 - 2pn )(ln Enps - ln Enpm )2
                           4
                        = 2 (2 - 2pn ) > 0 when pn < 1.
                          s

These establish the proof. Q.E.D




                                                             61
D       Math details on solving model
Given the denition of     j :

                                                                     - 1
                                                          
                                               
                                                  ( jw
                                                     Aj
                                                        ) 1-   - j
                                          j =                               ,
                                                      1 - j

                      w
we can then solve        as
                      Aj
                                                 
                                            1   + (1 -  ) 1-
                                      w        j j     j
                                         = j [           ]  .
                                      Aj           j j

                                                                 wj HjP
Hence, the total wage payment to xed-pay position                       can be written as:
                                                                  Aj


                                      1j  j + (1 - j ) 1- 
                         ~jF =   [
                         E                             ]  j HjP
                               j
                                            j  j
                                                    1      j   j
                                  = [j j + (1 - j )] [
                                                    
                                                                      ]HjP
                                                       j j + (1 - j )
                                   ~j 
                                  =A  ~ j HjP ,

                   j 
where   ~j =     
                     j
                              .   The total payment to performance-pay position is thus      ~jP =
                                                                                             E
               j j +(1-j )

µ(1 -      ~j HjP .
      ~ j )A
    The representative rm decides the employment level at xed-pay position to maximize

the prot net of payment to workers at xed-pay position. That is,


                                                                        1
                                                              
                              max         j Aj HjF + (1 - j )Hjp        
                                                                            - wNjF .
                              NjF



    Solving the maximization problem above, the following relation can be established:

HjF = j HjP .    Substitute it into the production function, we have:


                                                                        1
                                                     
                          Yj = j (j HjP ) + (1 - j )Hjp                      ~j HjP ,
                                                                            =A

                             1
where   ~j = [j  + (1 - j )] 
        A                      .
                j




                                                       62
