                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MEASURING LABOR-FORCE PARTICIPATION AND THE INCIDENCE
                     AND DURATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT

                                          Hie Joo Ahn
                                       James D. Hamilton

                                      Working Paper 27394
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27394


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




The views in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted
as reflecting the views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any other
person associated with the Federal Reserve System. We thank Katharine Abraham, Alessandro
Barbarino, Travis Berge, Michael Elsby, Andrew Figura, Glenn Follette, Ryan Michaels, Norm
Morin, John Stevens and Robert Valletta for comments on earlier drafts of this paper and Jesse
Wedewer for excellent research assistance. Data and software to reproduce results in this paper
available at http://http://econweb.ucsd.edu/~jhamilton/AH2_code.zip. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

Е 2020 by Hie Joo Ahn and James D. Hamilton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including Е notice, is given to the source.
Measuring Labor-Force Participation and the Incidence and Duration of Unemployment
Hie Joo Ahn and James D. Hamilton
NBER Working Paper No. 27394
June 2020
JEL No. E24,E32,J01,J64

                                        ABSTRACT

The underlying data from which the U.S. unemployment rate, labor-force participation rate, and
duration of unemployment are calculated contain numerous internal contradictions. This paper
catalogs these inconsistencies and proposes a unified reconciliation. We find that the usual
statistics understate the unemployment rate and the labor-force participation rate by about two
percentage points on average and that the bias in the latter has increased over time. The BLS
estimate of the average duration of unemployment substantially overstates the true duration of
uninterrupted spells of unemployment and misrepresents what happened to average durations
during the Great Recession and its recovery.


Hie Joo Ahn
Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System
20th & C Street, NW.
Washington, D.C. 20551
HieJoo.Ahn@frb.gov

James D. Hamilton
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jhamilton@ucsd.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27394
1    Introduction.

    The Current Population Survey (CPS) is the primary source of information about the labor-
force participation rate, unemployment rate, and duration of unemployment for the United States.
There are multiple internal inconsistencies in the data from which the fundamental statistics are
calculated-- if one reported number is correct, another must be wrong. In this paper we catalog
these inconsistencies and propose a unified reconciliation of all the problems.
    Rotation bias. One source of inconsistency is rotation bias. In any given month, some house-
holds are being visited for the first time (rotation 1), others are being interviewed for the second
time (rotation 2), with 8 different rotations contributing to the statistics reported for that month.
One would think that in a random sample, the numbers calculated from different rotations for a
given month should all be the same. But as documented by Hansen et al. (1955), Bailar (1975),
Solon (1986), Halpern-Manners and Warren (2012) and Krueger, Mas, and Niu (2017), the reported
unemployment rate differs significantly across rotations.    In our sample (July 2001 to February
2020), the average unemployment rate among those being interviewed for the first time is 6.6%,
whereas the average unemployment rate for the eighth rotation is 5.7%. Even more dramatic is
the rotation bias in the labor-force participation rate.    This averages 65.8% for rotation 1 and
64.2% for rotation 8 in our sample. Rotation bias affects any inference one draws from the CPS
data. For example, it means that if one follows a fixed group of individuals over time, on average
outflows from unemployment seem to exceed inflows.
    Missing observations. A second source of inconsistency documented by Abowd and Zellner
(1985) is that missing observations are not random. Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2015) noted that
households in the CPS have become increasingly less likely to answer surveys or to provide all
answers. The standard approach is to calculate statistics for a given month based only on individuals
for whom there is an observation that month. But if missing observations are not randomly drawn
from the overall population, this may be an increasing source of bias in CPS estimates.
    Reported job-search durations and observed continuation probabilities. A third problem in the
CPS is inconsistency between the duration of job search reported by an individual in month t and
the labor-force status recorded for that same individual in t - 1. For example, consider those
individuals who were counted as not in the labor force when in rotation 1 in month t - 1 and


                                                 1
unemployed when surveyed in rotation 2 in month t. In the second survey, the individual would be
asked how long he or she has been looking for work. Two-thirds of these individuals' duration of
unemployment is recorded as longer than 4 weeks and 17% of their durations are recorded as one
or two years.
    A related anomaly is the inconsistency between unemployment hazard rates and the reported
duration of unemployment. For example, according to BLS adjusted numbers on labor-force flows,
the average unemployed individual in 2011 had a 38% probability of exiting unemployment the
following month. Among those already unemployed for more than 6 months, the probability was
31%.1     From those probabilities we might expect an average duration of unemployment around
(1/0.31) or 3 months. Yet according to the BLS, the average duration of unemployment among
all those unemployed in 2011 was 40 weeks -- three times the value that would be predicted on the
basis of the reported hazards.
    Number preference. A final source of inconsistency arises from people's preference for reporting
certain numbers over others, as documented for example by Baker (1992), Torelli and Trivellato
(1993), and Ryu and Slottje (2000). On average there are more people who say they have been
looking for work for 6 months than say they have been looking for 23 weeks, though the fraction of
those unemployed for 23 weeks should be greater than that of those unemployed for 6 months. In
addition, people are more likely to report an even number of weeks than an odd number for shorter
spells.
    Our proposed resolution. Each of the problems above has been discussed in the literature.
Previous papers addressed one problem in isolation. In this paper we show how these problems
interact to influence the statistics that economists rely on and propose a unified resolution that
addresses the issues simultaneously.
    Our first step is to add a fourth category of labor-force status. We regard an individual in any
month as either employed (E ), unemployed (U ), not in the labor force (N ) , or missing from the
sample that month (M ). On this basis we construct a data set in which all identities relating stocks
and flows are respected; for example, the sum of EE, NE, ME, and UE transitions between t - 1
and t exactly equals the total number of E at t. This has never been done before.

   1
    Our own direct estimates in Panel A of Figure 4 below suggest that hazards do not change much after durations
beyond six months.


                                                       2
    Our second step is to model statistically the way in which people's answers change the more
times they have been interviewed. We interpret households in different rotations as being surveyed
using a different interview technology and summarize how the differences in the average answers
given by different rotations change gradually over time. We calculate the answer to the following
counterfactual question: if a group of households in rotation j in month t were being interviewed
for the first time instead of the j th time, how would their answers have been different?
    Combining these two steps allows us to produce the first fully reconciled description of stocks
and flows in the CPS data. By then looking at how reconciled M E, MN, and MU transitions
differ from the rest of the population, we are able to adjust the treatment of missing observations
based on what we know about those individuals when data are collected from them.2 We find that
missing individuals are more likely than the general population to be unemployed. In addition, the
biases introduced by missing observations have increased over time and are bigger when the labor
market is slack. Our paper is the first to document the cyclical features in the bias coming from
nonrandom missing observations.
    With these tools we can provide the first-ever reconciled description of stocks and flows nor-
malized on the basis of any of the eight interview technologies.                 In practice we need to choose
a particular technology, which requires taking a stand on the source of the rotation bias. Much
evidence, most of which is new to this paper, persuades us that the primary source of rotation bias
is that individuals who are unemployed or only employed part-time perceive some stigma associated
with those answers and become less engaged with the interview process the more times an interview
is attempted.      We conclude that the first-interview concept of unemployment is the best one to
use, and show that the unemployment rate and labor-force participation rate are more seriously
underestimated at points in time or for demographic groups for which the reported unemployment
rate is higher.
    Reconciling the inconsistencies in the CPS further requires confronting the gray area in the
distinction between unemployed and not in the labor force. We argue that the most satisfactory way
   2
     Our adjustment for missing observations is similar in spirit to that in Abowd and Zellner (1985), though there are
a number of important differences. For any month t they make one adjustment looking backward in time and a second
adjustment looking forward in time, giving them potentially two different estimates for each month t. By contrast,
we take a unified approach to the full data set. Abowd and Zellner's adjustments do not deal with the problem of
rotation bias or the other measurement issues for which we also develop solutions. And they only calculate average
unemployment rates over what is now a historically old sample. By contrast, we adjust estimates month-by-month
up to the present.


                                                          3
to resolve the inconsistencies is to reclassify some of those currently counted as N as instead actively
seeking work. As noted above, in every month t a significant fraction of Americans are counted as
Nt but the following month are counted as Ut+1 and report at t + 1 that they have been looking for
work for 5 weeks or longer. We find that the incidence of such reports is explained not by education
or demographic group but instead can be very accurately predicted by the reported incidence of
medium- and long-term unemployment at date t. The incidence can separately be predicted by
whether those individuals said at time t that they wanted a job.        Moreover, individuals in this
category have similar future job-finding probabilities and unemployment-continuation probabilities
as if they had been counted as Ut . Our proposal is therefore to classify such individuals as Ut . This
is another reason why the unemployment rate and labor-force participation rate are more seriously
underestimated at points in time or for demographic groups for which the unemployment rate is
higher.
   Finally, our resolution to the number-preference problem is to postulate a flexible latent dis-
tribution of perceived durations that is then reported by individuals with a certain structure of
number-reporting preference; for related approaches see Baker (1992), Torelli and Trivellato (1993),
and Ryu and Slottje (2000). Our approach is completely new compared to these studies in that
our parameterization allows direct linkage of data on stocks, flows, and durations and in that both
digit and interval preference are jointly considered. Our framework describes the reported values
extremely accurately.
   Why does it matter? The importance of these issues is illustrated in Panel A of Figure 1. This
asks a very fundamental question: if someone is unemployed at t - 1, what is the probability that
person will still be unemployed at t? Researchers have used the CPS data to answer this question
in two different ways. A measure based on reported unemployment durations calculates the ratio
of individuals who are unemployed at t with a reported duration greater than 4 weeks to the total
number of individuals unemployed at t - 1. Variants of this calculation have been used by van
den Berg and van der Klaauw (2001), Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2009) and Shimer (2012). This
measure is plotted as the black line in Panel A. An alternative measure based on labor-force flows
looks at the subset of individuals who are U at t - 1 and either E, N, or U at t and calculates
the number of UU continuations as a fraction of the sum. Variants of this approach were used by
Fujita and Ramey (2009) and Elsby, Hobijn and S
                                              И ahin (2010). The flow-based measure is plotted

                                                   4
as the green line.   If all magnitudes were measured accurately the two estimates should give a
similar answer. But in practice they are wildly different. The duration-based measure averages
68.6% over our sample, while the flow-based measure averages 53.0%.
    These differences are caused by the multiple inconsistencies mentioned above. The flow-based
measure underestimates the true continuation probability because (1) some UN transitions are a
result of rotation bias and (2) some UN transitions should be interpreted as UU continuations.
The duration-based measure overestimates the probability, because a substantial number of people
interpret the duration of job search as including on-the-job search or the time since the last salient
job; see Elsby et al. (2011), Farber and Valletta (2015), and Kudlyak and Lange (2018).           Our
reconciled estimate is shown in the blue line in Panel A, and falls in between the other two estimates.
The flow-based estimate was closer to our adjusted measure at the beginning of the sample, whereas
the duration-based measure is closer to our adjusted series today.
    Another fundamental question is, how many people become unemployed each month?                One
estimate (e.g., Shimer, 2012) is simply the number of unemployed individuals reporting durations
of less than 5 weeks. The black line in Panel B of Figure 1 shows this value as a percent of the
civilian noninstitutional population. As noted by Elsby et al. (2011), it underestimates new inflows
into unemployment since half of EU and NU transitions report unemployment durations of 5 weeks
or longer. Alternatively, the BLS publishes separate estimates of EU and NU flows that they adjust
to address some of the problems that we document in this paper. However, our analysis suggests
that rotation bias and non-random missing observations have not yet been completely corrected
for in the BLS adjusted series (in green). Our reconciled series (blue) is often significantly higher
than the BLS adjusted estimate.
    Panel C of Figure 1 compares our adjusted estimate of the unemployment rate with the BLS
estimate. Our measure is 2.0% higher on average, and the gap increased during the Great Recession.
The gap recovered gradually after the recession and has only recently returned to its pre-recession
level.   The gap between our measure and the BLS measure of the labor-force participation rate
(Panel D) is 2.1% on average. It also increased in the Great Recession and remained elevated as
of 2020.   We conclude that labor-force participation declined slightly less over this period than
suggested by the BLS series.
    Whereas BLS estimates of unemployment duration are based on individuals' reported durations

                                                  5
of job search, our estimates are based on uninterrupted spells of unemployment.       In going from
the green to blue lines in Panel A, we adjusted unemployment continuations up considerably from
the standard estimates, but we did not adjust these all the way up to those implied by reported
durations in black. As a result, our reconciled estimates of average unemployment durations (shown
as blue in Panel E) are considerably below those from BLS (black), similar to the conclusion by
Kudlyak and Lange (2018).      Our estimates of average duration did not rise as much during the
Great Recession as suggested by the BLS series based on reported durations. Also, our reconciled
estimates subsequently recovered to pre-recession levels, whereas the BLS reported durations do
not.
   A significant part of the measurement errors we discuss arises from ambiguities in classifying
individuals as "unemployed" versus "not in the labor force." The employment-to-population ratio
(panel F) avoids these issues and thus might be a better indicator of labor market slack. However,
the employment-to-population ratio is still influenced by rotation bias, which we attribute to stigma
and disengagement with repeated interviews of some part-time workers.
   A number of important studies have approached the problem of measurement error in the CPS
data in a very different way from ours. A common assumption is that the reported data differ
from latent true values, with identification coming from assumptions about the joint dynamics of
the true values and measurement error. Prominent examples include Biemer and Bushery (2000),
Feng and Hu (2013), and Shibata (2019). These studies are silent about the source of misclassifi-
cation errors, and did not deal with rotation bias, nonrandom missing observations, inconsistency
between reported duration and the previous labor force status, or reporting errors of unemploy-
ment duration in their correction. Biemer and Bushery (2000) and Shibata (2019) assumed that
true labor-force transitions were first-order Markov. Feng and Hu (2013) relaxed this assumption,
though Shibata (2019) concluded that their approach generates implausible transition probabili-
ties. By contrast, our approach does not impose any Markov assumptions and produces plausible
transition probabilities and unemployment durations that are consistent with these probabilities.
Our approach also explains well the non-Markov predictability of labor-force status documented by
Kudlyak and Lange (2018). Although our methods and assumptions are very different from these
studies, we nevertheless reach a similar conclusion that the BLS significantly underestimates the
average unemployment rate and overestimates the average duration of unemployment.

                                                 6
    The plan of the paper is as follows.     Section 2 describes the structure of the CPS survey
and our data set.      Section 3 uses averages over the complete sample to document the various
inconsistencies in the CPS data and develops the statistical framework that will form the basis for
our reconciliation. Section 4 describes the steps we use to reconcile these inconsistencies. Section
5 briefly concludes.



2    Data construction.

    Since July 2001, each month around 60,000 housing units are included in the Current Population
Survey. An effort is made to contact each address and determine the number of individuals aged
16 or over who are not in the armed forces or in an institution such as prison or a nursing home.
An individual is counted as employed (E ) if during the reference week of the survey month the
individual did any work at all for pay, for their own business, or were temporarily absent from work
due to factors like vacations, illness, or weather. People are counted as unemployed (U ) if they
were not E but were available for work and made specific efforts to find employment some time
during the previous 4 weeks. Individuals who are neither E nor U are counted as not in the labor
force (N ). One person in the household can provide separate answers for each of the individuals
living at that address.
    The next month and each of the following two months, the interviewer attempts to contact the
same address to ask the same questions. In any given month, around 1/8 of the 60,000 qualifying
households being interviewed for the first time (denoted rotation 1), and another 1/8 each are being
interviewed for the second, third or fourth time (rotations 2, 3, or 4). After the fourth month the
household is not interviewed for the next 8 months, but is reinterviewed again 1 year after the first
interview (rotation 5) and again for each of the following 3 months (rotations 6, 7, and 8). For
data since 1994, if an individual was unemployed in two consecutive months, the interviewer does
not ask again the duration of unemployment the second month, but simply adds time elapsed since
the previous interview to the previous answer. Thus new unemployment duration data are only
collected in rotations 1 and 5, or in the other rotations for someone who was E, N or missing from
the sample the month before.
    The survey is imperfect for purposes of tracking the experience of an individual across months


                                                 7
due to various measurement problems; for discussion of these see Madrian and Lefgren (2000)
and Nekarda (2009). Each address has a unique identifier, and an effort is made to associate an
individual person within that household with a particular 2-digit number. Our study is unique in
treating missing (M ) as a separate observed category for someone whose information is not available
in a particular rotation or is inconsistent from the information reported for that individual in other
rotations. As in Abowd and Zellner (1985), we will use information about that individual in months
where it is available to correct for the fact that individuals who are sometimes missing (which could
come in part from households that are more prone to reporting errors or to having people moving
in or out) may differ in systematic ways from individuals for whom 8 separate months of data are
available. We check if an individual with the same household and personal identifier is reported
to have the same gender and an age that does not differ by more than 2 years across rotations. If
so, we consider that individual successfully matched. If not, we designate that individual as M in
the months for which no status is available or for which the age and gender records are inconsistent
with those reported across the majority of the 8 rotations.3
                                                             [j ]
    The raw data for our study thus consist of yX,t , the sum of the number of individuals (multiplied
by a weight associated with that individual) who are in rotation j  {1, ..., 8} in month t with
                                                     [j ]
reported status X  {E, N, M, U }, and yX1 ,X2 ,t , the weighted sum of individuals reporting X1 in
rotation j - 1 in month t - 1 and X2 in rotation j in month t for j  J = {2, 3, 4}  {6, 7, 8}. See
Table A-1 in the online appendix for a summary of notation used in this study. A key advantage
of our approach is that, unlike the values used by any other researchers, our data on stocks and
flows are internally consistent by construction, always satisfying the accounting identities


                                   [j ]     [j ]            [j ]        [j ]     [j ]
                                 yX2 ,t = yE,X2 ,t + yN,X2 ,t + yM,X2 ,t + yU,X2 ,t                                 (1)


                                 [j -1]       [j ]            [j ]        [j ]     [j ]
                                yX1 ,t-1 = yX1 ,E,t + yX1 ,N,t + yX1 ,M,t + yX1 ,U,t                                (2)


   3
     Nekarda (2009) used race in addition to age and gender and Madrian and Lefgren (2000) also used education.
Both these variables are susceptible to ambiguity and could be reported differently for a fixed individual, particularly
when a different individual answers the questions for the household. We topcode age at 65 years or older, so an
individual in this age group with the same address, same gender, and same identifying number is considered matched.
Note that our category of M includes people who move into the address (for example, from another address, getting
out of prison or the military, or becoming 16 years old) and people who leave the address (whether to another
address, institution or through death). Our M category also includes people who do not answer the questions in
some rotations or who answer the gender and age questions in an inconsistent way.


                                                                    8
for all t, X1 , X2 and j  J.
    One drawback of this procedure is that we need 16 months of observations to determine whether
to categorize someone as M in a given month. For example, our sample starts in 2001:7. Someone
whose history beginning in 2001:7 was EEM M - MM MM will be counted as M in rotation 3 in
2001:9 by our method, whereas someone who would have had the same history if initially surveyed
in 2001:5 would never appear in the sample.4                  This causes the number of individuals who are
classified as M to be artificially depressed in the first year of the sample. A similar effect arises
at the end of the sample, with individuals whose record would have been M MEE - EEEE not
being apparent if their rotations 1 or 2 would have come at the end of the sample. We therefore
adjusted the counts of M and MM at the beginning and end of the sample upward based on the
average counts of M for each rotation over the nearest year of complete observations; for details
see Appendix A. Since changes in M occur relatively slowly in our sample, this adjustment has
little effect on any of the key measures we develop. We made additional adjustments when new
households were added and other households dropped in the 2004 and 2014 sample redesigns.5
    BLS also assigns a weight to each individual. People with characteristics that are underrep-
resented in a particular month are given a larger weight. These weights are a partial response of
BLS to the issue that missing individuals are not a random sample of the population. We want to
include this correction to demonstrate the need for additional corrections for missing individuals.
We can not use the exact BLS weights to do this because the BLS may assign a given individual
different weights in two different months, which is another reason in addition to missing observa-
tions why (1) and (2) do not hold in the BLS data. Our approach was to assign a fixed weight for
an individual across all 8 possible observations based on the BLS weight for that individual in the
first month for which data are recorded for that person, as described in Appendix A.



3       Statistical description of labor-force status data.

    In this section we develop statistical descriptions of a number of features of the CPS data.

    4
     See Appendix A for detailed examples.
    5
     With the expansion of the survey from 50,000 to 60,000 households, beginning in July 2001, some individuals
were added and others dropped across a number of rotations, with waves of new individuals added to subsequent
rotations 5. Tracking individuals before and after this break is considerably harder than handling the sample redesign
in 2004 and 2014. For this reason we simply begin our analysis with the modern design adopted in July 2001.


                                                          9
3.1   Unemployment durations reported in rotations 1 and 5.

   First we consider the durations of unemployment that are reported on average over our sample
by people who are being interviewed for the first time (rotation 1). The blue bars in the top panel
of Figure 2 plot the fraction of unemployed reporting the indicated duration of job search in weeks.
Clearly there are some significant reporting errors arising from number preference. Respondents
are more likely to report spells as an integer number of months, and for longer spells as either 6
months, 1 year, 18 months, or longer than 99 weeks.          For shorter spells, people are more likely
to report an even number of weeks instead of an odd number; for example, on average there are
more people reporting 2 weeks than 1 and 6 weeks than 5.        Respondents are extremely unlikely to
report a duration of zero weeks, and for this reason we group the 0-week and 1-week observations
together into a category of reported duration less than or equal to one week.
   To interpret these numbers in an internally consistent way, we impose the restriction that the
only way an individual could have been unemployed for  weeks would be if the individual had
been unemployed for  - 1 weeks the week before. Thus if U ( ) denotes an internally consistent

summary of the fraction of the population who have been searching for  weeks, the function U ( )

must be monotonically decreasing in  . For our baseline specification we propose to represent this
function as a mixture of two exponentials with decay rates p1 and p2 , respectively.            We form a
(99 О 1) vector U whose  th element for  = 1, 2, ..., 98 is an internally consistent representation

of the fraction of the working-age population who perceive having been unemployed for a duration
of  weeks at a fixed point in time, while the 99th element is the fraction with perceived duration
greater than 98 weeks:
                                                      
                                           U =  1U +  2U                                              (3)
                                                                             
             iU =  U wi (1 - pi )   1 pi    p2
                                             i   иии   p97
                                                        i    p98
                                                              i /(1 - pi )
                                                                                for i = 1, 2.         (4)
            (99О1)

Here U denotes the fraction of the population who are unemployed and wi the fraction of those
individuals who are type i. Such a distribution would be the outcome of a steady state in which
there was a fraction U w1 (1 - p1 ) of the population who lose their jobs each week and for each of
whom the probability of continuing unemployed in any subsequent week is p1 , and an additional




                                                 10
inflow of U w2 (1 - p2 ) individuals with continuation probability p2 .6
       We allow for the various forms of number preference noted above by introducing a (99 О 99)
matrix A(A ) whose elements are determined by a (13 О 1) vector A . The first element A,1
allows a preference for reporting short durations as an even rather than an odd number of weeks,
assuming that someone whose true duration is  = 1, 3, 5, or 7 in fact reports duration 2, 4, 6, or
8 with probability A,1 . The value of A,2 represents the probability that someone will round their
duration up or down by a week to reach an integer number of months for durations within one
week of 1, 2, 3 or 4 months, while someone two weeks away from either of two months is presumed
to round down with probability  A,3 /2 and up with probability  A,3 /2. As we move to longer
durations we allow for the possibility that the rounding tendencies become stronger, introducing
new pairs of parameters for durations between 5-7 months, 8-11 months, or 12 or more months.
The last elements of A allow for preferences for integer multiples of 6 months for longer durations.
For each  the  th column of A sums to unity and characterizes the probability that someone whose
true duration category is  will report each of the possible categories i between 1 and 99, where i
or  = 99 is interpreted as true or reported durations longer than 98 weeks. Appendix B provides
more details on the structure we use to represent the matrix A. Note that our framework does
not impose the assumption of the existence or magnitude of any particular reporting error, as it
includes as a special case no reporting error of any kind when A = 0.
            [1]
       Let yX,t be the number of individuals in rotation group 1 sampled at date t who report status
X for X one of E (employed), N (not in labor force), M (labor-force status for that individual
is missing), or U (unemployed).          We summarize further detail in the last category in terms of
 [1]
yU,t ( ) which is the number of unemployed who report having been looking for work for  weeks
                                                               [1]
for  = 1, ..., 99.7 We compare the observed values yU,t ( ) with the predicted values represented
by the (99 О 1) vector
                                                    U = A
                                                         U.                                                     (5)

We also let X denote the overall fraction of the population reporting status X  {E, N, M, U }.

    6
      We will later examine some testable implications of such an interpretation by looking at the actual
unemployment-continuation probabilities for different individuals and also look at alternative functional forms. But
for now we propose (3) and (4) as a simple but flexible parametric functional form with which to impose monotonicity
on   U ( ).
    7
      The duration is top-coded at 99 weeks in our data.


                                                        11
If we treated observations as independent across months t the log likelihood of the rotation 1
observations alone would then be


                          [1]                T     [1]               [1]        [1]
                         X (X ) =            t=1 [yE,t ln  E   + yN,t ln N + yM,t ln M ]                        (6)
                                               T      99   [1]
                                         +     t=1     =1 yU,t ( ) ln  U ( ).


We can maximize this with respect to A , p1 , p2 , w1 , w2 , E , N , M , U subject to the constraint
that all probabilities are between 0 and 1 and sum to unity.8
    Estimates are reported in column 1 of Table 1, along with quasi-maximum-likelihood standard
                                                                       [1]
errors in column 2 which allow for the possibility that yX,t is correlated across time (calculated as
described in Appendix C). The predicted reported values  U ( ) are compared with the average
reported values in the top panel of Figure 2.9 This framework is able to describe the reported
values extremely accurately. The estimated latent function U ( ) along with its two contributing

components are plotted as a function of  in the bottom panel of Figure 2. We also considered
an alternative functional form based on a Weibull distribution, as discussed in Appendix D. The
mixture of exponentials has a much better fit to the data than that for the Weibull specification,
and we will use it in our baseline analysis.
    For rotations 2-4 and 6-8, BLS imputes a duration to those reporting UU continuations, making
durations for these individuals a hybrid of perceived and imputed quantities. This can create a
downward bias in the number of individuals unemployed for less than 5 weeks as discussed by
Abraham and Shimer (2001) and Shimer (2012) and blurs the inconsistency between perceived and
imputed durations. Since our goal is to characterize perceived durations separately from objective
durations, we do not use the imputed duration in the second month in unemployment. However,
there are no imputations for unemployment durations for those people in rotation 5. We therefore
                                 [1]                           [5]
repeated the analysis with yX,t in (6) replaced by yX,t . Parameter estimates and standard errors
are reported in columns 3 and 4 of Table 1.             These are very similar to those inferred from the


   8                                                                                             T
       Maximum likelihood estimates of some parameters are known analytically. Let yX =          t=1 yX,t denote the
total number of observations in category X and n = (yE + yN + yM + yU ) the total number of observations. Then
^ X = yX /n for X  {E, N, M, U }. These values can be substituted into expression (6) and the resulting concentrated
likelihood then maximized with respect to  A , p1 , p2 , w1 with w2 = 1 - w1 .
     9
       As noted in the previous footnote, by the nature of the maximization problem, the estimated values    ^ X for
X = E, N, M exactly match the historical fractions yX /(yE + yN + yM + yU ).


                                                         12
rotation 1 observations alone.


3.2   Characteristics of N U, EU, and M U transitions.

   Next consider the status of individuals in rotation 2 who had been counted as not in the labor
force when surveyed in rotation 1. Figure 3 focuses on the subset who in the second month (when
they were in rotation 2) reported being unemployed, giving the percentage reporting each duration
of job search. Two-thirds of these people have a duration of unemployment in rotation 2 that is
recorded to be longer than 4 weeks, despite the fact that the previous month they did not report
actively looking for a job and so were counted as out of the labor force. 8.6% of NU individuals
say that they have been looking for a job for 52 weeks and another 8.5% report having been looking
for work for over 98 weeks.
   Of those people who report right after an NU transition that they have been looking for
work for more than 4 weeks, what distribution characterizes their perceived duration of job
search?     We represent the probability of transitions from N to E, N, M , or U with parame-
ters NE , NN , NM , NU , respectively, where these four numbers sum to unity.                  Of those who
make an NU transition and report an unemployment duration greater than 4 weeks, suppose that
their perceived duration can again be represented by a mixture of two exponentials with decay
parameters p1,NU or p2,NU . We assume that some fractions q1,NU , q2,NU , q3,NU , and q4,NU of those
making the NU transition will perceive their unemployment duration to be 1,2,3, or 4 weeks re-
spectively, treating these values of qj,NU completely unrestrained.           A fraction q5,NU perceive a
duration greater than 4 weeks drawn from an exponential distribution with parameter p1,N U and
                                                          6
a fraction q6,NU are characterized by p2,NU , with        j =1 qj,NU   = 1. We thus calculate

                     
                                             q ,NU                              for  = 1, 2, 3, 4
                     
          NU ( ) =
                                           -5
                      q5,N U (1 - p1,NU )p1                          -5
                                           ,NU + q6,NU (1 - p2,NU )p2,NU       for  = 5, 6, ..., 98 .   (7)
                                   q5,NU p94            94
                                          1,NU + q6,NU p2,NU                       for  = 99


The predicted probability of each reported duration is then given by  NU =  NU ANU .
          [2]
   Let yNX,t denote the number of individuals who counted as not in the labor force in rotation 1
                                                                                         [2]
in month t - 1 and reported status X at date t where X  {E, N, M, U }. Let yNU,t ( ) denote the


                                                     13
number of NU who report unemployment duration   {1, ..., 98,  99} in rotation 2. Then the
contribution to the likelihood for months t = 1, ..., T from rotation 2 NX transitions is


                   [2]                    T     [2]              [2]                [2]
                  NX (N X ) =             t=1 [yNE,t ln  NE   + yNN,t ln  NN + yNM,t ln NM ]                        (8)
                                            T      99   [2]
                                      +     t=1     =1 yNU,t ( ) ln  NU ( ).


This      expression       can      then      be      maximized         with      respect      to     NX             =
( A,NU , p1,NU , p2,NU ,  NE ,  NN ,  NM ,  NU , q1,NU , q2,NU , ..., q6,NU )
                                                                               subject to the constraints

                                                                                                6
that all parameters fall between 0 and 1, NE + NN + NM + NU = 1 and                             j =1 qj,NU   = 1.
    Quasi-maximum-likelihood estimates ^ NX are reported in column 5 of Table 1 and predicted

values  NU compared with historical average values for yN U in Figure 3.                       Note that  A was
estimated in column 1 solely from individuals who were recorded as being unemployed in rotation
1, in column 3 solely from individuals who were unemployed in rotation 5, and in column 5 solely
from individuals who were recorded as being out of the labor force in rotation 1 and unemployed in
rotation 2. Although the vector A was estimated from very different data, the estimated values are
quite similar. Likewise p
                        ^1,NU and p
                                  ^2,NU turn out to be very close to the values p
                                                                                ^1 and p
                                                                                       ^2 estimated
from rotations 1 and 5. Those who make NU 5+ transitions, like those who are unemployed in
rotation 1, are allowed to answer any number to the question, "how long had you been looking for
a job." Due to this feature, the question reveals the perceived job-search spells of an individual in
a way that the assigned durations for UU individuals does not. The similarity in the parameter
estimates suggests that the perceived job-search history of NU 5+ individuals is similar to that of
the pool of unemployed in rotation 1.
    Next consider the status in month t of individuals who were recorded as employed when sampled
in rotation 1 in month t - 1. Twenty-six percent of those who make EU transitions report durations
longer than 4 weeks. Unlike the NU transitions, we do not interpret these as necessarily implying
an inaccuracy in either the E or U designation. Kudlyak and Lange (2018) noted these could
represent records of individuals who were employed in t - 1 but were engaged in on--the-job search
for a new job.10 We repeated the procedure to characterize transitions from employment using the

  10
     Elsby et al. (2011) and Farber and Valletta (2015) suggested that EU 5+ individuals could also be reporting the
time since the last salient job. Both this interpretation, as well as that of Kudlyak and Lange (2018), support the
conclusion that the reported duration associated with an EU transition should not be interpreted as the duration of an


                                                         14
same framework as above, replacing NX in (8) with EX. Parameter estimates and standard errors
are reported in columns 7 and 8 of Table 1. Much fewer EU transitions perceive themselves as
long-time job seekers (q6,EU = 0.17 versus q6,N U = 0.50). We also looked at the status in rotation 2
of individuals who were missing in rotation 1, replacing EX with M X. Quasi-maximum-likelihood
estimates are reported in column 9 of Table 1. Individuals making MU transitions look similar to
the pool of unemployed in rotation 1.


3.3    Characteristics of U X transitions.

    We next examine UX transitions.               The bars in the top panel of Figure 4 show  U ( ), the
observed probability that someone in rotation 1 who reports being unemployed with duration 
weeks will still be unemployed the following month.11                   This probability rises as a function of
duration before eventually plateauing at a value around 0.62 for durations over half a year. One
way this feature of the data is often captured is by defining some arbitrary cutoff K with any
duration   K designated as short-term unemployed who have some continuation probability
 1,U U while long-term unemployed ( > K ) have a different probability  2,U U . That kind of simple
dichotomization into short-term and long-term unemployment would have the drawbacks that it
requires picking an arbitrary cut-off K and implies an abrupt discontinuity in outcomes expected
for individuals slightly below K relative to those slightly above K.
    Our parameterization suggests a smooth function that could be used as a natural alternative
to an arbitrary cutoff. We have summarized the distribution of reported durations for those un-
employed in rotation 1 as coming from a mixture of two types of individuals, where type 1 have a
perceived weekly continuation probability of p1 and type 2 have a perceived continuation probabil-
ity of p2 . We modeled the fraction of the population that reports being unemployed with duration
 as given by the  th element of the vector  1 +  2 where  i = A        
                                                               iU for  iU given in (4). If we

observe someone reports a duration of  , the probability that the individual is type i is obtained



uninterrupted spell of unemployment. Ahn and Shao (2017) further documented that on-the-job search constitutes
a non-negligible fraction of aggregate job search. Hall and Kudlyak (2019) found that many job losers make frequent
transitions between short-term employment, unemployment, and out of the labor force before finding a long-term
job.
   11
      To avoid plotting values for observations with excessive sampling error, we set this probability to 0 for durations
with 10 or fewer observations over the whole sample.


                                                           15
from the formula
                                         i ( ) =  i ( )/[ 1 ( ) +  2 ( )]                                         (9)

for i = 1 or 2. The function 2 ( ) is plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 4.12                     Someone who
reports a duration of  = 1 week is quite unlikely to have come from the second distribution,
whereas someone who reports a duration greater than 40 weeks is almost certain to have come
from the second distribution. The function dips down at duration  = 26 weeks because, given the
tendency of answers to clump at this value, this observation includes many individuals whose true
duration is less than 26 weeks and accordingly contains a higher mix of type 1 relative to those
reporting 25 weeks.
    This formula allows us to estimate objective monthly transition probabilities for the two types.
Let  i,U X be the probability that an individual of type i makes a transition from unemployment in
rotation 1 to status X = E, N, M, or U in rotation 2, so  i,U E +  i,U N +  i,U M +  i,U U = 1 for both
i = 1 and i = 2. Let  i denote the vector whose  th element is i ( ) and  U X the (99 О 1) vector
whose  th element is the observed probability that someone who reports duration  in month t has
status X in month t + 1. Under the above assumptions  U X would be predicted to be


                                           UX = 1  1,U X +  2  2,U X .                                           (10)


       [2]
Let yU X,t ( ) denote the observed number of individuals who report U with duration  in rotation
1 and status X in rotation 2. We then have the likelihood function


                [2]               T      99         [2]                       [2]
               U X (UX ) =        t=1     =1      [yU E,t ( ) ln  U E ( ) + yUN,t ( ) ln  U N ( )
                                                      [2]                           [2]
                                                  +yU M,t ( ) ln  U M ( ) + yU U,t ( ) ln  U U ( )].             (11)


We fixed 2 to be the function plotted in the bottom panel of Figure 4 and maximized (11) with
respect to { i,U E ,  i,U N ,  i,U M ,  i,U U }i=1,2 subject to the constraint that  i,U E +  i,U N +  i,U M +
 i,U U = 1 for i = 1, 2.
    Quasi-maximum-likelihood estimates and standard errors are reported in rows 1 and 2 of Table 2.


  12
     For purposes of this graph, this function was calculated using the values of w1 , p1 , p2 , A from Table 3, which
pool all observations from all rotations to estimate these parameters.


                                                            16
Type 1 individuals have a 32% probability of being employed next month, whereas the probability
for type 2 individuals is only 12%. Type 1 individuals have a 37% probability of being unemployed
next month, whereas for type 2 the probability is 57%. The red line in the top panel of Figure 4 show
the predicted values for the unemployment-continuation probability implied by these maximum
likelihood estimates.13 This function provides a very good summary of the raw data.
   We also repeated the analysis using only data for individuals who were unemployed in rotation
5, with very similar results shown in rows 3 and 4.                           Our preferred estimates pool together all
observations for all rotations but still estimate  i,U U completely independently of the value of pi ,
while treating the values of A , p1 , and p2 as the same across all rotation groups. This summary
of the full data set was obtained by maximizing the full-sample likelihood


                                   [1]    [5]              [j ]        [j ]     [j ]     [2]      [6]
                             = X + X +              j J   EX + NX + MX + U X + U X .                                 (12)


These full-sample estimates are reported in Table 3.
   Now let us compare the estimated objective unemployment-continuation probability for type 1
individuals ( 1,U U ) with the value that would be predicted on the basis of their reported durations.
If type 1 individuals truly had a weekly unemployment-continuation probability of p1 = 0.8092, we
would expect to observe a monthly continuation probability of 0.80924.33 = 0.40. If we condition
on missing observations having the same distribution as observed E, N and U, this value turns out
to exactly equal the value we'd predict from Table 3 of  1,U U /(1 -  1,U M ) = 0.40. Note that our
approach did not impose this in any way; p
                                         ^1 is based solely on reported durations, whereas ^1,U U
is based solely on observed continuations. The exercise shows that the durations reported by type
1 individuals are entirely consistent with the observed labor-force flows for those individuals.
   By contrast, the long-term unemployed are another story.                                      Their perceived weekly
unemployment-continuation probability of p2 = 0.9733 would imply a monthly continuation prob-
ability of 0.97334.33 = 0.89, far larger than the estimate  2,U U /(1 -  2,UM ) = 0.62. Even more
dramatically, a monthly continuation probability of 0.62 would mean a probability of remaining
unemployed for 6 months of 0.626 = 0.06. But in the BLS data, the fraction of those unemployed
who report durations over 26 weeks averages 28%. Far fewer people than are reported in the data

  13
       That is, the red line plots  1 ( )^
                                          1,U U /(1 - ^ 1,U M ) +  2 ( )^
                                                                         2,U U /(1 - ^ 2,U M ) as a function of  .


                                                                  17
should be unemployed longer than 6 months if people left the pool of long-term unemployed at
anything like the rate implied by  2,U U . The observed unemployment continuation probabilities
are not consistent with the distribution of reported unemployment durations.
    That conclusion is robust whether one uses our parametric model or any other. For example,
Appendix D derives the analogous result using a Weibull characterization of durations. Any model
that accurately describes the cross-section of durations -- and ours does so quite well -- will predict
an unemployment-continuation similar to the stock-based measure plotted as the black line in
Figure 1, which we noted is inconsistent with flow-based measures in green. The main advantage
of our parametric approach is that it highlights that this inconsistency between the stock-based
and flow-based measures comes entirely from those whom we have characterized as the perceived
long-term unemployed. This insight is new to this literature.


3.4       Rotation-group bias.

    Another source of error in the CPS data is the difference across different rotations in the
reported labor-force status. Table 4 reports the monthly average number of sampled individuals
with measured labor force status E, N, M, or U for each of the 8 rotation groups.14                                          Column 6
shows that the average unemployment rate declines sharply as a function of rotation group, starting
out at 6.6% for rotation 1 but falling all the way to 5.7% for rotation 8. Column 7 reveals another
interesting fact that has not been much commented on in the earlier literature: the measured
labor-force participation rate falls even more sharply.               Column 3 documents a third tendency--
individuals are much more likely to be missed in rotation 1 and 5 compared to other groups.
                                                                                                                               [j ]
    We        summarize       these           tendencies   with some simple          regressions.                      Let    xt        =
       [j ]    [j ]    [j ]     [j ]            [j ]
100yX,t / yE,t + yN,t + yM,t + yU,t denote the percentage of individuals in rotation group j sam-
                                                                                    [j ]          [j ]   [j ]   [j ]
pled in month t with measured status X = E, N, M, or U ; thus et + nt + mt + ut exactly equals
100 for every j and every t. Consider an 8-variable panel regression with time fixed effects where
                                       [j ]
the dependent variable is nt , j = 1, ..., 8, t = 1, ..., T :


                                              [j ]                                         [j ]
                                          nt = nt +  n j + n1 d1t + n5 d5t + nt .                                                     (13)



  14                                                                 T      [1]
       For example, the entry in the first row and column is T -1    t=1   yE,t .


                                                               18
Here nt is the time fixed effect for month t,  n captures a linear trend across rotations (with
increased fraction of N in later rotations captured by  n > 0), d1t = 1 if j = 1 and 0 otherwise
allows for something special about the first rotation group, while d5t = 1 if j = 5 serves a similar
function for rotation 5. The fitted value of this regression (with fixed effect ant = 0) is plotted as
the red curve in Figure 5. These coefficients capture the tendency for the percentage of individuals
classified as N to increase sharply across rotation groups.
                                                        [1]     [8]
     Coefficients for panel regressions in which et ,...,et are the 8 dependent variables are plotted
as the thick black curve in Figure 5. Coefficients when unemployment is the dependent variable
are plotted as the dashed yellow line.          The rising trend across rotations in N ( N = 0.0010) is
accounted for by falling trends in E and U ( E +  U = -0.0012). The bulges in M in rotation 1
(M 1 = 0.0168) and rotation 5 (M 5 = 0.0153) are accounted for by drops in E and N in those
rotations.15



4        Reconciling the inconsistencies.

     This section describes how we reconcile the inconsistencies documented in Section 3.


4.1      Rotation-group bias.

     We have seen that a given household can give different answers depending on the number of
times the household has previously been interviewed. We interpret this as differences in interview
technology: the process by which data are obtained differs across rotations, and the numbers from
different rotations mean different things. As a first step we summarize these differences in the form
of a counterfactual question: if an individual in rotation j had instead been interviewed using the
technology i, how would their answers have differed? In this section we show how to answer this
question for i = 1 and then find the answer for any i. In the next section we ask, which interview
technology i should be used as a baseline summary of the data? We identify several reasons why
we prefer to use the answers that people give the first time they are interviewed (i = 1).
                                                                            [j ]    [j ]   [j ]   [j ]   [j ]
     Summarizing the differences in interview technology. Let t = (E,t , N,t , M,t , U,t ) denote

    15
     These findings are consistent with Krueger, Mas, and Niu's (2017) finding that rotation-group bias is associated
with nonresponses and with Bailar's (1975) conclusion that the rotation-group bias of the unemployment rate can be
explained by the participation margin.


                                                         19
the observed fraction of individuals who reported status X when interviewed in rotation j in month
t. For each j  J = {2, 3, 4}  {6, 7, 8}, of the individuals who reported status X1 in rotation
j - 1 in month t - 1, some fraction j
                                    X1 ,X2 ,t are observed to report status X2 in rotation j for
                                 [j ]               [j ]          [j ]          [j ]
Xi  {E, N, U, M }; thus XE,t + XN,t + XU,t + XM,t = 1 for all X , t and j  J. Collect these
observed probabilities in a matrix

                                                                                                
                                                   [j ]         [j ]          [j ]       [j ]
                                                 EE,t         NE,t        ME,          U E,t
                                                                                                
                                         [j ]  [j ]  [j ]  [j ]                                 
                                                                                                
                              [j ]       EN,t NN,t MN,t U N,t                                   
                            t          =                                                           j  J.
                                         [j ]  [j ]  [j ]  [j ]                                 
                                         EM,t NM,t MM,t  UM,t                                   
                                                                                                
                                          [j ]  [j ]  [j ]  [j ]
                                         EU,t NU,t MU,t U U,t

                                          [j ]
Notice that each column of t sums to unity.                                    For example, for the first column, if someone
reported status E when interviewed in rotation j - 1, they must have had one of the statuses
E, N, M, or U in rotation j. Our constructed data set exactly satisfies the accounting identity


                                            [j ]           [j ] [j -1]
                                         t = t t-1                        for all t and j  J.                           (14)


        For an individual who reported status X [j ] in rotation j in month t, consider the counterfactual
answer that individual would have given if interviewed using the interview technology that was
used for rotation 1:


 [j ]
rX [j] ,X [1] ,t = Prob(would have answered X [1] using technology 1 given answered X [j ] using technology j ).


Collect these counterfactual probabilities in a matrix

                                                                                                
                                                  [j ]         [j ]       [j ]          [j ]
                                                 rEE,t        rNE,t      rME,t         rU E,t
                                                                                                
                                          [j ]   [j ]  [j ]  [j ]                               
                                          r                                                     
                                [j ]      EN,t rNN,t rMN,t rU N,t                               
                             Rt         =                                                          j  J.
                                          r[j ]  [j ]  [j ]  [j ]                               
                                          EM,t rNM,t rMM,t rU M,t                               
                                                                                                
                                            [j ]  [j ]  [j ]  [j ]
                                          rEU,t rNU,t rMU,t rU U,t

                                         [j ]
Notice that each column of Rt sums to unity. For example, for the first column, given that an
individual reported status E when interviewed in rotation j, they would have to have given one

                                                                         20
of the answers E, N, M, U if interviewed using the technology of rotation 1.                                                                                   We can construct
                  [j ]
matrices Rt that satisfy the condition16


                                                  [j ] [j ]            [1]
                                             Rt t = t                                for t = 1, ..., T and j = 2, ..., 8.                                                  (15)


                                                                                                   [j ]
From the analysis above, for j > 1 we expect rNU,t > 0; some of the individuals who report labor
status N in rotation j would have reported status U if they had been interviewed for the first time.
                               [j ]                        [j ]
We also expect rEM,t > 0 and rNM,t > 0; some of the individuals who were reported as status E
or N in rotation j would have been missing using the interview technology of rotation 1.
                                                                         [j ]
       One can parameterize a matrix Rt that exactly satisfies (15) in an infinite number of ways.
In our monthly empirical estimates below we will take the view that rotation bias evolves slowly
                                                     » where R  [j ]
                                                             » does not differ too much from                     [j ]                    [j ]
over time, leading us to replace Rt with an estimate Rt       t

» [j -1] . In this case, R
R                        » [j ] [j ] will be close to but not exactly equal to [1] . In anticipation of this
  t                        t    t                                              t
                                                                                                          [j ]
plan, we now parameterize the unrestricted matrix Rt in a way that focuses on what we believe to
be the most important features of rotation bias. In Figure 5 we saw that the decline in U across
rotations is balanced by a corresponding trend up in N and that differences in M in rotations 1 and
5 correspond to matching drops in E and N. We therefore propose to capture the key differences
                                                                                                                           [j ]            [j ]         [j ]   [j ]
in interview technology in month t using three parameters t = ( EM,t , NM,t ,  NU ) :17

                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                              [j ]
                                                       1 - EM,t
                                                                            0                                                            0 0
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                    [j ]       [j ]                                                          
                                                           0    1 - NM,t - NU,t                                                          0 0 
                                              [j ]                                                                                           
                                             Rt      =                                                                                       .                             (16)
                                                        [j ]             [j ]
                                                                      NM,t                                                               1 0 
                                                          EM,t                                                                               
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                          [j ]
                                                           0          NU,t                                                               0 1


     16
          For example, the first row states
                                              [j ]       [j ]          [j ]          [j ]          [j ]   [j ]          [j ]      [j ]            [1]
                                             rEE,t E,t + rN E,t  N,t + rME,t M,t + rU E,t  U,t = E,t .

This equation states that the fraction who reported E in rotation 1 can be viewed as the fraction who reported X [j ]
in rotation j times the probability someone reporting X [j ] would have reported E using technology 1, added across
the four possible X [j ] .
   17                                            [j ]
      We take the (3,3) and (4,4) elements of Rt to be unity because a higher fraction of the population is M or
U in rotation 1 than in other rotations. For example, the third equation in (15) states that the fraction missing in
                                                                     [j ]       [j ]
rotation 1 is the fraction missing in rotation j plus some portions EM,t and N M,t of the fractions that are E and
                         [1]          [j ]        [j ]        [j ]        [j ]              [j ]
N in rotation j : M,t = M,t + EM,t  E,t + N M,t  N,t . Note that the normalization of the third and fourth columns
      [j ]                                                                                                                                                     [j ]
of   Rt      still allows equation (15) to fit exactly the observed average values of every element of t for every j and t.


                                                                                                    21
                  [j ]
The value of t that causes (15) to hold exactly for every j is given by18


                                                                       [j ]                    [1]           [j ]
                                                            1 - EM,t = E,t /E,t                                                                                         (17)


                                                        [j ]                     [1]               [j ]             [j ]
                                                       NU,t = (U,t - U,t )/N,t                                                                                          (18)

                                                            [j ]                     [j ]                 [1]              [j ]
                                              1 - NM,t -  NU,t = N,t /N,t .                                                                                             (19)

    Next consider a vector t that represents the fractions that would have been reported if everyone
                                                                                                                                                                         [1]
in month t had been interviewed using technology 1. One reasonable estimate of t would be  t .
                                                                                                                                                          [j ]
However, our proposal below will be to estimate t using all eight of the observed  t under the
                                                                                            [j ]
assumption that the rotation bias parameters in Rt do not change much over time. That is, we
           [2]                                                                                                                      [2]
will use t       to help improve our estimate of t by adjusting  t                                                                        based on the average relation
           [2]           [1]
between t and t in recent years.
    We also construct a counterfactual matrix of transition probabilities t that summarize what

transitions between labor-force status would have been if all individuals could have been interviewed
in both t - 1 and t using interview technology 1. We require this estimate to satisfy the accounting
identity
                                                                                 
                                                                       t  t-1 =  t .                                                                                    (20)

                                                                                                   [1]                        [1]
We have reasonable estimates of          
                                t-1 and  t (e.g.,  t-1 and  t , respectively). The goal is to use
                                                         [j ]
the observed transition probabilities t and the representation of rotation bias in (15) to construct
an estimate of t satisfying (20).
                                                  [2]
    Premultiply (14) for j = 2 by Rt and use result (15):


                                                      [2]       [2] [1]                      [2] [2]                       [1]
                                               Rt t t-1 = Rt t = t .

   18
      These equations come from solving rows 1 ,2 and 4 of (15), One can show that equations (17)-(19) imply that
row 3 of (15) also holds. Add rows 1, 2, and 4 of (15) together to deduce
                                [j ]   [j ]    [j ]             [j ]      [j ]              [j ]          [j ]               [1]          [1]   [1]
                                E,t + U,t + N,t - EM,t E,t - NM,t  N,t =  E,t +  U,t +  N,t .

Subtracting both sides from 1 gives
                                               [j ]             [j ]          [j ]          [j ]          [j ]               [1]
                                              M,t + EM,t  E,t + N M,t N,t = M,t
                                                                                                                            [j ]                                 [j ]
as required by the third row of (15). In general, since each column of Rt sums to unity, if elements of  t sum to
                             [j ] [j ]                    [j ]
unity, then the elements of Rt  t also sum to unity: 1 Rt t = 1  t = 1 for 1 a vector of four ones.


                                                                                      22
                     [2]    [2]
In other words, Rt t offers one estimate of the counterfactual transition matrix t if people

could somehow have been interviewed with the same technology in rotation 2 as in rotation 1. It
                                                                                              [1]                [1]                  [2]   [2]
satisfies the internal consistency requirement (20), namely,                 
                                                             t  t-1 =  t for t = Rt t . More
                                              [j ]
generally, premultiplying (14) by Rt we see


                                     [j ]     [j ]    [j -1]           [j -1] [j -1]          [j ] [j ]
                                  Rt t (Rt-1 )-1 Rt-1 t-1 = Rt t


                                   [j ]     [j ]     [j -1]          [1]       [1]
                                  Rt t (Rt-1 )-1 t-1 =  t                                   for j  J                                              (21)

         [1]                                                                         [j ]        [j ]     [j ]         [j -1] -1
where Rt is defined to be the identity matrix. Thus t                                       = Rt t (Rt                       )     gives us another
                                                                                      [j ] [1]              [1]
estimate satisfying the internal consistency requirement t t-1 = t . Our approach will be to
                                                                                                                 [j ]
estimate t so as to be as close as possible to the various estimates t                                                   while satisfying all the
necessary accounting identities, as described in detail below.
   Rotation-bias correction to the full-sample averages. To calculate a full-sample analog to the
                                                              [j ]
date t estimate just described, we replace t in equations (17)-(19) with  [j ] , the average fractions
in rotation j across our full sample. This produces the estimates of [j ] reported in Table 5. The
first row shows that 1-2% of the individuals who get counted as employed in rotations 2-4 or 6-8
would have been missing from the survey if the rotation 1 interview technology had been used.
On the other hand, rotation 5 (which follows an 8-month break) reports similar numbers of E as
               [5]
rotation 1 (EM near 0).19 The second row captures a rising tendency for those who would have
been counted as N in later rotations to have been counted as U in the first interview. The third
row indicates that a large and rising fraction of those counted N in later rotations would have been
M in rotation 1.
                                                                                             » [j ] be
   Let [j ] be the observed full-sample average transition probabilities into rotation j and R
the value obtained by plugging the parameter values in Table 5 into expression (16).                                                         We then
chose values for the (n О n) matrix  by minimizing the sum of squared elements of


                                              » [j ] )-1  R
                                      [j ] - (R           » [j -1]                   for j  J                                                     (22)



  19                  [5]
    The estimate of EM from equation (17) is actually very slightly negative (-0.0049). The value reported in
                                                [5]
Table 5 and used in the calculations below sets EM = 0. This makes essentially no difference for any results.


                                                                     23
                                                      [1] -                                                     (23)

                                                       » [5] )-1 
                                                [5] - (R                                                        (24)

subject to the constraints that all elements of  lie between 0 and 1, each column of  sums to
1, and that  is the vector of ergodic probabilities implied by  .20 The resulting estimates of  
and  are reported in Table 6.
    This framework predicts that the fraction of individuals reporting status E, N, M, or U when
interviewed using technology j would be given by


                                                          » [j ] )-1  .
                                                ^ [j ] = (R
                                                                                                                (25)


These predicted shares are compared with the actual shares reported for each rotation in Figure 6.
Our representation fits the values in each [j ] essentially perfectly.
    Our approach also implies a predicted value for the observed fraction of individuals with mea-
sured transitions from X [j -1] to X [j ] :


                                            ^ [j ] = (R
                                                      » [j ] )-1  R
                                                                  » [j -1] .                                    (26)


Figure 7 plots these predicted values along with the actual reported fractions for j  J .21 These
show a reasonable fit, though not perfect. One could try to model in more detail features such
as the tendency for those missing in rotation 1 to be reported as employed in rotation 2 and for
those not in the labor force in rotation 1 to be missing in rotation 2. Notwithstanding, our simple
parsimonious framework does a reasonable job of capturing transitions.
    We defined the value of  in terms of the rotation 1 technology. But now that we've found
 , we can also calculate the answer using any other technology.                                » [5] )-1  gives
                                                                                 For example, (R

  20
    That is, we minimized the sum of squares of the 96 = 16 О 6 elements in (22) plus the sum of squares of the 8
elements in (23) and (24). The vector   is also a function of  using expression [22.2.26] in Hamilton (1994):

                                                          I4 - 
                                                  B=
                                                             1

                                                   = (B  B )-1 B  e5
where 1 denotes a (1 О 4) vector of ones and e5 denotes column 5 of I5 .
   21
      Note we do not offer a predicted value for transitions from X [4] to X [5] since there are 8 intervening months
between rotations 4 and 5.


                                                          24
the answer in terms of the rotation 5 technology. The BLS approach, which simply averages the
rotations together, is implicitly reporting results in terms of an "average" technology, which in
                                         ~ -1  for R
                                                   ~ -1 = (1/8)                                                                      8     » [j ] -1
our formulation would be described as  = R                                                                                           j =1 (R ) .       Appendix
                                ~ our estimates of the full-sample averages and transition
                          ~ -1  R,
Table A-5 reports  and  = R
probabilities if all individuals had been surveyed using the average interview technology.
    Month-by-month corrections for rotation bias.                                  For applying this approach to monthly data,
we take the view that the rotation bias parameters evolve slowly over time, implemented using the
principle of exponential smoothing. Our first step is to construct weighted moving averages of the
counts of individuals in each labor-force status in each rotation,


                                                    [j ]                    [j ]              [j ]
                                                yX,t = (1 - )yX,t + y X,t-1 ,


         [j ]
where yX,t denotes the observed weighted number of individuals reporting labor status X 
{E, N, M, U } in rotation j in month t. For  = 1, this method would reproduce the full-sample
averages just reported. For  = 0, it would amount to estimating values for each month in isola-
tion of all the others. We set  = 0.98, which means that observations 3 years prior to t receive
                                                                                                                        [j ]
half the weight of observation t in determining the smoothed count y X,t .22 We then calculated the
corresponding smoothed fractions as


                                      [j ]             [j ]   [j ]           [j ]            [j ]                [j ]
                                X,t = y X,t / yE,t + y N,t + yM,t + y U,t .


From these we calculated time-varying rotation-bias parameters as


                                             [j ]                                   [1]        [j ]
                                         EM,t = max 1 -  E,t /E,t , 0


                                         [j ]                         [1]            [j ]                [j ]
                                      N U,t = max                    U,t - U,t /N,t , 0

                               [j ]                                  [j ]                   [1]           [j ]
                              NM,t = max 1 - N U,t - N,t /N,t , 0 ,

                                                                                                  [j ]                               [j ]       [j ]
and exponentially smoothed these as well. For example, EM,t = (1 - )EM,t + EM,t-1 .


  22                                                                                          [j ]                             36     [j ]
     That is, 0.9836 = 0.48. We started the recursion by setting y
                                                                 »X,1 = (1/36)                                                 t=1   yX,t the average of the first
three years of observations.


                                                                      25
                             [j ]    [j ]                 [j ]                                            [j ]
   The resulting series for  EM,t , NU,t , and NM,t are plotted in Figure 8. The value of EM,t ,
which characterizes the tendency to record people as E in rotation j who would have been M in
                                                                   [j ]
rotation 1, has fallen somewhat over time. By contrast, NU,t , which governs the tendency of people
who would have been counted as U in earlier rotations to be designated as N in later rotations,
                                                            [j ]
has increased over time. The third parameter, NM,t , which characterizes the tendency of someone
who would have been counted as M in rotation 1 to be counted as N in later rotations, has not
changed much over time.
                           [j ]   [j ]       [j ]                            » [j ] for each j and t.
   Plugging the values for EM,t , NU,t , and NM,t into (16) gives a value of R t

Our procedure was to proceed iteratively through the data, choosing t for each t to minimize the

errors in the following equations:


                     [j ] » [j ] )-1  R
                                      » [j -1]
                     t - (R t        t t-1                for j  J = {2, 3, 4}  {6, 7, 8}                   (27)




                                                    [1]
                                                   t -    
                                                       t  t-1                                               (28)

                                             [5] » )-1    [5]
                                                          
                                            t - (Rt    t  t-1 .                                             (29)

                                                                          [1]
We set the initial value of                             
                            t for observation t = 1 as  1 =  1 . For each t = 2, 3, ... we choose the

16 elements of t so as to minimize the sum of squares of the 104 terms in (27)-(29) subject to the

constraints that each element of                                         
                                 t is between 0 and 1 and each column of t sums to 1. Given

t we then calculated

                                                        
                                                   t = t  t-1


                                                                           T
and proceeded to the next observation t + 1. The resulting time series {t }t=1 gives the estimate

for month t of the fractions that would have reported each status using interview technology 1, and
is the starting point for the adjusted estimates described below.


4.2   Choosing a baseline interview technology.

   The framework in Section 4.1 allows us to reconcile stocks and flows in the CPS data and
summarize that reconciliation using any interview technology.                   In practice we need to choose a



                                                           26
particular technology as a baseline.          In this section we review the reasons why we recommend
using the first-interview definition of labor-force status.
   Disengagement. The tendency to report a higher incidence of unemployment the first time
people are asked has also been observed in the Netherlands (van den Brakel and Krieg, 2015) and
New Zealand (Silverstone and Bell, 2010).            One possible explanation is that people become less
engaged the more times they are interviewed and tend toward answers that they think will end
the interview more quickly.         For example, the CPS interview is more onerous if the respondent
says that they have worked at more than one job.               The number of people reporting more than
one job drops sharply across rotations (Halpern-Manners and Warren, 2012; Hirsch and Winters,
2016).     The CPS questionnaire also routes people over age 50 who say they are retired through
an abbreviated set of labor-force questions.23          It is interesting to note that more than all of the
increasing incidence of N in later rotations can be explained by larger numbers of people who say
they are retired or disabled. Specifically, note from row 1 in Table 7 that the average fraction of
the population categorized as N is 1.3% higher in rotations 2-8 than in rotation 1. Row 2 shows
that the fraction of the population categorized as N and retired is 1.0% higher in 2-8, and row 3
shows that the fraction categorized as N and disabled is 0.6% higher.
   This raises the possibility that some of the people who had reported U in rotation 1 hoped to
end the interview more quickly in later interviews if they claimed to be retired or disabled. We can
observe in the data that those who are allegedly retired or disabled in rotations 2-7 are more likely
to return to the labor force (that is, to report E or U ) the following month than are the retired or
disabled in rotation 1 (see row 4 of Table 7). This observation is consistent with the inference that
some of the additional individuals in later rotations who are designated as N are in an objective
sense still in the labor force.
   Stigma. Another possible explanation suggested by Halpern-Manners and Warren (2012) is that
some people may perceive a stigma in reporting to an official government agency that they are con-
tinually searching for a job without success. This of course could interact with the disengagement
effect -- someone who feels some stigma associated with their status may become less engaged with
the interview process than the general population. This could lead some respondents to report in
subsequent interviews that they did not actively search for work even though they did, which would
  23
       Current Population Survey Interviewing Manual, April 2015, p. B3-3.


                                                        27
show up as an increase in N and decrease in U in later rotations. The CPS allows one member of
the household to report the labor-force status for all the adults living there. It is noteworthy that
unemployment falls much more quickly across rotations among individuals who are reporting their
own status compared to individuals whose status is reported by a proxy, consistent with Halpern-
Manners and Warren's hypothesis. Self-responders account for half of the total observations but
two-thirds of rotation bias (see rows 6 and 7 of Table 7).
   Demographic evidence. An alternative hypothesis is that some individuals are confused by the
questions or learn the meaning better as interviews are repeated.        Some interesting evidence on
this comes from differences in rotation bias across demographic groups and over time. Following
Krueger, Mas and Niu (2017), we summarize the magnitude of rotation bias by the slope of a
regression of the unemployment rate for rotation j on a constant and the month-in-sample j . For
the subsample 2001:7 to 2008:6, the slope of this regression is -0.11, meaning that on average,
rotation j reported an unemployment rate that is 0.11 percentage points lower than that reported
by rotation j - 1. For those without a high school degree the slope was -0.21 while for those with
a college degree the slope was only -0.05. These differences might seem to lend support to the
confusion/learning hypothesis. Nonetheless, we note that even for those with college degrees, the
slope is still highly statistically significant, with a standard error below 0.01.
   Another feature that distinguishes less educated workers is that they have higher unemployment
rates than the general population.     The top panel of Figure 9 illustrates the importance of this
graphically.   The horizontal axis plots the average unemployment rate as measured by BLS for
a particular demographic group and sample period.          The vertical axis plots the absolute value
of the slope from the Krueger, Mas and Niu regression. For the overall population, the average
unemployment rate over 2001-2008 was 5.3%, represented by the point A1 = (5.3, 0.11) in the
figure. College graduates (represented by the point C1) had an average unemployment rate over
this period of 2.6%, about half that of the overall population, just as the slope for this group is
about half that for the overall population for this period.      The average unemployment rate for
those without a high school diploma, 11.2%, is about twice that for the overall population, as is
the slope for this group, as represented by point L1 in the figure.
   The slope is different across demographic groups and also changes over time. Consider a second
sample, 2008:7-2014:6, that includes the high unemployment rates in the aftermath of the Great

                                                   28
Recession. For almost every demographic group, the unemployment rate is higher in the second
subsample than in the first, and the magnitude of rotation bias goes up by a roughly proportionate
amount. It seems implausible that the college-educated (S2 and C2) were more confused by the
questions during the Great Recession than they had been in the earlier decade. Nor is the increase
in rotation bias part of a long-term trend. Over the 2014:7-2020:1 subsample, we see slopes and
unemployment rates come back down together for every group.
   We can summarize this regularity with an OLS regression fit to the 27 data points in the top
panel of Figure 9 (standard errors in parentheses):


                                siT = 0.029 + 0.0126uiT + ^
                                                          iT         R2 = 0.80.                    (30)
                                       (0.010)   (0.0013)


Here siT is the negative of the Krueger-Mas-Niu slope coefficient24 for demographic group i and
subsample T and uiT is the average unemployment rate for that group.              Most of the variation
in the slope across demographic groups and across time can be explained by differences in the
unemployment rate across groups and across time. The data are suggestive of a universal law: if a
percentage uit of a group i at date t are truly unemployed, 1.26% of those unemployed individuals
will no longer be classified as unemployed in each subsequent interview. This law seems to hold
for every education group, demographic group, and point in time. Rotation bias can be explained
statistically solely on the basis of the underlying true unemployment rate and has nothing to do
with education or age. This observation casts doubt on the hypothesis that rotation bias arises
from confusion or learning about the questions and is exactly what we would expect to see if stigma
and disengagement are the main explanation for rotation bias.
   Rotation bias in the employment to population ratio. We observe differences across rotations not
just in the unemployment rate but also in the employment rate. The employment-to-population
ratio is 0.9 percentage points lower on average for rotations 2-8 compared to rotation 1 (see row 8
                        t the subset of individuals who worked only part-time in month t or who
of Table 7). Denote by E
are usually employed but didn't work in t. Row 9 shows that rotation bias in E can be entirely
                                   . This is another labor-force status for which we might expect
explained by the rotation bias in E
to see some stigma and less engagement as people are re-interviewed.

  24
       That is, siT = -^ in the regression u[j ] = iT +  и j + it for t  T.
                        iT                  it          iT



                                                            29
    The bottom panel of Figure 9 reproduces the analysis in the top panel with U now replaced
    Here e [j ]
by E.     it is the fraction of people in rotation j, demographic group i and month t who only
work part time in t or report that they are usually employed but not in month t. Let s
                                                                                      iT be the
                                                                    [j ]
negative of the slope coefficient from a regression of e
                                                        it on a constant and j over subsample T.
The bottom panel of Figure 9 shows the scatterplot relating s
                                                             iT to the average value of e
                                                                                         it for that
group and subsample. A regression line summarizing the relationship is


                                 s
                                  iT = 0.014 + 0.0077e
                                                     iT + ^
                                                          iT               R2 = 0.34.                               (31)
                                         (0.035)   (0.0021)


This does not have as good a fit as (30) -- demographics and sample period play a more impor-
tant role in rotation bias in the unemployment rate than in the employment-to-population ratio.
Notwithstanding, the slope coefficient in (31) is highly statistically significant.
    College-educated individuals are significant outliers in the second panel of Figure 9. Part-time
work for these individuals may involve consulting or programming for which they may feel little or
no stigma compared to less-educated individuals whose part-time work may be cleaning or serving.
In fact, the slope coefficients corresponding to the height of C1, C2 and C3 are each far from
statistically significant. When these three observations are dropped, the R2 rises to 0.49.
    Evidence from reported durations of job search.                  One of the main objectives of our study
is to reconcile the discrepancies between different CPS statistics.                   One glaring inconsistency is
that reported durations of unemployment are much longer than could be consistent with observed
probabilities of UU continuations. Because more U get counted as N as we increase the number of
interviews j, if we were to reconcile stocks and flows on the basis of the interview j - 1 technology,
some of the observed UN transitions between rotation j - 1 and j would be interpreted as UU
continuations, decreasing the inconsistency between UU continuations and reported durations. By
contrast, if we were to standardize on the basis of interview j technology, some of the reported
UN transitions would be interpreted as NN continuations, increasing the inconsistency between
reported durations and the probability of a UU continuation.                     Normalizing on the basis of any
interview technology j > 1 would reduce the number of imputed UU continuations and thus
increase the discrepancy between UU continuation probabilities and reported durations.25 Using
   25
    For example, the first-interview measure implies an unemployment-continuation probability of                   
                                                                                                        U U /(1 -  U M ) =
55.7% after correcting for rotation bias. By contrast, if we were to use rotation-bias-corrected transition probabilities


                                                              30
the first-interview definition of unemployment helps resolve the inconsistency between reported
durations and observed UU continuations relative to a standardization based on any other interview
technology.
    The role of missing observations. Some have conjectured that rotation bias might arise from
unemployed individuals exiting the sample more quickly than others. But rows 10-16 of Table 7
establish that the effect is instead directly related to the number of times the household has been
interviewed.     There are some people who were interviewed for the first time when the address
would have been in rotation 2, for example because the individual moved into the address. The
unemployment rate for these individuals is reported in row 11. Others were missing in both 1 and
2 and are being asked the questions for the first time in rotation 3 (row 12). For every group, we
see the highest unemployment rate the first time people are asked the questions and a drop across
each follow-up interview.26
    Moreover, we observe an increase across rotations in the total number of individuals who are
designated as not in the labor force (row 17 of Table 7). This cannot be people dropping out of the
survey, but must come from some people changing their answers. Yet another way to get at this
question is to look at the subset of individuals who gave answers in both rotation 1 and rotation 2.
Row 1 of Table 8 shows that the unemployment rate for this group was 6.50% the first time they
were asked the question and 6.23% the second time.               Row 2 shows that among individuals who
were sampled in both rotation 2 and rotation 3, the unemployment rate was 6.22% in rotation 2
and 5.99% in rotation 3.27 The same pattern of the reported unemployment rate to drop among
a fixed group of individuals whenever the household is asked the same questions a second time is
seen in each of the subsequent rows of Table 8 as well.
    Reconciliation with Krueger, Mas and Niu. The evidence in Krueger, Mas and Niu (2017) is
sometimes interpreted as showing that rotation bias does not result from individuals being asked


 X1 ,X2 in Table A-5 based on the average interview technology, we would calculate an implied unemployment-
continuation probability of             
                             U U /(1 -  U M ) = 54.9%.
   26
      Indeed, the reported unemployment rate among people being asked the questions for the first time when in
rotation 2 (7.4%) is even higher than the unemployment rate among people being asked the questions the first time
when in rotation 1 (6.6%). This is a consequence of the fact that individuals who are M in some month of the survey
are more likely than the general population to be U in the months when they are sampled.
   27
      The average unemployment rate in row 2, column 2 of Table 8 (6.22%) is not quite the same as in row 3, column
1 (6.23%) because the set of individuals who were neither M 2 nor M 3 (which is the set of people who are counted in
row 2) is not quite the same as the set of individuals who were neither M 3 nor M 4 (which is the set of individuals
who are counted in row 3).


                                                        31
the same question multiple times. Krueger, Mas and Niu interpreted the duration of job search as
a measure of the number of times an individual had previously reported being unemployed. But
duration of job search is not a reliable indicator of the number of times people have answered the
questions in earlier rotations. Of people in our sample who responded in both rotations 1 and 2,
30% of the U individuals in rotation 2 who reported unemployment durations 9 weeks or longer
had been counted as E or N in rotation 1 (4 weeks earlier). Krueger, Mas and Niu found that
the biggest difference between rotations 1 and 2 comes from comparing people who report being
unemployed with a duration less than 5 weeks (U 1.4 ) in rotation 1 with people who are U 1.4 in
rotation 2. This is not an apples-to-apples comparison. In our 2001-2018 sample, the durations
in rotation 1 are all solicited explicitly, whereas the durations for UU continuations into rotation
2 are imputed to be a number greater than 4 weeks. Thus by construction no one who is U 1.4 in
rotation 2 could have been unemployed in rotation 1. Any statistic that conditions on not being U
the previous month is selecting a subset of individuals who have a lower unemployment rate than
the general population, which explains why U 1.4 in rotation 2 would be expected to be a smaller
number than U 1.4 in rotation 1. Our data set contains a total of 39,000 individuals who were U 1.4
in rotation 1 but only 30,000 who were U 1.4 in rotation 2. By contrast, we have 28,000 U 5.14 in
rotation 1 and 34,000 in rotation 2. This suggests that most of the "missing" U 1.4 in rotation 2
are being classified as U 5.14 on the basis of the BLS duration imputation but would have reported
U 1.4 if allowed. The same pattern is seen in comparing rotations 5 and 6. Two-thirds of the drop
in U 1.4 between 5 and 6 is accounted for by the rise in U 5.14 .
    Before 1994, durations for all individuals (including UU continuations) were directly solicited
rather than imputed. A striking finding in Krueger, Mas and Niu's Figure 4 is that rotation bias
among U 1.4 individuals was virtually nonexistent prior to 1994 and then appeared suddenly and
dramatically when the BLS began imputing durations to UU continuations in 1994. Their figure
shows that this break also coincides with a decrease in rotation bias in 1994 for U 5.14 individuals. We
conclude that reported and imputed unemployment durations cannot be used in the way suggested
by Krueger, Mas and Niu to identify the effects of being asked the survey questions multiple times.28
   28
      Others have suggested that rotation bias might result from a difference between phone interviews and in-person
interviews. For example, it is possible that respondents might want to impress the interviewer by showing their effort
for job search when jobless, which would overstate the unemployment rate from personal interviews. However, the
data suggest to us that this is an unlikely explanation. First, both the first and fifth rotation groups are typically
surveyed in person, yet individuals in rotation 5 have significantly lower unemployment rates than those in rotation


                                                         32
    Conclusion. We again emphasize that the method we developed in equations (27)-(29) can
be used to reconcile stocks with flows on the basis of any interview technology j. The evidence
reviewed in this section leads us to recommend the first-interview concept of labor-force status
(j = 1) as the one that should be used. The most important factor in rotation bias appears to
be stigma and disengagement on the part of individuals who are unemployed or employed part
time. Evidence in support of this hypothesis includes (1) characteristics of people claiming to be
retired or disabled, (2) differences between self-reported answers and answers reported by proxy,
(3) observed differences in unemployment rates and part-time employment rates across different
demographic and education groups and different sample periods, and (4) comparing answers for
missed interviews and matched interviews.


4.3    Reconciling labor-force status with reported unemployment durations.

    The inconsistency between reported labor-force status and duration of job search establishes
clearly that there must be some errors in either labor-force status or in duration. We argue that it
would be inappropriate to try to resolve this inconsistency by completely ignoring duration data.
Reported duration signals some important and verifiable information about the individual's true
circumstances, as evidenced by the fact that reported duration is a strong statistical predictor
of whether the individual will still be unemployed next month (see the top panel of Figure 4).
Our final estimates will make corrections to both labor-force status and duration in an effort to
resolve the inconsistency. One issue that is key in addressing this inconsistency is the unavoidable
gray area in the distinction between someone who is not employed but actively looking for a job
(U ) versus someone who is truly not in the labor force (N ). In this section we review evidence
that persuades us that many individuals counted as N by BLS are more accurately interpreted as
actively looking for work.
    Forecasting evidence about NU 5+ transitions.             Consider individuals who transition from N
at t - 1 to U at t with a duration of job search reported at t to be 5 weeks or longer, hereafter
denoted Nt-1 Ut5+ . We first note that the incidence of such transitions can be quite accurately


1 (see column 6 of Table 4). Second, within rotation 5, individuals report significantly lower unemployment rates
the more times they have previously been interviewed (see rows 9-12 of column 5 of Table 7). Third, rotation bias
was observed during the time when all the interviews were conducted in person (see for example Hansen et al., 1955).
For these reasons, we conclude that the mode of interview is unlikely to be the key explanation for rotation bias.


                                                        33
predicted on the basis of the previously observed rate of medium- and long-term unemployment.
Let m                    5+
     N,t-1 = 100 и Nt-1 Ut /(Et + Ut + Nt + Mt ) be the percentage of individuals who will make

an NU 5+ transition between t - 1 and t and let u5+           5+
                                                 t-1 = 100 и Ut-1 /(Et-1 + Ut-1 ) be the medium-

to long-term unemployment rate reported by the BLS in month t - 1. The value of u5+
                                                                                 t-1 turns out

to be an excellent predictor of mN,t-1 , as seen in the following regression (Newey-West standard

errors with 12 lags in parentheses):


                          m                        5+
                           N,t-1 = 0.0690 + 0.0682ut-1 + ^
                                                         t-1            R2 = 0.91.                       (32)
                                     (0.0018)   (0.0079)


Whenever one observes a high value of u5+
                                       t-1 one can quite accurately predict that many of the

individuals who are classified as Nt-1 that month will report in the following month that they have
been looking for work for longer than 5 weeks. This observation invites us to ask whether some of
the long-term unemployed at date t - 1 are being misclassified as Nt-1 .
   We can also examine at the individual level what a person's report of Nt-1 Ut5+ predicts about
their own labor-force status at t + 1. The first column of Table 9 examines UUU continuations in
months t - 2, t - 1, and t for which the reported durations would be consistent with a true UUU
continuation.29    As we go down the rows, the history is consistent with a longer initial duration
in month t - 2. Our framework would predict that the probability of being employed in month
t + 1 would decrease as we move down the rows. This is because type 2 individuals, who have a
lower probability than type 1 of becoming employed at t + 1, make up a larger fraction of the pool
at t as we move down the rows.30 This is exactly what we observe in the data. The third column
looks at individuals with an intervening N status in month t - 1 but with the same U durations
in t - 2 and t as in column 1. These probabilities also tend to decrease as we move down rows.
The job-finding prospects for someone who begins a UUU stretch with reported initial duration of
5 to 14 weeks (16%) is similar to that for somebody who begins a UNU stretch with duration 5-14
weeks (15%), as are the probabilities for someone beginning with more than 26 weeks (8% versus
7%, respectively).
   Demographic evidence on NU 5+ transitions. It is also interesting to examine how mNt varies


  29
     For example, Ut1.4   5.14   5.14
                    -2 , Ut-1 , Ut    refers to someone who reported being newly unemployed in t - 2 and being
unemployed between 5 and 14 weeks in t - 1 and t.
  30
     See Ahn and Hamilton (2020).


                                                      34
across different demographic groups. We summarize this evidence in the top panel of Figure 10.
Over the 2001:7-2008:6 subsample, mNt averaged 0.44% for those without a high school diploma

but only 0.15% for college graduates, a fact that could lead some to conclude that better educated
individuals are less prone to misreport their time spent searching for a job.     But we also observe
that the value of mNt is higher for every group in the 2008:7-2014:6 subsample, correlating very

strongly with the higher rates of u5+
                                   t for every group in this subsample. For example, for college
                                        
graduates the average values of u5+
                                 t and mNt during the Great Recession were about the same as

the average values of these two variables for the overall population prior to the recession. When
their unemployment rate is high, college graduates look just like the rest of the population when
                                                 
their unemployment rate is high. Both u5+
                                       cg,t and mcg,Nt returned to their historical values when

the recession was over. A regression summarizing this relation is


                          m                       5+
                           i,NT = 0.0629 + 0.0609uiT + ^
                                                       iT         R2 = 0.88.                      (33)
                                   (0.0251)   (0.0045)


Almost all of the variation in observed NU 5+ transitions across demographic groups and across
time can be explained by the simple hypothesis that when more people are experiencing long-term
unemployment, the number of unemployed who are incorrectly classified as not looking for a job is
higher.
   Note moreover that the coefficients from the demographic regression (33) are remarkably similar
to those for the aggregate time-series forecasting relation (32).    We illustrate this point visually
in the bottom panel of Figure 10.     For each month t - 1, we would predict on the basis of the
demographic regression a value for next month's aggregate Nt-1 Ut5+ transitions to be 0.0629 +
                                                                       
(0.0609)u5+                                                                                  ^
         i,t-1 . The figure compares this with the actual transitions mN,t-1 . The predicted mN,t-1

is on average lower than the actual mN,t-1 , as a result of the fact that A1-A3 fall a little above the

demographic regression line in the top panel. Notwithstanding, the fit is quite remarkable. One
can predict Nt-1 Ut5+ transitions quite accurately, for any demographic group or any point in time,
solely on the basis of u5+
                        t-1 .

   Additional evidence on NU 5+ transitions. There are a number of other reasons to regard
individuals who report an Nt-1 Ut5+ transition as having been unemployed at time t - 1. First,
when asked at time t, "how long have you been looking for work?", their answer (more than 4


                                                   35
weeks) indicates that the individual's own perception at t is fully consistent with characterizing
them as U at t - 1. Second, the cross-sectional distribution of reported unemployment durations
among those making Nt-1 Ut5+ transitions is remarkably similar to that for those who reported Ut-1 .
Our estimate in Table 1 of p2 , the key parameter summarizing perceived duration for the long-term
unemployed, is 0.9745 for Nt-1 Ut5+ individuals and 0.9737 for Ut-1 . Further details of the cross-
sectional distribution, as summarized both by our parametric model in columns 1 and column 5
in Table 1 and in the raw data in Figures 2 and 3, are strikingly similar.                    Third, the objective
probability of being employed the next period is similar across the two groups: P (Et+1 |Nt-1 , Ut5+ ) =
12.5% versus P (Et+1 |Ut-1 , Ut5+ ) = 15.5%, in sharp contrast for example to P (Et+1 |Et-1 , Ut5+ ) =
37.8%. Fourth, information the individuals gave at t - 1 would also identify many of the Nt-1 Ut5+
transitions as more attached to the labor force than typical Nt-1 . Specifically, people who are not
in the labor force are asked whether they want a job. Only 5.3% of all Nt-1 answered this question
yes, whereas 44% of Nt-1 Ut5+ answered the question yes at t - 1. The indication that a person
wants a job (W J ) is furthermore an objective predictor that they will find one.                      For example,
P (Et+1 |NtW J
           -1 , Ut ) = 14.1% versus P (Et+1 |Ut-1 , Ut ) = 15.5%.
                                                                  31


    Based on these considerations, our recommendation is to classify observed Nt-1 Ut5+ transitions
as having been U rather than N at t - 1. This adjustment is closely related to that recommended
by Rothstein (2011), Elsby et al. (2011), Elsby, Hobijn, and S
                                                             И ahin (2015), and Farber and Valletta
(2015) who reclassified all UNU as UUU. Our approach differs from theirs in that we utilize the
reported duration of unemployment when correcting classification errors.                     The adjustment just
described would only classify UNU as UUU if the final U reports a duration of job search greater
than 4 weeks.
    Interpreting flows from long-term unemployment into N. If we are correct that some of the
people who are currently counted as N are better classified as U, it also means that some UN
transitions are really UU continuations.            In Section 3.3 we found that the discrepancy between
reported unemployment durations and objective unemployment-continuation probabilities mainly
   31
     Recently the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has added detailed questions to their Survey of Consumer
Expectations about an individual's search effort, search methods and outcomes, and the incidence of informal
recruiting methods. Faberman et al. (2019) find that if one defines unemployment to mean someone who actively
searched and is available for work , the unemployment rate in the U.S. over October 2013 to December 2017 would
have been 1.7% higher on average than the figures reported by the BLS. This is close to the figure implied by our final
adjustment, which is 2.1% higher than the BLS figure over this period. Faberman et al.'s measure does not account
for nonrandom missing observations, which could explain the 0.4% difference between their estimate and ours.


                                                          36
comes from  2,UU , the objective unemployment-continuation probability for type 2 individuals.
Here we explore whether a fraction  U N of the  2,U N transitions should be regarded as UU con-
tinuations. Since type 2 individuals account for 95% of those unemployed for 15 weeks and over
(hereafter, U 15+ ), we look for evidence in the observed outcomes in month t of individuals who
were U 15+ in t - 2 and N in t - 1.
   Someone with a history Ut15+
                            -2 Nt-1 has a 21.4% probability of being U
                                                                       15+ in t. We argued above


that such an individual, having been observed to be Nt-1 Ut15+ , should be classified as U at t - 1.
This means that any Ut15+      15+
                      -2 Nt-1 Ut   sequence is really UUU .               Thus at a minimum an average
fraction  U N > 0.214 of Ut15+
                           -2 Nt-1 should be regarded as UU continuations.

   But Ut15+
         -2 Nt-1 individuals are special not just in their objective probability of returning to un-

employment but also in their probability of successfully landing a job. Someone with a Ut15+
                                                                                         -2 Nt-1

history has a 7.69% probability of being employed at t, far higher than usually observed for in-
dividuals classified as Nt-1 (P (Et |Nt-1 ) = 4.10%). Suppose we view Ut15+
                                                                        -2 Nt-1 individuals as a

mixture of two populations, with a fraction  U N having the same employment probability in month
t as someone who is observed to be Ut15+ 15+
                                     -2 Ut-1 , and the remainder with the same employment

probability as someone who is truly out of the labor force in t - 1 as represented by a history of
Nt-2 Nt-1 :


              P (Et |Ut15+                        15+    15+
                       -2 , Nt-1 ) =  U N P (Et |Ut-2 , Ut-1 ) + (1 -  U N )P (Et+1 |Nt-2 , Nt-1 )



                                 0.0769 = 0.1094 U N + 0.0222(1 -  UN ).

This equation gives an estimate of  U N = 0.627, which would imply an objective unemployment-
continuation probability for type 2 individuals of  2,U U +  U N  2,U N .
   Our proposal is thus to classify some of the Nt as Ut based on a subsequent observation of Ut5+
                                                                                                +1 ,

and also to classify some of the Nt as Ut based on a previous observation of Ut15+
                                                                               -1 . We then make

a subtraction to correct for double counting Ut15+    5+
                                               -1 Nt Ut+1 .




                                                      37
4.4    Nonrandom missing observations.

    The conventional approach simply throws out missing observations, which amounts to assum-
ing that those missing from the survey are just like those included. However, our rotation-bias
corrected probabilities  in Table 6 show that someone who is employed has a 6.4% probability
of being missing in the next month, whereas someone who is unemployed has 8.8% probability. Of
those making ME , MN , or MU transitions, 5.8% are unemployed, although the unemployed only
comprise 4.3% of the observed E , N , or U on average. In addition, of those making MU transitions,
60% claim that they have been searching for work longer than 4 weeks. In sum, missing individuals
are more likely to be unemployed than a typical person in the observed data.
    Our M category includes the out-of-scope population, for example, people who leave the sample
for reasons such as death, imprisonment, or enlistment in the army. Such individuals would show
up in our data set as EM, NM, or UM transitions. Our procedure does not make any adjustment
to labor-force measures for such individuals.           Instead, our adjustments will be based solely on
individuals who were M the previous month and are E, N, or U during the current month. This
category does include individuals who were 15 in the previous month but became 16 in the current
month, and those who were in the armed force in the previous month but now a civilian. However,
we can directly observe these flows from the microdata, and the fractions of these observations are
negligible (less than 0.1% of civilian non-institutional population). Hence, it should not affect our
estimates significantly.
    To correct for the bias coming from nonrandom missing observations, we impute a labor-force
status in month t - 1 to individuals observed to make ME , MN , or MU transitions into period
t. Suppose that some fraction mE of those missing in month t - 1 are just like those who were
counted as employed that month in terms of their transition probabilities, while fractions mN or
mU share the same transition probabilities as those counted as N or U. We regard the remaining
mM = 1 - mE - mN - mU as "dormant observations" in the sense of having zero probability of
being recorded as E, N, or U in month t.32 The probabilities of observing ME, MN, and MU




  32
      This would include people who are in the military, incarcerated, moved away from the address, or yet to move
in, for example.


                                                       38
transitions would then be given by
                                                                                  
                                                                
                               ME   EE
                                                         NE     U E   mE          
                                                                                  
                                                                                  .
                               MN  =  EN                NN      U N   mN                                       (34)
                                                                                  
                                MU    EU
                                                         NU
                                                                UU
                                                                      mU


This system of equations can be solved to find (mE , mN , mU ) = (0.0975, 0.0475, 0.0117). Our
suggested correction for nonrandom missing observations for the full-sample is then33
                                                                  
                                                 E   + M mE       
                                                                  
                                                +  m              .
                                               N    M N           
                                                                  
                                                    
                                               U +  M mU


    To obtain monthly estimates, we use t to solve for mt-1 :

                                                                                      
                             ME,t             EE,t
                                                       NE,t
                                                                U E,t
                                                                          mE,t-1      
                                                                                      
                                      =                                  m            .
                           MN,t        EN,t NN,t U N,t                    N,t-1       
                                                                                      
                           MU,t                      
                                         EU,t  NU,t  UU,t                 mU,t-1

We also smooth these as
                                        mX,t = (1 - )mX,t + mX,t-1 .

The mX,t parameters have more high-frequency movement than terms like EM,t . We accordingly
use a shorter effective window by setting  = 0.97, which gives observations 2 years ago half the
weight as current observations for purposes of calculating mX,t . The resulting values of mX,t are
plotted in the first three panels of Figure 11.          Both m
                                                              » Nt and m
                                                                       » Et rise over time, while mU,t is
countercyclical without exhibiting a particular trend. The secular rise in m
                                                                           » Nt and m
                                                                                    » Et suggests
that the upward trend in missing individuals likely comes from N and E. The countercyclical

  33
     Our approach thus allocates an average fraction m = mE + mN + mU = 0.1567 of the M to a status E, N, or U ;
the vast majority of M are not allocated to any status. A fraction mE /m = 0.6222 of those allocated are designated
as E and fractions mN /m = 0.3031 and mU /m = 0.0744 designated as N and U, respectively. These compare with
fractions            
           E /(1 -  M ) = 0.6141 of individuals who are originally either E, N or U who were reported to be employed
and fractions   N / (1 -                            
                         M ) = 0.3427 and  U /(1 -  M ) = 0.0433 who were N or U. Thus our adjustment for missing
observations raises the count of U, lowers the count of N, and does not much change the count of E. The reason is
that M U transitions are more common and M N transitions less common than they would be if the population of M
the previous month had the same characteristics as those for whom a status E, N or U was observed.


                                                        39
behavior of m
            » U t tells us that unemployed individuals are more likely to be missed during a weak
labor market.
    Other panels of Figure 11 plot month-by-month estimates of some of the parameters whose
full-sample maximum likelihood estimates were reported in Table 3. These were found by fixing
the digit-preference parameters A at their full-sample averages and then maximizing the likeli-
hood of observation t alone with respect to the other parameters in Table 3. These in turn were
exponentially smoothed.         The fractions of NU and M U transitions that individuals perceive as
                                         »6,NU,t and q
continuations of long-term unemployment (q           »6,MU,t ) rose sharply during the Great Re-
cession and have been slow to return to their historical averages. Both the perceived weekly UU
continuation probability for type 1 individuals p1t and the objective monthly probability » 1,U U,t
react to seasonal hiring, consistent with the high seasonality in unadjusted short-term unemploy-
ment, and both fell during the Great Recession.34 For type 2 individuals, there is a time trend in
perceived p2t that is not fully matched by that for the objective » 2,U U,t probability, though both
increased significantly in the Great Recession and were slow to come down afterward. The frac-
     »2t of type 2 workers among the reported unemployed rose through 2011 and has been slowly
tion w
declining since.


4.5    Reconciled estimates of labor-force participation and unemployment rates.

    Our reconciled estimates for labor-force status in month t - 1 begin with the value of t-1

calculated as described in Section 4.1, which estimates labor-force status as it would be measured
using the first-interview technology.         We then adjust this using m
                                                                        » X,t-1 described in Section 4.3
based on individuals who were missing in t - 1 but for whom one of the statuses E, N, or U was
reported in t. Next we adjust Nt-1 down and Ut-1 up based on the number of individuals who
reported status N in month t - 1 and reported in month t that they were unemployed and had been
looking for work for longer than 4 weeks. The fraction of individuals for whom this adjustment is



  34
     The feature of the data that gives rise to this conclusion is the observation that individuals with unemployment
durations of 5-14 weeks were much more likely to remain unemployed during the Great Recession, meaning that
more type 1 individuals must have exited unemployment after just one month of unemployment. One possible
interpretation is that individuals would only voluntarily quit their job in this episode if they knew they could get
another job quickly. A drop in p1t during the Great Recession was also found by Ahn and Hamilton (2019, Figure 4
and Table 1). They found that this feature was unique to the Great Recession and was not seen in other recessions.


                                                         40
warranted in month t - 1 is given by

                                                          99        [j ]
                                                           =5  j J yN,U,t ( )
                             mN,t-1   =            [j -1]   [j -1]       [j -1]      [j -1]
                                                                                              .
                                            j J   yE,t-1 + yN,t-1 + yM,t-1        + yU,t-1


This averages 0.37% of all individuals over the full sample, so it is quite a significant adjustment.
We then further adjust Nt-1 and Ut-1 based on reinterpreting a fraction of the Ut15+
                                                                                 -2 Nt-1 transitions

as UU continuations. We construct monthly estimates of mN,t-1 , the fraction of the population

with reported UN who are better interpreted as long-term UU, from


                                       m         
                                        N,t-1 =  U,t-1 w
                                                       »2,t-1 » 2,UN,t-1  U N .


Here                                 
     U,t-1 is the fourth element of  t-1 , w
                                           »2,t-1 and » 2,U N,t-1 are the exponentially smoothed
parameters plotted in panels 8 and 10 of Figure 11, and we fix  U N = 0.627 at the full-sample
average35 .
   The adjustments m           
                    N,t-1 and mN,t-1 entail some double-counting of individuals who are

Ut15+      5+
  -2 Nt-1 Ut  who would be included in both m           
                                             N,t-1 and mN,t-1 . We correct for this by cal-

culating k , the fraction of m      
                              Nt + mN t that comes from double-counting the same individuals, from

our full-sample estimate of that fraction:


                                             m                0.0006
                                  k =         N
                                                      =                   = 0.095
                                          mN   + mN
                                                          0.0037 + 0.0026

giving rise to the monthly estimate m               
                                     Nt = k (mNt + mNt ). Our final estimates that correct for

rotation bias, non-randomly missing observations, and misclassified N are then

                                                                                                  
                 ~                                              + M,t-1 mE,t-1
                 E,t-1                                 E,t-1                                      
                                                                            
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
                 ~ N,t-1       N,t-1 +  M,t-1 mN,t-1 - mN,t-1 - mN,t-1 + mN,t-1                   
                             =                                                                    .   (35)
                                                                                                  
                 ~ M,t-1              M,t-1 (1 - mE,t-1 - mN,t-1 - mU,t-1 )                       
                                                                                                  
                                                                            
                 ~ U,t-1                
                               U,t-1 +  M,t-1 mU,t-1 + mN,t-1 + mN,t-1 - mN,t-1




  35
       We obtained similar results allowing  U N,t to change over time.


                                                           41
Our adjusted estimates of the unemployment rate and labor-force participation rate are


                                             u
                                             ~t = ~ U,t / (~
                                                           E,t + ~ U,t )


                                   ~t = (~
                                          E,t + ~ U,t ) / (~
                                                           E,t + ~ N,t + ~ U,t ) .

Note that these are all seasonally unadjusted magnitudes in order to preserve all the accounting
identities associated with observed transitions. To relate these to the usually reported magnitudes,
we plotted seasonally-adjusted values for these rates in Figures 1 and 12.36
   The black lines in Figure 12 show the BLS values for the unemployment rate and labor-force
participation rate, and the first row of Table 10 reports their values over the full sample.       We
can calculate the effect of our correction for rotation bias alone by setting m
                                                                              » Et = m
                                                                                     » Nt = m
                                                                                            » Ut =
m      
 Nt = mNt = 0 in (35). These series are plotted as the red lines in Figure 12, with the full-sample

average reported in the second row of Table 10. Correcting for rotation bias alone would add half
a percentage point to the unemployment rate and 1.1% to the labor-force participation rate. The
green lines in Figure 12 and third row of Table 10 show the contribution of also taking account of the
                                                                      » E,t , m
nonrandom nature of missing observations (that is, allows for nonzero m       » N,t , m
                                                                                      » U,t ). The blue
lines and last row of Table 10 show the effects of all three adjustments. Altogether, our adjustments
add 2.0% to the unemployment rate and 2.1% to the labor-force participation rate on average. For
the unemployment rate, the NU misclassification is the main source of cyclical features in the
errors. For the labor-force-participation rate, both rotation bias and missing observations explain
the slowly rising trend in the errors and the NU misclassification explains the countercyclicality.
   The last column of Table 10 shows that while rotation bias matters for the employment-
population ratio, the ratio is unchanged after correcting for missing observations or misclassified
N. Thus the employment-population ratio could be a more robust measure of the labor-market
slack in the presence of increasing nonresponses and errors in responses in the CPS.
   The top panel of Figure 13 compares our adjusted estimate u
                                                             ~t (in blue) with three different
unemployment rates reported by the BLS-- the usual U3 unemployment rate (black) along with U5
unemployment (red), which includes discouraged workers and all other marginally attached workers,
and U6 unemployment (green) which adds people who are employed part-time for economic reasons.
  36
       These were calculated using the X11 instruction in RATS.


                                                         42
Our adjustment includes more individuals than U5, but far less than U6.


4.6   Reconciled estimates of unemployment-continuation probabilities.

   Our concept for calculating unemployment-continuation probabilities is that used by Fujita and
Ramey (2009) and Elsby, Hobijn and S
                                   И ahin (2010) -- we track the objective labor-force status next
month of someone who is unemployed this month.              However, our estimates differ from theirs in
that we correct for rotation bias, nonrandom missing observations, and misclassifcation of some N.
   Let » i,U,t be the (4 О 1) vector of smoothed transition probabilities for unemployed individuals
of type i in month t. An individual element of the vector »i,U X,t represents the probability that a
type i individual who was reported to be unemployed in rotation 1 or 5 would have reported status
X  {E, N, M, U } in rotation 2 or 6. Adjusting this to correct for rotation bias is achieved by


                                                   »  [2]     [6]
                                                        »  i,U,t .
                                    »
                                     i,U,t = (1/2)(Rt + Rt )»



We further concluded that a fraction  U N of the type 2 individuals who report N in t + 1 should
be viewed as UU continuations. Correcting for missing observations, this gives an estimate of the
true unemployment-continuation probability for type 2 individuals of

                                                                
                                                2,U U,t +  U N  2,U N,t
                                   ~
                                    2,U U,t =                             .
                                                     1 - 2,U M,t


This series is plotted as the red line in the last panel of Figure 11.           We calculate monthly
unemployment-continuation probabilities for type 1 individuals from ~                          
                                                                     1,U U,t =  1,U U,t /(1 -  1,U M,t ).

   The estimate ~                                 4.33 = 0.89, the value we would have expected
                 2,U U averages 0.77, well below p2

based on reported unemployment durations. Nevertheless, the adjustment goes a fair way toward
reconciling perceived durations with objective continuation probabilities.        One source of the re-
maining discrepancy between our estimate of the objective continuation probability ~2,U U and the

perceived duration of job search p2 is on-the-job search. Recall from Section 3.2 that EU 5+ tran-
sitions account for 26% of EU observations, with many EU individuals reporting duration longer
than 6 months. As noted by Kudlyak and Lange (2018), we could interpret these individuals as
correctly reporting how long they have been looking for a job or looking for a better job, while still



                                                     43
defending the estimate ~2,U U as a correct summary of the true probability of remaining unemployed

without an intervening spell of employment. A second possible source of discrepancy between ~2,U U

and p2 is that individuals are reporting not the length of a continuous spell of unemployment but
instead how long it has been since their last good job (Elsby et al. (2011); Farber and Valletta
(2015)). We conclude that our procedure of adjusting unemployment-continuation probabilities
up, but not all the way to those implied by reported job-search durations, is the correct way to
reconcile the data.
   We next calculate the fraction w
                                  ~i,t-1 of total unemployed individuals ~ U,t-1 that are of type i.
Consider the last row of equation (35). For the first term in that equation (U,t-1 ), we know the

                                        »i,t-1 . We assume the same fraction w
fraction of type i from the estimate of w                                    »i,t-1 could be used
to impute types to the missing unemployed for the second term ( M,t-1 m
                                                                      » U,t-1 ). The third term
(mN,t-1 ) is derived from observed NU
                                      5+ transitions, for which we have estimated the fraction of


type 1 to be q
             »5,NU,t-1 /(»
                         q5,NU,t-1 + q
                                     »6,NU,t-1 ). The last two terms by construction come solely from
type 2 individuals. We thus estimate

                               »1,t (
                               w                » U,t ) + m
                                     U,t +  M,t m          N,t q
                                                               »5,NU,t /(»
                                                                         q5,NU,t + q
                                                                                   »6,NU,t )
                      ~1,t =
                      w
                                                             ~ U,t

and w
    ~2,t = 1 - w
               ~1,t . Our estimate of the true monthly continuation probability averaged across all
individuals who are truly unemployed is then


                                           w
                                           ~1,t ~1,U U,t + w
                                                           ~2,t ~2,UU,t ,



which is the series plotted as the blue line in Panel A of Figure 1.


4.7       Reconciled estimates of new flows into unemployment.

   We estimate that a fraction w
                               ~i,t ~ U,t of individuals in the sample are truly unemployed of type
i  {1, 2} in month t. Of these, a fraction ~i,U U,t+1 are still unemployed the next month, giving
rise to
                                   ~i,t+1 = w
                                   V        ~i,t+1 ~ U,t+1 - ~ i,UU,t+1 w
                                                                        ~it ~ Ut                (36)




                                                        44
as an estimate of the number of individuals of type i who are newly unemployed in month t + 1
    ~t+1 = V
and V      ~1,t+1 + V
                    ~2,t+1 as the total number of newly unemployed. This is the series that was

plotted as the blue line in Panel B of Figure 1. We also reproduce it as the blue line in the bottom
panel of Figure 13 along with several alternative estimates. Shimer (2012) and other researchers
have estimated unemployment inflows from the number of unemployed with reported durations of
less than 5 weeks, shown in red as a percent of the civilian population. Others like Fujita and
Ramey (2012) base their calculation on the number of EU and NU transitions among those with
two consecutive months of nonmissing observations,

                                                          [j ]          [j ]
                                                j J      yE,U,t + yN,U,t
   ^t =
   V                                                                                                       ,   (37)
                  [j ]           [j ]    [j ]     [j ]           [j ]          [j ]   [j ]   [j ]   [j ]
           j J   yE,E,t + yE,N,t + yE,U,t + yN,E,t + yN,N,t + yN,U,t + yU,E,t + yU,N,t + yU,U,t


shown as the turquoise line. The Shimer estimate is significantly below the Fujita-Ramey estimate
                                                                               ^t . The biggest
because the latter includes EU 5+ and NU 5+ transitions. Our estimate is above V
single reason for this is rotation bias, which causes flows into unemployment as calculated from
the numerator of (37) to be smaller than flows out of unemployment even in months when the
measured unemployment rate is constant or even rising. One can see the effect of rotation bias
                          [j ]
by replacing     j J     yX1 ,X2 ,t in (37) by the estimate          
                                                            X1 ,t-1  X1 ,X2 ,t . This corrects the calculation
                                                                       ^t is shown as the green
for rotation bias but makes no other adjustments. The resulting series V
                                                          ^t from (37). Our fully adjusted series
line in Figure 13, which is much higher than the estimate V
~t makes a number of other adjustments that can either increase or decrease the estimate relative
V
   ^t . We exclude NU 5+ transitions because we see them as continuing spells of unemployment,
to V
which lowers the estimate of V. But we also adjust the estimate up as a result of our treatment of
                                 ~t is above V
missing observations. On average V           ^t , but rotation bias is the biggest single problem
     ^t . Finally, we note that the BLS also publishes estimates of the number of EU and NU flows
with V
that are consistent with observed stocks of E, N and U. Their series (shown in black) adjusts the
                                                             ^t ) but is lower than an adjustment that
data in the direction of our estimates (that is, it is above V
                                                           ^t ).
only corrects for rotation bias (the BLS estimate is below V




                                                            45
4.8   Reconciled estimates of unemployment duration.

       ~i,t-d+1 denote the number of newly unemployed of type i at t - d + 1 as calculated in
   Let V
(36). A fraction ~i,U U,t-d+2 will still be unemployed at t - d + 2. Thus the number unemployed
for exactly d months as of month t would be given by


                       ~i,t
                       U d   ~i,t-d+1 
                            =V        ~ i,UU,t-d+2 и и и ~ i,U U,t-2 ~i,U U,t-1 ~i,U U,t .    (38)


This implies an average unemployment duration of those who are unemployed in month t of

                                                  48     ~d     ~d
                                        ~t =      d=1 d(U1,t + U2,t )
                                        d          48                 .                       (39)
                                                        ~d     ~d
                                                   d=1 (U1,t + U2,t )


Dividing by 4.33 gives the unemployment duration in weeks plotted as the blue lines in Panel E of
Figure 1. Our series is much lower on average and less cyclically variable than the BLS measure
in black.
   We calculated the average values of (38) over all months t in our sample and report in Table 11
the average percentage of the truly unemployed ~ U for whom the true duration is less than 5 weeks
(1 month), 5-14 weeks (2-3 months), 15-26 weeks (4-6 months) and longer than 26 months (7 months
and over), along with the average duration. Our estimate of the average duration of unemployment
is only 15 weeks, about 11 weeks lower than the BLS reports. Kudlyak and Lange (2018) constructed
estimates of the number of newly unemployed as a fraction of total unemployed by (1) counting
all Et-1 Ut as newly unemployed despite the duration of search reported at t, and (2) also counting
all Nt-1 Ut as newly unemployed. Our estimate of the fraction of individuals unemployed for less
than 5 weeks, 36.4%, is in between their two estimates (29.1% and 46.1%, respectively) because we
designate some, but not all, of the Nt-1 Ut as unemployed at t - 1. Their two methods produced
estimates of 37.5% and 24.1%, respectively, for the fraction of unemployed with duration greater
than 14 weeks, with our estimate of 32% again in between those two. Although their approach did
not allow them to uncover the average duration of unemployment, their calculations confirm our
conclusion that the BLS estimates substantially overstate the number of long-term unemployed.




                                                       46
5    Conclusion.

    The data underlying the CPS contain multiple internal inconsistencies. These include the facts
that people's answers change the more times they are asked the same question, stock estimates
are inconsistent with flow estimates, missing observations are not random, reported unemployment
durations are inconsistent with reported labor-force histories, and people prefer to report some
numbers over others.   Ours is the first paper to attempt a unified reconciliation of these issues.
We conclude that the U.S. unemployment rate and labor-force continuation rates are higher than
conventionally reported while the average duration of unemployment is considerably lower.


    References
    Abowd, John M., and Arnold Zellner (1985). "Estimating Gross Labor-Force Flows." Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics 3, no. 3: 254-283.
    Abraham, Katharine G., and Shimer Robert (2001). "Changes in Unemployment Duration and
Labor Force Attachment." NBER Working Paper 8513.
    Ahn, Hie Joo, and James D. Hamilton (2020). "Heterogeneity and Unemployment Dynamics."
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, forthcoming.
    Ahn, Hie Joo, and Ling Shao (2017). "Precautionary On-the-Job Search over the Business
Cycle." Federal Reserve Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-025.
    Bailar, Barbara A (1975). "The Effects of Rotation Group Bias on Estimates from Panel
Surveys." Journal of the American Statistical Association 70: 23-30.
    Baker, Michael (1992). "Digit Preference in CPS Unemployment Data." Economics Letters,
39(1):117-121.
    Biemer, Paul P., and John M. Bushery (2000). "On the Validity of Markov Latent Class Analysis
for Estimating Classification Error in Labor Force Data." Survey Methodology 26: 139-152.
    Elsby, Michael W. L., Bart Hobijn, and AyИ
                                             segЧl S
                                                   И ahin (2010). "The Labor Market in the Great
Recession." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2010: 1-56.
    Elsby, Michael W.L., Bart Hobijn, and AyИ
                                            segЧl S
                                                  И ahin (2015). "On the Importance of the
Participation Margin for Labor Market Fluctuations." Journal of Monetary Economics 72: 64-82.
    Elsby, Michael WL, Bart Hobijn, AyИ
                                      segЧl S
                                            И ahin, and Robert G. Valletta (2011). "The Labor
Market in the Great Recession-- An Update to September 2011." Brookings Papers on Economic

                                                47
Activity Fall 2011: 353-371.
   Elsby, Michael W. L., Ryan Michaels, and Gary Solon (2009). "The Ins and Outs of Cyclical
Unemployment." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 84-110.
   Faberman, R. Jason, Andreas I. Mueller, AyИ
                                             segЧl S
                                                   И ahin, and Giorgio Topa (2019). "Job Search
Behavior among the Employed and Non-Employed." working paper, University of Texas at Austin.
   Farber, Henry S., and Robert G. Valletta (2015). "Do Extended Unemployment Benefits
Lengthen Unemployment Spells? Evidence from Recent Cycles in the US Labor Market." Journal
of Human Resources 50: 873-909.
   Feng, Shuaizhang, and Yingyao Hu (2013). "Misclassification Errors and the Underestimation
of the US Unemployment rate." American Economic Review 103: 1054-70.
   Fujita, Shigeru and Garey Ramey (2009). "The Cyclicality of Separation and Job Finding
Rates." International Economic Review, 50(2): 415-430.
   Hall, Robert E., and Marianna Kudlyak (2019). "Job-Finding and Job-Losing: A Comprehen-
sive Model of Heterogeneous Individual Labor-Market Dynamics." NBER Working Paper 25625.
   Halpern-Manners, Andrew, and John Robert Warren (2012). "Panel Conditioning in Longitu-
dinal Studies: Evidence from Labor Force Items in the Current Population Survey." Demography
49(4): 1499-1519.
   Hamilton, James D. (1994). Time Series Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
   Hansen Morris H., William N. Hurwitz, Harold Nisselson, and Joseph Steinberg (1955). "The
Redesign of the Census Current Population Survey." Journal of the American Statistical Association
50: 701-719.
   Hirsch, Barry T., and John V. Winters (2016). "Rotation Group Bias in Measures of Multiple
Job Holding." Economics Letters 147: 160--163.
   Krueger, Alan B., Alexandre Mas, and Xiaotong Niu (2017). "The Evolution of Rotation Group
Bias: Will the Real Unemployment Rate Please Stand Up?" Review of Economics and Statistics
99: 258-264.
   Kudlyak, Marianna, and Fabian Lange (2018). "Measuring Heterogeneity in Job Finding Rates
Among the Nonemployed Using Labor Force Status Histories." Working paper, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco.
   Madrian, Brigitte C., and Lars John Lefgren (2000). "An Approach to Longitudinally Matching

                                                 48
Current Population Survey (CPS) Respondents." Journal of Economic and Social Measurement
26(1): 31-62.
   Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K. C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan (2015). "Household Surveys in
Crisis." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(4): 199-226.
   Nekarda, Christopher J. (2009). "A Longitudinal Analysis of the Current Population Survey:
Assessing the Cyclical Bias of Geographic Mobility." Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
   Rothstein, Jesse (2011). "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2011: 143-196.
   Ryu, Hang K., and Daniel J. Slottje (2000). "Estimating the Density of Unemployment Duration
Based on Contaminated Samples or Small Samples." Journal of Econometrics, 95(1): 131-156.
   Shibata, Ippei (2019). "Reassessing Classification Errors in the Analysis of Labor Market
Dynamics." IMF Working Paper.
   Shimer, Robert (2012). "Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment." Review of Economic
Dynamics, 15(2): 127-148.
   Silverstone, Brian, and Will Bel (2010). "Labour Market Flows in New Zealand: Some Ques-
tions and Some Answers." 51st Conference of the New Zealand Association of Economists, Auck-
land, vol. 30.
   Solon, Gary (1986). "Effects of Rotation Group Bias on Estimation of Unemployment." Journal
of Business and Economic Statistics 4: 105-109.
   Torelli, Nicola, and Ugo Trivellato (1993). "Modelling Inaccuracies in Job-search Duration
Data." Journal of Econometrics 59(1-2): 187-211.
   Van den Berg, Gerald J., and Bas van der Klaauw (2001). "Combining Micro and Macro Un-
employment Duration Data." Journal of Econometrics 102: 271-309.
   Van den Brakel, Jan A., and Sabine Krieg (2015). "Dealing with Small Sample Sizes, Rotation
Group Bias and Discontinuities in a Rotating Panel Design." Survey Methodology 41: 267-296.




                                               49
Table 1. Parameters estimated separately for rotation 1, rotation 5, and NX, EX and MX transitions from
rotation 1 to rotation 2.

               [1]       [2]        [3]       [4]        [5]      [6]      [7]      [8]       [9]      [10]
            rotation     std     rotation     std        NX       std      EX       std       MX        std

    p
  param      1 only     error     5 only     error      only     error    only     error     only     error

    p
             0.8261     0.0031     0.8272   0.0022     0.7529   0.0101   0.7534   0.0115    0.8303    0.0046
             0.9737     0.0025     0.9733   0.0025     0.9745   0.0021   0.9688   0.0033    0.9741    0.0024

   
             0.4320     0.0471     0.4081   0.0481

   
             0.4253                0.4203

   
             0.2365     0.0051     0.2481   0.0052

   
             0.3083     0.0038     0.3047   0.0039

  
             0.0300     0.0031     0.0269   0.0029

  
                                                       0.0384   0.0015   0.8881   0.0043    0.1300    0.0053

  
                                                       0.8762   0.0007   0.0319   0.0006    0.0664    0.0036

  
                                                       0.0609            0.0669             0.7933

   q
                                                       0.0246   0.0020   0.0130   0.0008    0.0103    0.0008

   q
                                                       0.0935            0.2185             0.0906

   q
                                                       0.0776   0.0055   0.1896   0.0059    0.0995    0.0072

   q
                                                       0.0825   0.0060   0.1798   0.0040    0.0834    0.0071

   q
                                                       0.0534   0.0028   0.1214   0.0049    0.0800    0.0043

   q
                                                       0.1880   0.0198   0.1197   0.0029    0.2237    0.0222

 q +q
                                                       0.5049   0.0411   0.1709   0.0149    0.4229    0.0482

   ,
                                                       0.6929            0.2906             0.6465

   ,
             0.1254     0.0036     0.1295   0.0077     0.2095   0.0285   0.1110   0.0262    0.0769    0.0260

   ,
             0.7740     0.0029     0.7407   0.0029     0.7499   0.0066   0.7048   0.0194    0.7328    0.0108

   ,
             0.4840     0.0089     0.4616   0.0105     0.4917   0.0173   0.3900   0.0306    0.5168    0.0228

   ,
             0.9255     0.0035     0.8623   0.0111     0.8597   0.0114   0.8366   0.0304    0.8433    0.0227

   ,
             0.7248     0.0145     0.6893   0.0091     0.7062   0.0156   0.6907   0.0308    0.7775    0.0423

   ,
             0.9229     0.0088     0.9088   0.0045     0.8749   0.0146   0.8243   0.0167    0.8890    0.0191

   ,
             0.9601     0.0080     0.9592   0.0022     0.9508   0.0142   0.9716   0.0102    0.9362    0.0174

   ,
             0.8956     0.0067     0.8619   0.0101     0.7310   0.0356   0.7445   0.0245    0.7957    0.0332

   ,
             0.9410     0.0104     0.9492   0.0039     0.9502   0.0125   0.9500   0.0342    0.9347    0.0101

   ,
             0.1654     0.0083     0.1511   0.0062     0.1990   0.0099   0.1367   0.0099    0.1477    0.0080

   ,
             0.4930     0.0081     0.4983   0.0043     0.5892   0.0097   0.4986   0.0232    0.4871    0.0157

   ,
             0.8978     0.0164     0.8947   0.0129     0.9222   0.0093   0.9106   0.0185    0.9084    0.0082
             0.1643     0.0279     0.1096   0.0397     0.1257   0.0238   0.1442   0.0123    0.0879    0.0445




                                                  50
Table 2. Parameters estimated separately for UX transitions from rotations 1 to 2 and 5 to 6.

                                      ,            ,            ,             ,            ,           ,              ,              ,
 [1]         Rotation 1 estimate   0.3189     0.2176       0.0928          0.3707    0.1164      0.2376           0.0743         0.5718
 [2]         Standard error        0.0057     0.0027       0.0037             ...    0.0093      0.0099           0.0033            ...
 [3]         Rotation 5 estimate   0.3391     0.2181       0.0898          0.3530    0.1214      0.2240           0.0695         0.5851
 [4]         Standard error        0.0080     0.0018       0.0017             ...    0.0079      0.0075           0.0041            ...


Table 3. Parameters estimated jointly across all rotations.


 p                        ,
       estimate                 estimate           estimate          estimate                              estimate                  estimate
                                             ,                  ,                   ,                                      ,
 p                        ,
        0.8092                   0.8890             0.2250            0.0876                                0.1011                    0.3283
                                             ,                  ,                   ,                                      ,
                          ,
        0.9733                   0.9547             0.1873            0.0820                                0.0967                    0.2179
                                             ,                  ,                   ,                                      ,
  ,                       ,
        0.4003                   0.8030             0.1977            0.0771                                0.0984                    0.0915
                                             ,                  ,                   ,                                      ,
  ,                      ,
        0.1453                   0.9394             0.1141            0.0655                                0.0702                    0.3624
                                             ,                  ,                   ,                                      ,
  ,                      ,
        0.7357                   0.1711             0.1369            0.1861                                0.2141                    0.1188
                                             ,                  ,                   ,                                      ,
  ,                      ,
        0.4693                   0.5215             0.1390            0.5017                                0.4196                    0.2311
                                                                                                                           ,
  ,                      ,
        0.8743                   0.9034                                                                                               0.0720
                                                                                                                           ,
                                                                                                   ,          ,     ,
        0.7109                   0.1194                                                                                               0.5782

   !", #, $%.
Notes to Table 3.       Also estimated (but not reported) are separate coefficients                                            for


Table 4. Average numbers of individuals with indicated status across different rotation groups.

                    [1]        [2]          [3]          [4]           [5]          [6]              [7]
 rotation            E          N            M            U           total       U/(U+E)      (U+E)/(U+E+N)
    1              7,837      4,357        5,621         553         18,368         6.6             65.8
    2              7,982      4,573        5,307         539         18,401         6.3             65.1
    3              7,988      4,619        5,295         520         18,422         6.1             64.8
    4              7,971      4,636        5,324         507         18,438         6.0             64.6
    5              7,773      4,588        5,621         497         18,479         6.0             64.3
    6              7,883      4,675        5,423         489         18,470         5.8             64.2
    7              7,914      4,692        5,373         480         18,459         5.7             64.1
    8              7,963      4,719        5,277         482         18,441         5.7             64.2


Table 5. Values of rotation-group bias parameters for full sample.


  '
       j            1          2             3            4            5             6            7              8
       [)]          0       0.0176        0.0180       0.0155          0          0.0021       0.0055         0.0113
   '
       [)]          0       0.0031        0.0072       0.0099        0.0126       0.0140       0.0159         0.0154
  '
       [)]          0       0.0437        0.0486       0.0490        0.0343       0.0506       0.0515         0.0569




                                                                51
Table 6. Estimated average fractions of individuals  who would have reported labor status E, N, M, U
and transition probabilities - , . if all individuals were being interviewed for the first time.

            0.4240                                                0.8984   0.0364     0.0917    0.2033
                                                          
     1    4                     1                            4
            0.2366                                           3 = 60.0257   0.8684     0.0460    0.2003
                                                          
     0    3
          =6       =            0                                                                     =
     0    3 0.3096              0
                                                          
                                                             3    0.0636   0.0662     0.8538    0.0880
     /   
          2 0.0299              /                         
                                                             2    0.0123   0.0290     0.0085    0.5084



Table 7. Characteristics of U and N as a function of rotation.

                                        1           2        3         4       5          6        7        8   avg(2-8)
  (1) N/(E+N+U)                        34.2       34.9      35.2     35.4     35.7      35.8      35.9   35.8     35.5
  (2) retired/(E+N+U)                  15.5       16.2      16.4     16.6     16.2      16.6      16.8   16.8     16.5
  (3) disabled/((E+N+U)                4.6        5.0       5.2       5.3     4.9        5.2      5.3     5.4      5.2
  (4) Probability E or U in j +1       1.75       1.90      1.87              1.91      1.82      1.81            1.86
  given retired or disabled in j
  (5) Standard error                 (0.017) (0.017) (0.017)                (0.018) (0.017) (0.017)             (0.006)
  (6) U (self-report)/(E+U)            3.3         3.1      3.0       2.9     3.0        2.9      2.8     2.8      2.9
  (7) U (proxy)/(E+U)                  3.2         3.1      3.0       3.0     3.0        2.9      2.9     2.9      3.0

       B
  (9) " /(E+U+N)
  (8) E/(E+U+N)                        61.5       60.9      60.8     60.8     60.4      60.3      60.4   60.4    60.6
                                       16.6       16.1      15.9     15.8     15.6      15.5      15.5   15.5     15.7
  (10) U/(E+U)                         6.6         6.4      6.2       6.0     6.0        5.9      5.8     5.7
  (11) U/(E+U) given M1                            7.4      6.8       6.3     5.6        5.4      5.2     5.1
  (12) U/(E+U) given M1 and                                 8.8       8.1     6.5        6.3      5.9     5.9
  M2
  (13) U/(E+U) given M1-M3                                            9.9     6.9        6.7      6.3     6.5
  (14) U/(E+U) given M1-M4                                                    9.3        8.6      7.9     7.6
  (15) U/(U+E) given M1-M5                                                               9.2      8.5     7.8
  (16) U/(U+E) given M1-M6                                                                        10.2    9.0
  (17) Total N (in thousands)          976       1024      1035 1038         1028       1047     1051    1057
Notes to Table 7. Row (1): N as a percent of E+N+U. (2): retired individuals as a percent of E+N+U. (3):
disabled individuals as a percent of E+N+U. (4): probability that an individual who is retired or disabled
in rotation j will be E or U in rotation j + 1. (5): standard error of row (4). (6): individuals who report
their own status to be U as a percent of the labor force. (7): individuals whose status is reported by
another member of the household to be U as a percent of the labor force. (8): E as a percent of E+N+U.
(9): Part-time unemployed plus those usually employed but not employed this week as a percent of
E+N+U. (10): unemployment rate as a function of rotation among individuals who are not missing in
rotation 1. (11): unemployment rate as a function of rotation among individuals who are missing in
rotation 1 but not missing in rotation 2. (12): unemployment rate among individuals who are missing in
rotations 1 and 2 but not missing in 3. Rows (13)-(16): unemployment rate among individuals who are
missing in rotations 1 through j Г 1 but not missing in j. (17): Total number of individuals counted as not
in the labor force from each rotation. All numbers are reported as percent except for last row which is
in thousands of individuals. Rows (1)-(9) and (17) refer to average over Jul 2001 to Feb 2020 while rows
(8)-(14) are over Sep 2002 to Feb 2020.

                                                     52
C + 1.
Table 8. Unemployment rates in rotation j and j + 1 among individuals who are not missing in either j or


               D)          D)E
  C=1
 Rotation                         difference

  C=2
             6.50         6.23    0.27

  C=3
             6.22         5.99    0.24

  C=5
             6.00         5.85    0.15

  C=6
             5.91         5.71    0.19

  C=7
             5.73         5.58    0.15
             5.62         5.59    0.04


Table 9. Month t + 1 employment probabilities for UUU and UNU histories.


 FGH
   .
      , FGH.
               , FG .                          FGH
                                                 .
                                                       , #GH , FG .
           UUU                   Probability               UNU           Probability

  FGH   , FGH    , FG .                         FGH      , #GH , FG .
                                    0.19                                    0.15
    .        .                                     .

 FGH , FGH , FG .                               FGH , #GH , FG .
                                    0.16                                    0.15
    .          .                                     .

  FGH . , FGH E , FG E                          FGH . , #GH , FG E
                                    0.14                                    0.14

  FGH E , FGH E , FG E                           FGH E , #GH , FG E
                                    0.12                                    0.10
                                    0.08                                    0.07

Table 10. Effects of adjustments on unemployment rate and labor-force participation rate.
                                  Unemployment Labor-force                Employment-
                                  rate             participation rate     population ratio
 Unadjusted BLS                        6.0%                64.6%                 60.7%
 Corrected for rotation-group
 bias only                             6.5%                65.7%                 61.4%
 Corrected for rotation-group
 bias and missing observations         6.9%                65.9%                 61.4%
 Corrected for rotation-group
 bias, missing observations,           8.0%                66.7%                 61.4%
 and long-term unemployed


Table 11. Adjusted and unadjusted estimates of duration of unemployment
                               BLS                     Adjusted
 < 5 weeks                     29.0                      36.4
 5-14 weeks                    27.5                      31.6
 15-26 weeks                   15.4                      17.7
 > 26 weeks                    28.1                      14.3
 Average duration          26.6 weeks                 15.1 weeks




                                                   53
Figure 1. Alternative measures of unemployment-continuation probability, new inflows to
unemployment, unemployment rate, labor force participation rate, and average duration of
unemployment.




Notes to Figure 1. Panel A: probability that an unemployed individual will still be unemployed next month, Aug
2001 to Feb 2020, as calculated by: (1) ratio of unemployed with duration 5 weeks or greater in month t to total
unemployed in t -1 (black); (2) fraction of those unemployed in t -1 who are still unemployed in t (green); (3)
reconciled estimate (blue). Panel B: Number of newly unemployed as a percent of the noninstitutional adult
population, Aug 2001 to Feb 2020, as calculated by: (1) number of unemployed with duration less than 5 weeks
(black); (2) EU and NU flows as adjusted by BLS (green); (3) reconciled estimate (blue). Panel C: Unemployment
rate, July 2001 to Jan 2020, as calculated by BLS (orange) and adjusted estimate (blue). Panel D: labor-force
participation rate, July 2001 to Jan 2020, as calculated by BLS (orange) and adjusted estimate (blue). Panel E:
Average duration of unemployment, July 2004 to Jan 2020, as calculated by BLS (orange) and adjusted estimate
(blue). Panel F: Employment-to-population ratio, July 2001 to Jan 2020, as estimated by BLS (orange) and adjusted
(blue). All series seasonally adjusted.




                                                       54
Figure 2. Predicted and reported durations of unemployment for individuals in rotation 1.




Notes to Figure 2. Top panel: reported percentage (blue) and predicted by equation (5) (in yellow) of unemployed
who have been searching for indicated number of weeks. Bottom panel: total fraction of unemployed (in black)
who have been looking for work for weeks and fraction for each type.

Figure 3. Predicted and reported unemployment durations in rotation 2 for individuals who were not in
the labor force in rotation 1 and unemployed in rotation 2.




Notes to Figure 3. Horizontal axis: duration of unemployment spell in weeks. Vertical axis: of the individuals who
were not in the labor force in rotation 1 and unemployed in rotation 2, the percent who reported having been
searching for work at the time of rotation 2 for the indicated duration.

Figure 4. Predicted and actual probability that someone with unemployment duration of weeks will
still be unemployed next month (top panel) and probability      that the individual is type 2 based on
reported duration (bottom panel).




                                                        55
Figure 5. Effect of rotation group on percentage of sampled individuals with indicated reported status.




Notes to Figure 5. Graph shows predicted values implied by regression (13).

Figure 6. Fraction of individuals reporting labor status E, N, M, or U in each rotation group (solid blue)
and fraction predicted to report that status for that rotation according to equation (25) (dashed red).




Figure 7. Actual reported transition probabilities for each rotation (solid blue) and fraction predicted by
equation (26) (dashed red).




                                                       56
Figure 8. Changes in rotation-group bias parameters over time.




Figure 9. Measures of rotation bias, unemployment, and part-time employment for overall population
and different demographic groups over three different subsamples.




Notes to Figure 9. Top panel: horizonal axis: / +        as reported by BLS; vertical axis: negative of slope of
regression of      /     +       on month-in-sample j. Demographic groups: A: Total population, Y: aged 16-24; M:
men aged 25-54; W: women aged 25-54; O: aged 55 and over; L: less than high school education, H: high school
graduate; S: some college; C: college graduates. Sample 1: 2001:7-2008:6; sample 2: 2008:7-2014:6; sample 3:
2014:7-2020:1. Also shown is regression line fitted to the 27 observations. Bottom panel: horizontal axis: / +
  +      as reported by BLS for part-time employment plus usual full-time workers not at work this month;
vertical axis: negative of slope of regression of  /     +      +       on month-in-sample j.



                                                       57
Figure 10. BLS reported medium- and long-term unemployment rate (     ) and percentage of individuals
reporting N followed by     (  ) for different demographic groups and three different samples plus
predicted and actual aggregate values each month.




Notes to Figure 10. Top panel: horizonal axis:     / +       as reported by BLS; vertical axis: percentage of
population reporting N followed by        . Demographic groups: A: Total population, Y: aged 16-24; M: men aged
25-54; W: women aged 25-54; O: aged 55 and over; L: less than high school education, H: high school graduate; S:
some college; C: college graduates. Sample 1: 2001:7-2008:6; sample 2: 2008:7-2014:6; sample 3: 2014:7-2020:1.
Also shown is regression line fitted to the 27 observations. Bottom panel: month (2001:7 to 2020:1); vertical axis:
actual percentage of population reporting N followed by        and value predicted from applying the coefficients
from demographic regression in the top panel to the aggregate value of        / +        the previous month.

Figure 11. Time variation in selected parameters.




Notes to Figure 11. Black lines denote smoothed data summaries  and red dashed lines denote estimates          that
adjust for rotation-group bias, missing observations, and long-term unemployed.

                                                        58
Figure 12. Contributions of different adjustments to the labor-force participation and unemployment
rates.
                                           Contributions of different adjustments to unemployment rate
12.5

10.0

 7.5

 5.0

 2.5
        2001    2002    2003     2004      2005    2006     2007    2008       2009     2010    2011     2012    2013    2014   2015   2016   2017       2018    2019   2020

                               all adjustments                      rotation plus missing                        rotation group only                    BLS


                                  Contributions of different adjustments to labor-force participation rate
68

66

64

62
       2001    2002    2003     2004    2005      2006     2007    2008        2009    2010    2011     2012    2013    2014    2015   2016   2017      2018     2019   2020

                               all adjustments                      rotation plus missing                        rotation group only                    BLS




Figure 13. Alternative measures of unemployment rate and new inflows into unemployment.
                                                         Alternative measures of unemployment rate
17.5
15.0
12.5
10.0
 7.5
 5.0
 2.5
 0.0
        2001    2002    2003     2004      2005    2006     2007    2008       2009    2010     2011    2012    2013     2014   2015   2016   2017       2018    2019   2020

                                                           BLS                    U5                   U6                adjusted


                                            Alternative measures of new inflows into unemployment
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
       2001    2002    2003     2004    2005      2006     2007    2008    2009        2010    2011     2012    2013    2014    2015   2016   2017      2018     2019   2020

                          fully adjusted                   rotation adj only                   Shimer                   BLS adjusted                 raw flows


Notes to Figure 13. Top panel: adjusted unemployment rate ( , in blue), BLS unemployment rate (black), U5 (red)
and U6 (green). Bottom panel: number of newly unemployed as a percent of the noninstitutional civilian
population 16 years and over. Blue: estimate incorporating all adjustments; red: number of unemployed with
duration less than 5 weeks; turquoise: number of EU and NU transitions as a fraction of individuals with two
consecutive non-missing observations; green: latter adjusted for rotation-group bias alone; black: BLS adjusted EU
and NU flows.




                                                                                                  59
