                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WHICH INVESTORS MATTER FOR EQUITY VALUATIONS
                           AND EXPECTED RETURNS?

                                        Ralph S. J. Koijen
                                       Robert J. Richmond
                                         Motohiro Yogo

                                       Working Paper 27402
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27402


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




For comments and discussions, we thank John Campbell, Christopher Conlon, Kent Daniel,
Xavier Gabaix, Tarek Hassan, Stefan Nagel, Anna Pavlova, Carolin Pflueger, Stijn Van
Nieuwerburgh, and conference / seminar participants at Boston College, Chicago Booth,
Columbia GSB, University of Hong Kong, Notre Dame, NYU Stern, the 2019 Adam Smith
Asset Pricing Conference, the 2019 NBER Long-Term Asset Management Conference, the 2019
NBER Summer Institute International Asset Pricing Conference, the 2019 UCLA Anderson Fink
Center Conference on Financial Markets, the 2019 LSE Paul Woolley Center Conference, and the
2020 AFA Meeting. We thank Miguel Ferreira and Pedro Matos for discussions regarding the
FactSet data. Ralph Koijen gratefully acknowledges support from the Center for Research in
Security Prices. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ralph S. J. Koijen, Robert J. Richmond, and Motohiro Yogo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Which Investors Matter for Equity Valuations and Expected Returns?
Ralph S. J. Koijen, Robert J. Richmond, and Motohiro Yogo
NBER Working Paper No. 27402
June 2020
JEL No. G1

                                          ABSTRACT

Much work in finance is devoted to identifying characteristics of firms, such as measures of
fundamentals and beliefs, that explain differences in asset prices and expected returns. We
develop a framework to quantitatively trace the connection between valuations, expected returns,
and characteristics back to institutional investors and households. We use it to analyze (i) what
information is important to investors in forming their demand beyond prices and (ii) what is the
relative importance of different investors--differentiated by type, size, and active share--in the
price formation process. We first show that a small set of characteristics explains the majority of
variation in a panel of firm-level valuation ratios across countries. We then estimate an asset
demand system using investor-level holdings data, allowing for flexible substitution patterns
within and across countries. We find that hedge funds and small, active investment advisors are
most influential per dollar of assets under management, while long-term investors, such as
pension funds and insurance companies are least influential. In terms of pricing characteristics,
small, active investment advisors are most important for the pricing of payout policy, cash flows,
and the fraction of sales sold abroad. Large, passive investment advisors are most influential in
pricing the Lerner index, a measure of markups, and hedge funds for the CAPM beta.

Ralph S. J. Koijen                               Motohiro Yogo
University of Chicago                            Department of Economics
Booth School of Business                         Princeton University
5807 S Woodlawn Ave                              Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Chicago, IL 60637                                Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER                                         and NBER
Ralph.koijen@chicagobooth.edu                    myogo@princeton.edu

Robert J. Richmond
Leonard N. Stern School of Business
Kaufman Management Center
44 West Fourth Street, 9-81
New York, NY 10012
rrichmon@stern.nyu.edu
       Much work in finance is devoted to understanding whether certain stock characteristics
are reflected in asset prices. Examples of such characteristics include a firm's fundamentals,
measures of beliefs about returns or cash flows, and, more recently, environmental, social, and
governance (ESG) measures. 1 To explain these facts, the literature often provides narratives
related to different types of investors whose asset demands reflect these characteristics, such
as arbitrageurs or hedge funds in search of mispricings, sentiment-driven retail investors,
or pension funds and sovereign wealth funds with sustainability mandates. We develop a
framework to quantitatively trace the connection between valuations, expected returns, and
characteristics back to specific investors or groups of investors.
       Our starting point is the large empirical literature that shows that demand curves for
individual stocks slope down (Shleifer 1986). The latest estimates put the estimate around
one (Chang, Hong, and Liskovich 2015) ­ even at longer horizons (Barbon and Gianinazzi
2019). In inelastic financial markets, differences in demand are reflected in asset prices.
If demand were instead highly elastic, as implied by many standard models of beliefs and
preferences, the demand of a group of investors for a particular stock or characteristic would
only have a modest impact on prices, as other investors would quickly substitute from one
stock to another.
       To develop intuition for our general approach, we start with a simple example. We
group institutional investors by type: investment advisors, hedge funds, long-term investors,
private banking, and brokers. Investment advisors are further broken down by size and
active share,2 as this is a large category of institutional investors that includes mutual funds.
Long-term investors include pension funds and insurance companies. 3 The red bars in the
top panel of Figure 1 summarize the size distribution across groups.
       The first question that we are interested in is how much firm valuations would change
if all institutions of a particular type switched to holding a market-weighted portfolio. Un-
derstanding how much valuations change in such a scenario quantifies how each type of
   1
     Prominent examples include La Porta (1996), La Porta et al. (2002), Hong and Kacperczyk (2009),
Yermack (1996), Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2008), Fillat and Garetto (2015), Giroud and Mueller (2011),
and Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003).
   2
     We define the active share as the sum of absolute deviations of an investors portfolio from a market-
weighted portfolio, based on the same securities as the ones held by the investor, divided by two.
   3
     We discuss the construction of the groups in Section III.



                                                    2
institution's deviation from market weights impacts firm valuations. We can use the elastic-
ity estimates from the literature above to get an initial estimate. Given an investor's current
holdings, we can compute the shift in demand required for a group of investors to switch to
a market portfolio. We then multiply this shift in demand by minus one, assuming a unit
elasticity based on Chang, Hong, and Liskovich (2015).
   The green bars in the top panel of Figure 1 present our repricing measure under these
assumptions. We compute the counterfactual valuations and take the absolute value of
the difference with the current valuations. We then normalize it by the total value of the
market. Hence, a measure of 10% implies that 10% of the market gets repriced. The size of
this measure, across institutional types, depends on the size of the sector as well as how far
the initial portfolios are from the market-weighted portfolio. The latter component explains
the differences between the green and the red bars in Figure 1.
   Despite its intuitive appeal, this calculation has three important shortcomings. First, it
assumes that the slope of the demand of each stock is the same and equal to one. As stocks are
held by different investors with heterogeneous demand elasticities, slopes of demand curves
also vary across stocks. Second, the empirical literature has only estimated elasticities, but
not the cross elasticities. Hence, we do not know how the price of Apple changes in response
to a demand shock for Google. To understand how much a group of investors matters for
prices, both elasticities and cross-elasticities are important. Third, using only an investor's
active share and a well-identified estimate of the demand elasticity, we cannot assess how
much an investor matters to incorporate information about specific characteristics into prices
­ only its overall impact. The methodology that we develop in this paper is designed to solve
all three shortcomings.
   To develop intuition for our empirical strategy, we start with a simple model in which
investors use a set of characteristics to forecast a firm's future profitability and to assess
its riskiness. The demand curve of investors can be expressed as a function of prices and
characteristics. Investors may disagree, and may have incorrect beliefs, about which or how
much characteristics are relevant for future profits and their riskiness. In equilibrium, prices
depend on characteristics, as in cross-sectional valuation regressions. The coefficients on the
characteristics are a weighted average of the preferences of the investors, where the weights


                                               3
                                                                                Figure 1
                                                                Total Repricing By Institution Type (US)

                                                                 AUM Share                          Repricing with Unit Elasticity of Demand
                                                                 Repricing                          Repricing AUM Scaled


                                 20

                                 15
          Percent




                                 10

                                  5

                                  0
          Repricing AUM Scaled




                                 1.0



                                 0.5



                                 0.0
                                                   e                   ive                  ive                   e               s                  m                  g          r   s
                                                siv                   s                  ct                    tiv              nd            Te
                                                                                                                                                 r                   kin        ke
                                            Pa
                                               s                   as                  A                  Ac                  Fu           g-
                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                            Br
                                                                                                                                                                               o
                                                               ll P                all               ge                   e             n                        Ba
                                    r  ge                   a                   m                 ar                    dg            Lo                    te
                                 La                       Sm                v.
                                                                               S
                                                                                             v.
                                                                                                L                     He                                iva
                  v.                                 v.                   In               In                                                        Pr
                In                                 In




The top panel reports the fraction of assets under management, repricing, and repricing
assuming that the elasticity of demand is one. Repricing is the percent change in market
cap if an investor type's demand curve changes to strict market weights. Repricing with
unit elasticity of demand is the percent change in market cap if an investor type's demand
curve changes to strict market weights and assuming that the elasticity of demand is equal
to one. The bottom panel reports the change in market cap normalized by the fraction of
ownership. Each bar is the time series average of the yearly values. The bottom panel
reports the change in market cap normalized by the fraction of ownership. Each bar is the
time series average of the yearly values. Firm-level fundamentals and equity holdings data
are from FactSet from 2006 until 2016.




                                                                                                                  4
depend on assets under management.
   The model guides our empirical analysis. First, we use firm characteristics to explain the
cross-sectional variation in valuation ratios. A large literature studies how variation in these
valuation ratios relates to expected returns and firm performance (e.g. Fama and French
(1995), Daniel and Titman (2006), and Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2009)). We show
that a small set of six characteristics related to risk, productivity, and profitability explains
the majority of variation in a panel of valuation ratios in the United States (US), Great
Britain (GB), the Euro area, and Japan. The residual variation in valuation ratios could be
due to other factors such as fluctuations in sentiment (Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny 1998),
funding constraints and other institutional frictions (Brunnermeier and Pedersen 2009), or
potentially unobserved characteristics. We also show that the same characteristics predict
about a third of the variation in firms' future profit growth in each of the regions.
   In our main empirical analysis, we estimate an international asset demand system in
which investors' demands are modeled as a function of prices, characteristics, and latent
demand, which captures unobserved components of demand. By imposing market clearing,
we can solve for equilibrium asset prices.
   We estimate the model using data in GB and in the US from 2006 to 2016. The model
allows for flexible substitution patterns across stocks within and across countries, and we
allow for rich heterogeneity across investors. A salient fact revealed by our estimates of
investors' demand curves is that the portfolios of institutional investors, both within and
across groups (e.g., hedge funds, mutual funds, broker dealers, . . . ), deviate significantly
from market weights.
   With the demand curve estimates in hand, we ask the same question as before and
measure how much valuations change if a group of investors switches to a market-weighted
portfolio. The blue bars in Figure 1 summarize the results. While the green and blue bars
are positively correlated, there are substantial differences. This illustrates the importance of
heterogeneity in the demand elasticities across investors and the cross-elasticities that the
simple calculation ignored.
   As discussed before, part of differences in the repricing measure across groups is driven
by their size, as measured by assets under management. Therefore, we also compute the


                                                5
repricing measure scaled by the total assets managed by a particular group. The results
are presented in the bottom panel of Figure 1. Per dollar of assets managed, hedge funds
and small, active investment advisors have the largest impact on valuations, with a ratio of
repricing to AUM share of over 1.25. On the other end of the spectrum, we find that large,
passive investment advisors and long-term investors, such as pension funds and insurance
companies, have a relatively small impact on valuations with a ratio below 0.5.
   We also explore the link to investors' size in detail. Investors' active share is inversely
related to size, as is well known. When splitting institutions into five groups of equal size
by AUM, the repricing measure is inversely related to size -- both in absolute terms and
when scaled by assets under management. We find that small, active investment advisors
and hedge funds are the most price elastic institutional investors. This implies that when
those institutions switch to holding a market indexing strategy, prices need to move more to
change the portfolios of, for instance, large, passive investors. Combined with the fact that
the small institutions are more active as well, their impact on prices is larger.
   To understand how much different investors matter in connecting asset prices to firm
characteristics, we re-estimate valuation regressions in each country using the counterfactual
prices and document how the coefficients of cross-sectional valuation regression, and their
residuals, change.
   To summarize the results, we compute changes in the coefficients of the valuation regres-
sions. As discussed before, we consider six characteristics. The first characteristic is log book
equity, which captures size effects. To forecast future productivity and profitability, we use
the sales-to-book equity ratio, the foreign sales share, the dividend-to-book equity ratio, and
the Lerner index. Our use of the foreign sales share is motivated by models such as Melitz
(2003) in which only the most productive firms export to other countries. The Lerner index
is a simple measure of markups that is also used in the recent literature on industry concen-
tration and the rise of superstar firms (see for instance Guitierrez and Philippon (2017) and
Autor et al. (2020)). Lastly, we include a stock's market beta as the canonical measure of
stock market risk.
   Small, active investment advisors are most important for the pricing of foreign sales. If
these investors would hold a market-weighted strategy instead of their current strategy, the


                                                6
coefficient of valuation ratios on the fraction of sales that is exported would decline by more
than 10%. These investors therefore play an important role in determining the cost of capital
of global firms.
    Small, active investment advisors are also most influential to price cash flows, payout
policy, and firm size. The coefficients on these characteristics in valuation regressions would
change by 19%, 64%, and 64%, respectively. For the Lerner index, large, passive investment
advisors are most important (an impact of 23.0%).
    Lastly, hedge funds are most influential in pricing market beta (an impact of -34%).
Hedge funds are generally quite important, as their impact on the coefficient of the Lerner
index is 20%, 23% for dividend-to-book, 11% for firm size, and 8% for the foreign sales share.
As discussed before, the influence of hedge funds is remarkable given their relatively small
size.
    Taken together, these results show how important different investors are for the pricing
of characteristics and the same calculations can be done for other characteristics, such as
governance or environmental scores, in future applications of our framework as environmental
and social concerns become more important.
    Combined with a forecasting model for expected future growth rates, this also measures
the importance of each investor type in connecting characteristics to long-horizon expected
returns using the present-value identities developed in Campbell and Shiller (1988) and
Vuolteenaho (2002). Our results on prices conditional of characteristics, show again that
hedge funds appear to be especially important to incorporate information into prices, con-
ditional on their size.
    We build on Koijen and Yogo (2019), who developed a framework for estimating de-
mand curves of institutional investors and households. Our first contribution is to develop a
framework to quantitatively trace the connection between valuations, expected returns, and
characteristics back to institutional investors and households. Second, we use new data on
institutional types which, in particular, identifies hedge funds who play an important role
in the analysis. The new holdings data also covers two countries. Third, we develop a new
methodology to estimate demand curves. As many institutions hold relatively concentrated
portfolios, earlier literature pools the holdings of investors to gain precision. We develop an


                                               7
instrumental variables shrinkage estimator that also accounts for the zeros when investors
choose not to hold a given stock. The degree of shrinkage depends on the number of stocks
held by an investor and vanishes asymptotically. Overall, our approach ensures that we al-
low for maximum heterogeneity in demand curves across investors and highlights substantial
differences in the demand of and importance of different institutional investors.


I.   Which investors matter for asset prices? Theory

We present a simple model to illustrate how we can measure the importance of various in-
vestors in the price formation process. While the model is intentionally stylized, the basic
economic insights extend to many asset pricing models, and the model motivates the em-
pirical strategy that we follow in subsequent sections. We summarize the main assumptions
and results, and provide further derivations in Appendix B.


Assumptions about beliefs, preferences, and technology              We consider a two-period
model with time indexed by t = 0, 1. There are N assets indexed by n = 1, . . . , N and I
investors indexed by i = 1, . . . , I . The supply of each asset is normalized to one. Vectors
and matrices are denoted in bold. Elements of vectors are indexed with parentheses.
     Investors have constant absolute risk aversion (CARA) preferences over assets at time 1,


                              max E [- exp (-i A1i + Y1i )] ,                             (1)
                                qi



where qi is a vector of asset holdings expressed in terms of the number of shares held. Y1i
represents other risk factors that impact the investor such as benchmarking, outside income,
time-varying investment opportunities, et cetera.
     The optimization is subject to the intra-period budget constraint


                                     A0i = q i P 0 + Q 0
                                                       i,                                 (2)


where P 0 denotes the vector of asset prices and Q0
                                                  i the dollar investment in a cash account.

The cash account has a price normalized to one and earns a rate of interest that we normalize



                                                8
to zero. We parameterize the cross-sectional distribution of absolute risk aversion coefficients
as i = (i Ai0 )-1 .4
       The terminal payoffs of firms are denoted by D 1 and their book equity values by B 0 .
                                                                   -1
We define the return on equity (ROE) for firm n as d1 (n) = D1 (n)B0  (n). We assume that
all investors agree that ROEs follow a factor model,


                                      d1 = g i + i F1 +  1 ,                                         (3)


where Var( 1 ) =  2 I ,  1 and F1 are independent, normally distributed with mean zero,
and we normalize Var(F1 ) = 1. Investors may disagree on the systematic exposure of stocks
to the factor, i . In addition, investors may disagree about the expected growth rate, g i .
We assume that investors have full information about other investors' beliefs and agree to
disagree ­ they do not revise their beliefs based on asset prices.
       In order to estimate the expected growth rate and the riskiness of the firm's future profits,
investors rely on public information, "characteristics," x, and potentially other information,
as captured by  g and   ,


                                     g i ( n) = g           g
                                                i x( n ) +  i ( n ) ,                                 (4)

                                     i ( n ) =             
                                                i x( n ) + i ( n ) ,                                 (5)


where ig and i are assumed to be uncorrelated with x. The first element of x equals book
equity, to capture size differences across firms, and x also includes a constant.
       We formulate the budget constraint as


                                    A1i = A0i + Q i ( d 1 - M B 0 ) ,

                        -1
where M B0 (n) = P0 (n)B0  (n), a firm's market-to-book ratio, and Qi (n) = B0 (n)qi (n). We
refer to g i - M B 0 as (long-horizon) expected returns.
       To complete the model, we assume the background risk factor Y1i is normally distributed,
   4
     For this particular choice, the model's implications mimic those of a more standard constant relative
risk aversion (CRRA) utility model, while maintaining the tractability of the CARA-normal model. Our
modeling strategy follows Makarov and Schornick (2010).


                                                    9
                 2
Y 1i  N ( Y i ,  Y i ), and



                                2Covi (Y1i , d1 (n)) = yi (n) = Y           Y
                                                                i x( n ) +  i ( n ) ,                                    (6)


where Covi (V, W ) denotes the covariance between V and W according to investor i's beliefs.


Model solution We solve the model in Appendix B and summarize the main results here.
Investor i's optimal demand is given by

                   1                1                            1
Qi ( n) = -            M B 0 (n) +      g            Y
                                        i - ci  i +  i x( n ) +       g (n) - ci i (n) + iY (n) , (7)
                  i  2             i  2                         i  2 i
                                                             1i
                   0i                                                                                      i (n )




where ci is a scalar that does not vary across securities. Empirically, we can link portfolio
holdings to observable characteristics. However, this expression shows that we cannot tell
whether investors attend to a particular characteristic because they view this information
as being relevant in forecasting future profits, to assess or hedge risk, or both. Likewise, if
an investor deviates from her demand curve conditional on characteristics, which is the last
term in (7), we cannot tell whether this is due to a particular view on expected growth rates,
risk or hedging benefits.
       By imposing market clearing,                   i   Qi = B , we can solve for equilibrium market-to-book
ratios,


                                             M B (n) =  mb x(n) +               mb (n),                                  (8)

                                             -1
                                                                               2
where mi = (i Ai )               j    j Aj        ,  mb =     i   m i  1i -           e1 ,   with e1 the first unit vector, 5
                                                                              i i A i

and      mb (n)   =     i   mi i (n).
       Hence, valuation ratios are connected to characteristics since investors view those char-
acteristics as being relevant to assess risk (via                                            g
                                                  i ), to forecast future profitability (via i ),

or for hedging purposes (via Y
                             i ). Large investors and investors with more extreme views

affect prices more and are therefore more important in the price formation process.
   5
       Recall that we ordered the characteristics in such a way that book equity is the first characteristic.



                                                                   10
                                                                                       2
   The first element of  mb has two terms,                    i   mi  1i (1) -                   . The first term, like for
                                                                                       i i A i

all other characteristics, captures how investors use log book equity to forecast a firm's
future growth and to assess its riskiness. The second term reflects the fact that larger firms
expose investors to more idiosyncratic risk, which, all else equal, leads to lower valuation
ratios. Depending on the slope of the demand curve for individual stocks, we expect log book
equity to enter cross-sectional valuation regressions with a negative sign, and this effect to
be more pronounced if stock-level demand is more inelastic.


The contribution of investors to the price formation process                                          We explain how we
quantify the importance of an investor, or group of investors, in the price formation process.
We consider the case in which an investor j switches to strict market weights, that is,
q j = j , where j is chosen to satisfy the investor's budget constraint. Using this demand
curve for investor j , the market clearing condition changes to


                                                     Qi + j B = B ,
                                             i,i=j


that is,   i,i=j   q i = (1 - j )B . The new market-clearing valuation ratio is

                                      CF         -j                          -j
                                   M B0 ,j (n) = mb x(n) +                   mb (n),


                                                                                     -1
where - j
      mb = (1 - j )
                    -1
                                i,i=j   Ai i  1 i -  2 e 1           i,i=j   Ai i          and analogously for      -j
                                                                                                                    mb (n).

Hence, the assets are now priced according to the weighted average demand curve of all other
investors. Indeed, implementing a passive market indexing strategy is equivalent to assigning
investor j the weighted demand curve of all other investors. The weights are proportional
to Ai i , the size-weighted risk tolerance.
   By comparing - j
                mb to mb , we measure the importance of investor j to incorporate a firm's
                                                                       -j
characteristics into prices. Likewise, by comparing                    mb    to     mb ,   we measure how important
investor j is in explaining the residual in cross-sectional valuation regressions, and hence
which investors cause a stock to be a value or a growth stock. The valuation impact of a
given investor depends on its size, the slope of the residual demand curve, and how different
an investor's demand curve is from other investors.

                                                         11
         Lastly, we define g R (x)-M B 0 as our measure of long-horizon expected returns, where g R
is the rational expectations forecast of d1 conditional on characteristics x, g R (x)  E[d1 | x].
We can therefore also compute the impact of investor j on expected returns by comparing
g R (x) - M B 0 to g R (x) - M B CF
                                 0,j . In addition, we can measure how much investor j matters

for the relation between long-horizon expected returns and the characteristics, x.6


II.       An empirically-tractable model of the asset demand system

Building on the insights in the previous section, we now develop an empirically-tractable
asset demand system, which allows for rich heterogeneity in demand curves across investors.
Our model extends the asset demand system in Koijen and Yogo (2019) by allowing for
substitution across countries.


A.        Notation

There are Nc assets, indexed by n = 1, . . . , Nc , in country c. Lowercase letters denote the
logarithm of the corresponding uppercase variables. As before, we denote the characteristics
of asset n in period t as xt (n). The financial assets are held by I investors, indexed by
i = 1, . . . , I . One of the investors in each country is a household sector, which holds whatever
assets are not held by institutional investors in that country.


B.        The universe of assets and asset demand

We show in Section III that financial markets are highly concentrated. We therefore use the
top 90% of stocks by market capitalization in each country as the universe of assets. This
ensures that our model focuses on pricing the largest firms that capture almost all economic
activity among listed firms, and that our estimates are not driven by a large number of
small and micro-cap firms. We refer to stocks within an investor's choice set as inside assets.
There is an outside asset in each country. We define the outside asset in a given country as
all stocks that are not part of the top 90% and it is indexed by 0 in each country.
    This calculation is accurate under the assumption that g R (x) does not change in the counterfactual,
     6

that is, that there are no real effects of investors switching to passive strategies. To relax this assumption,
we would need to allow for corporate decisions regarding capital structure, investment, and payout policy.
While this is an interesting extension to explore in future work, it is beyond the scope of this paper.


                                                      12
   Each investor allocates assets Ai,t in period t across assets in its choice sets Ni,c,t 
{1, . . . , N }. An investor's choice set is a subset of assets that the investor considers or is
allowed to hold. Restrictions on the choice set may be driven by investment mandates,
benchmarking or information frictions that limit an investor's ability to analyze a large
universe of stocks (Merton 1987). An investor's universe is the set of stocks that the investor
holds at some point in our sample from 2006 to 2016, that is Ni,c = T
                                                                    t=1 Ni,c,t . We denote

the number of assets in the investment universe of country c as |Ni,c |.
   Investors may invest in GB and the US, and can substitute across countries. Without
loss of generality, the portfolio weight of investor i in stock n and country c is


                                             wi,t (n, c) = wi,t (n|c)wi,t (c).                              (9)


The first term on the right side, wi,t (n|c), is the portfolio weight across stocks in a given
country. The second term, wi,t (c), is the portfolio weight across countries. We next discuss
the modeling choices we make for wi,t (n|c) and wi,t (c), which are guided by the idea that
demand elasticities within and across countries may be different.
   The portfolio weight on stock n within country c is

                                                                 i,t (n|c)
                                     wi,t (n|c) =                                ,                         (10)
                                                       1+        mNi,c i,t (m|c)


where


                      i,t (n|c) = exp b0,i,c,t + 0,i,c mbt (n) +  1,i,c xt (n)       i,c,t (n),            (11)


and b0,i,c,t are investor-country-time fixed effects. An investor's demand depends on the
log market-to-book ratio, firm characteristics, and latent demand,                   i,c,t (n).   Latent demand
captures investor i's demand beyond characteristics. Zero holdings, within an investor's
choice set, correspond to        i,c,t (n)   = 0.
   This demand curve is motivated by the simple model in Section I, but is empirically more
realistic as portfolio holdings are log-normally distributed. We normalize the mean of latent
demand    i,c,t (n)   to one so that the intercept b0,i,c,t in equation (11) is identified. This implies


                                                            13
that the error terms averages to one for a given investor across stocks in each year, but the
error terms do not necessarily average to one across investors for a given stock. Indeed, the
residual variation in market-to-book ratios beyond characteristics is due to latent demand,
see equation (8).
   To specify the allocation across countries, wi,t (c), we define i,t (c) = 1 +       mNi,t      i,t (m|c),
                                                                                     1
which is the inverse of the fraction invested in the outside asset, i,t (c) =    wi,t (0|c)
                                                                                            .   Intuitively,
when i,t (c) is large, inside assets are relatively attractive to investor i, compared to the
outside asset, in country c. This happens when an investor considers the prices to be low
relative to fundamentals and latent demand. In this case, the investor may also want to
reallocate assets from the foreign country to country c.
   Following this intuition, we model the portfolio weight of country c as

                                               i,t (c)1,i i,t (c)
                         wi,t (c) =                                          ,                         (12)
                                    i,t (U S )1,i i,t (U S ) + i,t (U K )1,i

where

                                                              
                                     ln i,t (U S ) = 0,i +    i,t ,                                    (13)


and i,t (U K ) = 1, which is a normalization. The model in (12) implies that the country
weight is increasing in i,t (c), that is, the relative attractiveness of inside assets in country
c. Our model of portfolio weights is a nested logit model.
   It is useful to consider two special cases to develop some intuition. When 1,i = 1, the
model collapses to a standard logit model,

                                                  i,t (n|c)i,t (c)
                           wi,t (n, c) =    2       N
                                                                             ,                         (14)
                                            k=1     m=0 i,t (m|k )i,t (k )


and the elasticity of substitution within and across countries is identical. This implies that
the equity markets in GB and the US are perfectly integrated.




                                                  14
         When 1,i = 0,

                                                i,t (n|c)                  i,t (c)
                              wi,t (n, c) =    N                          2               ,                            (15)
                                               m=0 i,t (m|c)              k=1   i,t ( k )

                                                                             
the allocation across asset classes depends only on 0,i +                    i,t .   In this case, the equity markets
in both countries are segmented and the relative allocation does not respond to prices,
characteristics or latent demand in either country. Empirically, we expect the willingness of
investors to substitute within a country to be higher than across countries, and we therefore
expect 1,i  (0, 1).7


C.        Market clearing

Portfolio weights sum to one within each region,                        nNi,c    wi,t (n|c) = 1. Additionally, ag-
gregate portfolio weights across regions sum to one,                        c   wi,t (c) = 1. We define the total
investment in the outside assets across regions as Oi,t =                            c   Ai,t wi,t (0, c). Then investor i's
total assets are given by

                                                           Oi,t
                                    Ait =                      N
                                                                                     .                                 (16)
                                              1-      c        n=0   wi,t (n, c)

We complete the model with the market clearing condition for each asset n in country c

                                               I
                             M Et (n, c) =          Ai,t wi,t (n, c)
                                              i=1
                                               I
                                                               Oi,t wi,t (n, c)
                                         =                            N
                                                                                              .                        (17)
                                              i=1   1-          c     n=0   .wi,t (n, c)

The market value of shares outstanding must equal the asset-weighted sum of portfolio
weights across all investors. In solving for equilibrium asset prices, we follow the literature
on asset pricing in endowment economies (Lucas 1978) and assume that shares outstanding
and the characteristics are exogenous. Additionally, we assume that investor's holdings of
outside assets are exogenous.
     Theoretically, there is no upper-bound on 1i and values above one would imply that investors are more
     7

willing to substitute across countries compared to within countries.


                                                          15
         Koijen and Yogo (2019) show that 0,i,c < 1, for all investors and in each country, is a
sufficient condition for both individual and aggregate demand to be downward sloping. We
impose this condition in estimating the demand system.


III.        Data and stylized facts

A.        Data

The data on firm characteristics, stock prices, and portfolio holdings are from FactSet.
The details on the data construction can be found in Appendix A. While FactSet provides
holdings data in many countries, the types of institutions covered varies due to differences
in reporting requirements across countries. As a result, we have only mutual fund holdings
for a large number of countries, which is insufficient for the purposes of this paper.
         For the holdings data, we therefore restrict attention to GB and the US. The US holdings
data are sourced from 13-F reports and reports to FactSet by individual funds. The GB
holdings data are sourced from the UK Share Register (UKSR) in combination with fund
holdings. We follow the FactSet methodology, as detailed in the appendix, to combine various
sources. We aggregate the holdings to the institutional level by country.
         We check the coverage of the data in Figure A.1. We plot the total holdings of US firms
by UK investors and vice versa using the FactSet data. As a point of reference, we use
the IMF's Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS). As the figure illustrates, the
FactSet data are highly representative of aggregate cross-border holdings and closely match
the figures from the CPIS.
         We group investors into eight groups. First, we group investors by type: Investment
Advisors, Long-Term Investors, Hedge Funds, Private Banking, Brokers, and Households.
The category Long-Term includes primarily insurance companies and pension funds, and
the category Investment Advisors includes investment advisors and mutual funds. 8 We
use FactSet's classification of investor types to assign institutions to institutional groups.
Second, as the group of investment advisors is large, we further split this group of investors
     FactSet classifies an investment firm as an Investment Advisor when the majority of its investments are
     8

not in mutual funds and when it is not a subsidiary of a bank, brokerage firm, or insurance company. If the
majority of its investments are in mutual funds, it is instead classified as Mutual Fund. As this classification
is economically quite arbitrary, we group investment advisors and mutual funds together.


                                                      16
by assets under management and active share, see Appendix A for further details. Our final
groupings are given by Investment Advisors ­ Large Passive, Investment Advisors ­ Small
Passive, Investment Advisors ­ Small Active, Investment Advisors ­ Large Active, Hedge
Funds, Long-Term, Private Banking, Brokers, and Households.
     The household sector is constructed so that total holdings of a company add up to the
company's market capitalization. In rare instances, the total holdings exceed total market
cap, in which case we scale the holdings back proportionally. One reason why this may
happen is due to short-selling activity, which are not covered in our data as we only have
the long positions (Lewellen 2011).
     We construct an annual sample of holdings data that begins in 2006 and ends in 2016.
While FactSet has data before 2006, the coverage is incomplete. Firm-level fundamentals
are from FactSet for GB, the US, the Euro area (EA), and Japan (JP). We construct annual
firm fundamentals from 2006 until 2016. While we do not have detailed holdings data in
the Euro area and Japan, we use data on valuation ratios and fundamentals in these regions
to show that the fundamentals that we use also explain a large share of the variation in
valuation ratios and future profits in these region.


B.    Firm granularity

Table 1 documents firm characteristics along the firm size distribution, as measured by
market capitalization. The top two panels are for the US in 2006 and 2016. In 2016, the top
90% of total market capitalization is accounted for by only 761 firms. The largest 82 firms
already account for 50% of the total market capitalization.
     The largest 50% of firms account for only 38% of sales, 33% of investment and employ-
ment, yet 63% of net income. This implies that profits are highly concentrated among the
largest firms. By comparing the distribution to 2006, we see that these statistics have been
fairly stable over time.
     In the bottom two panels, we compute similar statistics for the Euro area, Japan, and
GB in 2006 and 2016. The patterns are similar, though less extreme, in other countries.
In 2016, the top 50% of firms is made up by 44, 85, and 22 firms in the Euro area, Japan,
and GB, respectively. At the 90th percentile, these numbers change to 274, 682, and 181.

                                              17
By comparing the bottom two panels, we find that these statistics have been quite stable
over time. To illustrate the concentration at the top, we list the largest 10 firms in each
geography in Table 2.
     For the remainder of the paper, we focus on the largest 90% of firms to make sure that
we focus on stocks that are sufficiently liquid (see also Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen
(2013)). We group the bottom 10% into a small-cap portfolio that becomes an outside asset
for the investors. Table 1 shows that the economic impact of these firms is small in terms of
employment, investment, and profitability.


C.    Distribution of institutional types

Figure 2 reports the ownership shares by institutional type, which have been fairly stable
during the last decade. Table 3 lists the largest investor by type to provide some perspective
on the types of institutions that populate the groups.
     The distribution of ownership is concentrated as well (see for instance Azar, Schmalz,
and Tecu (2018)), and this concentration has increased over time (Itzhak et al. 2018). To
illustrate this in our sample, we list the assets under management in 2016 of the largest 10
investors in the US and GB in Table 4. Part of this concentration is driven by the increased
popularity of passive indexing strategies and has resulted in questions regarding the broader
impact on market efficiency (Garleanu and Pedersen 2019).


IV.    Cross-sectional valuation regressions: Global evidence

We show that a small set of characteristics explains the majority of the cross-sectional
variation in valuation ratios in the US, GB, the Euro area, and in Japan. We use this fact
in the specification of our asset demand system.


A.    Selection of characteristics

We consider six characteristics. The first characteristic is log book equity (LNbe), which
captures size effects. To forecast future productivity and profitability, we use the sales-to-
book equity ratio, the foreign sales share, the dividend-to-book equity ratio, and the Lerner


                                             18
index. Our use of the foreign sales share is motivated by models such as Melitz (2003) in
which only the most productive firms export to other countries. The Lerner index is a simple
measure of markups that is also used in the recent literature on industry concentration and
the rise of superstar firms (see for instance Guitierrez and Philippon (2017)). The Lerner
index is calculated as operating income after depreciation divided by sales. Lastly, we include
a stock's market beta, measured relative to the local market return, as the canonical measure
of stock market risk. We cross-sectionally standardize all characteristics by region and year.


B.        Explaining valuation ratios using characteristics

We start with the following panel regression of valuation ratios on the characteristics


                                 mbt (n) = at + mb xt (n) + t (n),                                  (18)


where at are time fixed effects. The results are reported for each of the four regions in
Table 5.
         First, we find that the coefficient on log book equity is negative, while the productivity
and markup variables all enter positively. The negative coefficient on book equity is consis-
tent with equation (8) and points to downward-sloping demand curves for individual stocks,
as discussed in the theory in Section I.
         Second, the point estimates are quite comparable across regions. The region that deviates
somewhat more from the others is Japan. Third, and importantly from our perspective, we
can account for a large fraction of the cross-sectional variation in prices using a small set of
characteristics. The within-year R-squared ranges from 37% (in Japan) to 68% (in GB). In
the US, we explain 52% of the variation in the panel of valuation ratios.
         Table 5 shows that the same characteristics also explain a substantial fraction of the
cross-sectional variation in future profitability, 9 often with similar coefficients in terms of
sign and magnitude as in the valuation regressions. 10 We do note that our global sample
     Following Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2009), we use the accounting identity Bt = Bt-1 + Xt -
     9

N Ft - Dt , where N Ft are net issuances, Dt cash dividends, Bt denotes book equity, and Xt the implied
                                                                                     5
earnings. We then define et = ln (1 + Xt /Bt-1 ) and use as our earnings measure i=1 i et+i with  = 0.95.
  10
     Kacperczyk, Sundaresan, and Wang (2019) show that price informativeness is increasing in the fraction
of equity held by foreign investors, in particular in developed economies (see also Bena et al. (2017)).


                                                   19
is quite short, which makes it challenging to accurately estimate expected future earnings.
However, our decomposition of the market-to-book-ratio also implies a decomposition of
long-horizon expected returns, once combined with a model for expected earnings, via the
present-value identities developed in Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003) and Campbell,
Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2009). As such, a decomposition of valuations, combined with a
model of earnings expectations, yields a decomposition of expected returns. We explore this
in more detail in Section VI.


V.    Estimating the asset demand system

In this section we discuss how we estimate the international asset demand system as sum-
marized by equations (10)-(11) and (12)-(13). We first discuss how we estimate the demand
system within a country and then discuss how we can estimate the demand curve across
countries. Readers may choose to skip this section in a first reading of the paper and go
directly to Section VI for the empirical results.


A.    Estimating the within-country demand system

The estimating equation          Our goal in this section is to estimate the demand curve of
investor i in a given country, which can be written as

                     wi,t (n)
                              = exp b0,i,t + 0,i mbt (n) +  1,i xt (n)   i,t (n),           (19)
                     wi,t (0)

where we omit country subscripts to simplify the notation as we focus on the within-country
demand system. We standardize all the characteristics cross-sectionally, denoted by xt (n),
and order them such that the first characteristic is log book equity, bet (n).
     We assume throughout this section that characteristics are exogenous to latent demand,


                                   Et [   i,t (n)   | xt (n)] = 1,                         (20)


where the expectation is taken across stocks in a given period as we include time fixed effects.
     There are two challenges in estimating the demand curve. First, prices are endogenous


                                                      20
to latent demand. We therefore first discuss the details of our instrument, zi,t (n). Second, as
some investors hold concentrated portfolios, we may not be able to estimate all coefficients
precisely. We propose a shrinkage estimator of the coefficients, which avoids pooling across
investors.


Construction of the instrument              We cannot simply estimate investors' demand curves
using ordinary least squares, as latent demand is likely correlated with prices. This corre-
lation could be a result of investors not being atomistic or correlated demand shocks across
investors. To construct an instrument, we follow Koijen and Yogo (2019) and use exogenous
variation in investors' investment mandates to generate exogenous variation in demand.
   The key economic assumption is that the set of stocks that an investor holds over time is
exogenous. Investors may drop certain stocks in a particular year as a result of variation in
latent demand, that is,   i,t (n)   and Ni,t are correlated, but the boundaries of the investment
universe, Ni = T
               t=1 Ni,t , are assumed to be exogenous. The boundaries of an investor's

investment universe in case of institutional investors is typically determined by investment
mandates.
   Within the universe of mandates, the actual portfolio holdings are endogenous. As in-
struments, we compute the counterfactual prices as if investors hold a 1 /(1 + |Nj |) portfolio,
excluding the investor's own assets and the assets of the household sector

                                                                1j (n)
                           zi,t (n) = log              Aj,t               .
                                             j =i,HH
                                                              1 + |Nj |


A ridge-IV estimator of the demand curve                      We now discuss how we modify the stan-
dard GMM moment conditions to impose the shrinkage penalty and how we choose the
shrinkage target. This allows us to estimate separate demand curves for each investor, in-
stead of pooling across investors.
We start from the moment conditions based on (20),

                           wi,t (n)
                     Et             exp {- i X t (n)} - 1 Z t (n) = 0,                         (21)
                           wi,t (0)




                                                  21
where X t (n) = (mbt (n), xt (n), dt ) ,  i = (0,i ,  1,i ,  2,i ) , Z t (n) = (zt , xt (n), dt ) , and dt
a vector of time fixed effects. In forming the moment conditions, we use the projection of
mbt (n) on (zi,t (n), xt (n), dt ), denoted by zt , as in case of linear two-stage least squares.
   We implement the shrinkage estimator by adding a ridge penalty (Hoerl and Kennard
1970) to the moment conditions:

                  wi,t (n)
            Et             exp {- i X t (n)} - 1 Zt (n) - D(i )  i -  T = 0.                        (22)
                  wi,t (0)

The term D(i )  i -  T is the ridge penalty, where D(v ) denotes a diagonal matrix with
the elements of the vector v on the diagonal.
   The shrinkage target,  T , equals  T = 0
                                          T       T
                                            ,i ,  1,i 1×K , 01×T        . For investors with more than
1,500 observations, across stocks and years, we can estimate ( 0,i ,  1,i ) without any shrinkage
as we can estimate their demand curves accurately. We use the (equal-weighted) average of
these estimates across investors with greater than 1,500 observations as the shrinkage target.
   We set the shrinkage penalty to Ni- , with  > 0. This implies that the penalty
becomes less important as investors hold more stocks.  controls the speed at which the
penalty vanishes asymptotically. If the implied estimates result in an estimate of i,0 that
exceeds 1, then we increase the first element of i to  to impose 0,i = 1. Even though
the moment conditions in (22) are non-linear, we develop a simple numerical algorithm to
solve them efficiently as we discuss in Appendix C.
   To complete the estimation procedure, we need to determine ( ,  ). As is common prac-
tice in the machine learning literature, we choose both parameters using cross-validation.
In particular, we split the holdings randomly in half for each investor by year. We then
estimate the model on one sample for each investor and compute the mean-squared error on
the left out sample. The mean-squared error is minimized for ( ,  ) = (15, 0.8).




                                                   22
B.    Estimating the cross-country demand curves

To complete the model's estimation, we estimate 0,i and 1,i in (12)-(13) that determine
the cross-country demand curves. The model implies

                           wi,t (U S )                       i,t (U S )
                    ln                       = 0,i + 1,i ln                + i,t
                           wi,t (GB )                        i,t (GB )
                                                             wi,t (0|U S )         
                                              = 0,i - 1,i ln                +      i,t           (23)
                                                             wi,t (0|GB )

                             1
where we use i,t (c) =   wi,t (0|c)
                                    .   Equation (23) highlights that 0,i controls the average alloca-
tion to GB relative to the US. -i,1 is the elasticity of the total GB-US share with respect
to the GB-US share in the respective outside assets. Intuitively, 1i measures how much an
investor would shift assets from GB to the US when, within GB, the investor shifts from
inside assets to the outside asset.
     We estimate (23) using a pooled regression by investor type with investor fixed effects,
which allows the share in the outside asset to be different across investors. The investor fixed
effects provide an estimate of i,0 and that we use within-investor variation in the GB-US
share over time to identify 1 .


VI.    Empirical results

We report the estimation results in Section A. In Section B, we define the counterfactual
to determine how much different investors matter for asset prices and report the results in
Section C. In Section D, we explore the link between investors' size and repricing in more
detail. Lastly, we show how different investors impact the link between characteristics and
either valuations or expected returns in Section E.


A.    Estimation results

Table 6 summarizes the estimation results for the US (top panel) and GB (middle panel). In
the bottom panel, we report the estimates of the cross-country allocation model, that is, 1,i .
The columns correspond to different institutional types and we report the AUM-weighted
average of the coefficients in the table. In Figure 3, we summarize the results graphically for

                                                      23
the US.
     In the top and middle panel, the coefficient on the log market-to-book ratio, 0,i,c , cap-
tures the demand elasticity with respect to price. Lower values correspond to demand curves
that are more sensitive to prices. We find that hedge funds are the most elastic institutional
investors, while long-term investors (pension funds and insurance companies) and large, pas-
sive investment advisors are the least elastic investors in both countries. Moreover, active
investment advisors are more price elastic, conditional on size, compared to passive invest-
ment advisors.
     The remaining coefficients reflect the response of demand to characteristics. The esti-
mates imply that investors disagree in particular about the valuation of dividend-to-book
equity, log book equity, and foreign sales in both countries. For large, passive investment
advisors, all coefficients are close to zero and the coefficient on log book equity is close to
one, consistent with these investors holding a market portfolio.
     In the bottom panel of Table 6, we report the estimates of 1,i in equation (12). Re-
call that 1 equal to one corresponds to the same substitution patterns across and within
countries, while 1 equal to zero implies that the cross-country shares are insensitive to rela-
tive prices and characteristics. The estimates are relatively close to zero, suggesting limited
substitutability across countries.


B.    Measuring the importance of investors for asset prices

The impact on asset prices of switching one particular group of institutional investors to
market weights is determined by: (i) their relative size, (ii) how different their demand curve
is from the other investors, and (iii) how price sensitive the other investors are, that is,
how much do prices need to move for other investors to absorb the demand, as so far as it
deviated from the market portfolio.
     To measure the relative contribution of different investors to asset prices, we compute
prices under the assumption that one group of institutional investors switches to holding
the market portfolio. As explained in Section I, this implicitly implies that we assign the
size-weighted demand curve of all other investors to this group.
     In computing the counterfactual, we switch, for instance, hedge funds both in the US

                                               24
and GB to the market portfolio, based on the investor's choice set, and solve for asset
prices. Specifically, to compute the counterfactual using the estimated demand system,
we set 0,i = 1, 1,i = e1 b , and               i (n)   = 0, for all n. We adjust the constant to ensure
that the fraction invested in the outside asset, given initial prices, is unaffected. 11 We then
solve for market clearing prices, M EtCF (n, c) using the algorithm in Koijen and Yogo (2019)
and our market clearing equation (equation 17). In doing so, we allow investors also to
rebalance across countries according to equation (12) and (13). With these counterfactual
asset prices we can study how much asset prices change on average, but can also re-run the
valuation regressions as in Section IV to understand how much different investors matter for
incorporating information about fundamentals into prices.


C.      How much do different investors matter for asset prices?

To measure the average change in valuations, we compute the following statistic

                                               N
                             1                 n=1     | M EtCF (n) - M Et (n) |
                           =                               N
                                                                                      ,           (24)
                             T       t                     n=1   M E t (n)

which measures the total repricing if we change a group's demand to holding the market
portfolio. We report the results in Table 7, in which the top panel reports the results for
asset prices in the US and the bottom panel for asset prices in GB. The first column shows
the share of AUM of that investor type, the second column our measure of total repricing,
the third column shows total repricing scaled by an investor type's total AUM, and the
fourth column shows repricing assuming that the price elasticity of demand is equal to one.
       In both countries, there is a strong relation between the size of the sector and the impact
on prices. While part of this is mechanical, the impact is far from proportional. To see
this, we scale total repricing by the share of each investor types AUM. The ratio is 0.37 for
large, passive investment advisors, 0.39 for long-term investors, 0.75 for broker dealers, 12 and
  11
       To be precise, we set the constant to
                                                            -1
                                                          wi,t (0, c) - 1
                                   b0,i,c,t = ln                                  ,
                                                        mNi,c exp (ln M Et (m))

where wi,t (0, c) and M E are measured before the counterfactual.
 12
    We only measure the direct impact of changing the holdings of the broker-dealer sector. It may well

                                                            25
1.37 for hedge funds. This points to the relative importance of hedge funds in determining
asset prices, while large, passive investment advisors and long-term investors already follow
strategies that are relatively close to holding the market portfolio.
    For comparison, we also present repricing under the assumption that the elasticity of
demand is equal to one -- a common magnitude found in the literature (Shleifer 1986;
Chang, Hong, and Liskovich 2015). To calculate this repricing we multiply each investors
AUM share by their active share (times two). This hypothetical repricing has a similar
magnitude to ours, although there are differences. For example, our total repricing for large,
passive investors is higher (8.5%) than the repricing with unit elasticity of demand (7.3%).
The differences between our total repricing and the unit elasticity of demand repricing points
to heterogeneity in slopes of demand curves across investors who specialize in different sets
of stocks.
    Across countries, we find that switching investors to the market portfolio has a larger
impact in the US compared to GB. The effects in GB are smaller for two reasons: (i) the
household sector is larger and (ii) our estimates imply that the household sector in GB is
more price elastic than the household sector in the US. Any shock to the demand curves of
institutions therefore has a smaller impact on asset prices.
    In Table 8, we summarize the most influential investors by type. This calculation reveals
some striking differences. For instance, the repricing measure for The Vanguard Group,
a large, passive investor, is 2.98%, although they manage almost $1.6 trillion in assets in
2016. Capital Research & Management, a large, active investment advisor, has almost the
same repricing impact of 2.46%, but managing a sixth of Vanguard's assets at $250 billion.
Similarly, AQR Capital Management, the hedge fund with the highest repricing measure,
has a repricing measure of 0.59% while investing $62 billion in assets. Per dollar of AUM,
Capital Research and AQR have approximately the same impact on prices, and substantially
more than Vanguard.
be the case, however, that by restricting leverage, broker-dealers have an outsized effect on other investors,
which has a larger overall impact on prices.




                                                     26
D.    Investor size and repricing

In Figure 4, we explore the link between investor size and repricing in more detail. Investors'
active share is negatively correlated with size, as is well known. When splitting institutions
into five groups of equal size by AUM, the repricing measure is negatively correlated with
size, both in absolute terms and when scaled by AUM.
     These effects are larger compared to the differences assuming that the elasticity of demand
equals one, which also points to differences in the slopes of demand curves. Heuristically,
if the slopes of demand curves would be the same and equal to one, our repricing measure
would simplify to repricing = active share × 2 × AUM share.
     Indeed, we find that small, active investment advisors and hedge funds are the most price
elastic institutional investors. This implies that when those institutions switch to holding a
market indexing strategy, prices need to move more to change the portfolios of, for instance,
large, passive investors.


E.    Linking characteristics to valuation ratios and long-horizon expected returns

Beyond the overall importance of different investor types for the cross-section of valuation
ratios, we can also quantify how important investor types are to link firm characteristics
to valuation ratios. This is useful as large literatures in accounting and finance discover
characteristics that are linked to valuation ratios or expected returns, and researchers often-
times attempt to explain such price patterns by linking it to the demand curves of different
investors such as the sentiment of retail investors, smart money (e.g., hedge funds), or long-
term investors such as pension funds and insurance companies. By providing a framework to
quantitatively assess the importance of various investor types, we can make the connection
between the models or narratives and the data precise.
     To show how important different investors are to link a particular characteristic to valu-
ation ratios, we re-run the valuation regressions by regressing the counterfactual log market-
to-book ratios on characteristics in a panel with time fixed effects, as in ( 18). We then
compute the change in loadings on characteristics.
     The results are presented in Table 9 for the US (top panel) and GB (bottom panel).


                                               27
The columns correspond to different counterfactuals. To simplify the interpretation of the
results, we scale the change in coefficients by the values in Table 5 and multiply by 100. For
instance, -10.9 for small, active investment advisors in the case of fraction of foreign sales
means that the coefficient in valuations regressions on this characteristic would be 10.9%
smaller if small, active investment advisors switch to a market-weighted portfolio.
     Small, active investment advisors are most important for the pricing of foreign sales
(-10.9%), cash flows as measured by sales-to-book (19%), payout policy as measured by
dividend-to-book (63.7%), and firm size (48.0%). For the Lerner index, large, passive in-
vestment advisors are most important (23.0%), while hedge funds are most influential in
pricing market beta (-33.7%). Hedge funds are generally quite important, as their impact
on the coefficient of the Lerner index is 20.2%, 22.8% for dividend-to-book, 10.9% for firm
size, and 8.4% for the foreign sales share. As discussed before, the influence of hedge funds
is remarkable given their relatively small size.
     For GB, small, active investment advisors are most important in pricing size (12.1%)
and payout policy (5.1%), while large, active investment advisors are most important for the
Lerner index (19.3%) and market beta (35.9%). Large, passive investors are most influential
in pricing foreign sales (-8.0%).


F.    The impact of investors on long-horizon expected returns

To map changes in valuations, and their connection to characteristics, to expected returns,
we use the valuation model of Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003) and Campbell, Polk,
and Vuolteenaho (2009). We write the log market-to-book ratio of firm n, mbt (n), as

                                                           
                   mbt (n) =         s-1 Et [et+s (n)] -         s-1 Et [rt+s (n)] ,     (25)
                               s=1                         s=1


where

                                           BEt (n) + Dt (n)
                           et (n) = ln 1 +                         ,                      (26)
                                             BEt-1 (n)
                                            M E t ( n ) + Dt ( n )
                           rt (n) = ln 1 +                          ,                    (27)
                                             M E t-1 ( n )


                                                   28
and BEt (n) a firm's book equity, M Et (n) its market equity, and Dt (n) its dividend.13
       To convert these estimates to expected returns, we make the simplifying assumption
that expected growth rates, gt , and expected returns, t , are random walks, which is not
unreasonable given the extreme persistence in these series. The expression for the market-
to-book ratio now simplifies to

                                                     gt   t
                                    mbt (n) = C +       -   .
                                                    1- 1-

       If the link between characteristics and expected growth rates does not change in the
counterfactuals, then the change in valuation ratios links one-to-one to changes in expected
returns, with a scaling coefficient of (1 - )-1 . Using a typical value of  = 0.95, we obtain
that the scaling factor is around 20 in mapping changes in valuations to changes in expected
returns. The impact on expected returns would be larger in case expected returns are
persistent but not a random walk. 14
       Hence, using the estimate of 10.47 as before, the relation between dividend-to-book equity
and expected returns would change by 52bp per year for a one standard deviation change in
dividend to book equity. If expected returns are less (more) persistent, for instance because
characteristics are less (more) persistent, then these effects would be larger (smaller).


VII.       Conclusion

It is common practice to decompose levels and variation in prices into expected returns and
expected fundamentals. However, it is unclear what information investors use for prices to
be informative and how important different investors are for incorporating information into
prices.
       We show that a small set of characteristics explains the majority of the variation in a panel
of firm-level valuation ratios across countries. The same characteristics also predict future
profitability with comparable coefficients. To measure how investors' demands respond to
  13
     As we use characteristics throughout this paper, Appendix D shows how one could compute variance
decompositions in characteristics space.
  14
     Alternatively, the scaling coefficient equals (1 -  )-1 if expected returns follow an AR(1) with au-
toregressive parameter  . Using the estimates in Binsbergen and Koijen (2010), the scaling coefficient is
(1 - 0.932 × 0.969)-1 10.


                                                   29
the characteristics, we estimate a demand system in Great Britain and in the United States.
The demand system allows us to quantify the importance of different institutional types (e.g.,
mutual funds, broker dealers, . . . ) for price formation by computing counterfactual prices if
a particular type were to follow a market-indexing strategy. By combining these estimates
with our forecasts of future profitability, we measure the contribution of each institutional
type to cross-sectional variation in long-term expected returns.
   Our framework can be used whenever one is interested in understanding why certain
characteristics affect the cross-section of valuation ratios or long-term expected returns.
For instance, our approach may be useful in understanding which investors matter most in
connecting asset prices to corporate governance, or ESG factors model broadly ( Baker et al.
2018), how risk is priced (Pflueger, Siriwardane, and Sunderam 2018), et cetera.
   By focusing on groups of intermediaries, which may differ in terms of regulations, funding
structure, and investment horizon, our approach may inform the growing theoretical litera-
ture on intermediary asset pricing to develop micro-foundations for the demand curves that
we estimate for different intermediaries.




                                              30
References

Asness, Clifford S., Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2013. "Value and Mo-
  mentum Everywhere." Journal of Finance 68 (3):929­986.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen.
  2020. "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms*." The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 135 (2):645­709. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjaa004 .

Azar, Jose, Martin Schmalz, and Isabel Tecu. 2018. "Anticompetitive Effects of Common
  Ownership." Journal of Finance 73 (4):1513­1565.

Baker, Malcolm, Daniel Bergstresser, George Serafeim, and Jeffrey Wurgler. 2018. "Financ-
  ing the Response to Climate Change: The Pricing and Ownership of U.S. Green Bonds."
  Working paper, Harvard Business School .

Barberis, Nicholas, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. "A Model of Investor Senti-
  ment." Journal of Financial Economics 49:307­343.

Barbon, Andrea and Virginia Gianinazzi. 2019. "Quantitative Easing and Equity Prices:
  Evidence from the ETF Program of the Bank of Japan." The Review of Asset Pricing
  Studies 9 (2):210­255. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/rapstu/raz008 .

Bebchuk, Lucian, Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell. 2008. "What Matters in Corporate Gov-
  ernance?" The Review of Financial Studies 22 (2):783­827. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1093/rfs/hhn099.

Bena, Jan, Miguel A. Ferreira, Pedro Matos, and Pedro Pires. 2017. "Are Foreign Investors
  Locusts? The Long-Term Effects of Foreign Institutional Ownership." Journal of Financial
  Economics 126 (1):122­146.

Binsbergen, Jules H. van and Ralph S.J. Koijen. 2010. "Predictive Regressions: A Present-
  Value Approach." Journal of Finance 65:1439­1471.

Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2009. "Market Liquidity and Funding
  Liquidity." Review of Financial Studies 22 (6):2201­2238.

                                           31
Campbell, John Y., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. 2009. "Growth or Glam-
  our? Fundamentals and Systematic Risk in Stock Returns." Review of Financial Studies
  23 (1):305­344.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller. 1988. "The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations
  of Future Dividends and Discount Factors." Review of Financial Studies 1 (3):195­228.

Chang, Yen-Cheng, Harrison Hong, and Inessa Liskovich. 2015. "Regression discontinu-
  ity and the price effects of stock market indexing." The Review of Financial Studies
  28 (1):212­246.

Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. 2003. "The Value Spread."
  Journal of Finance 58 (2):609­641.

Daniel, Kent and Sheridan Titman. 2006. "Market Reactions to Tangible and Intangible
  Information." Journal of Finance 61 (4):1605­1643.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French. 1995. "Size and Book-to-Market Factors in Earn-
  ings and Returns." Journal of Finance 50 (1):131­155.

Fillat, Jos L. and Stefania Garetto. 2015. " Risk, Returns, and Multinational Production
  *." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130 (4):2027­2073. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1093/qje/qjv031.

Garleanu, Nicolae and Lasse Pedersen. 2019. "Active and Passive Investing." Working paper,
  University of California, Berkeley - Haas School of Business .

Giroud, Xavier and Holger M. Mueller. 2011. "Corporate Governance, Product Market
  Competition, and Equity Prices." The Journal of Finance 66 (2):563­600. URL https:
  //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2010.01642.x .

Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick. 2003. "Corporate Governance and Equity
  Prices*." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1):107­156. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1162/00335530360535162 .



                                            32
Guitierrez, German and Thomas Philippon. 2017. "Declining Competition and Investment
  in the U.S." Working paper, NYU Stern.

Hoerl, Arthur E. and Robert W. Kennard. 1970. "Ridge Regression: Biased Estimation for
  Nonorthogonal Problems." Technometrics 12 (1):55­67.

Hong, Harrison and Marcin Kacperczyk. 2009. "The price of sin: The effects of social
  norms on markets." Journal of Financial Economics 93 (1):15 ­ 36. URL http://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304405X09000634 .

Itzhak, Ben-David, Francesco A. Franzoni, Rabih Moussawi, and John Sedunov. 2018. "The
  Granular Nature of Large Institutional Investors." Working paper, Ohio State University.

Kacperczyk, Marcin T., Savitar Sundaresan, and Tianyu Wang. 2019. "Do Foreign Institu-
  tional Investors Improve Market Efficiency?" Working paper, Imperial College London.

Koijen, Ralph S.J. and Motohiro Yogo. 2019. "A Demand System Approach to Asset Pric-
  ing." Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.

La Porta, Rafael. 1996. "Expectations and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns." The Journal
  of Finance 51 (5):1715­1742. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.
  1111/j.1540-6261.1996.tb05223.x .

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2002.
  "Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation." The Journal of Finance 57 (3):1147­
  1170. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1540-6261.00457 .

Lewellen, Jonathan. 2011. "Institutional Investors and the Limits of Arbitrage." Journal of
  Financial Economics 102 (1):62­80.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1978.    "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy."        Econometrica
  46 (6):1429­1445.

Makarov, Dmitry and Astrid Schornick. 2010. "A Note on Wealth Effect under CARA
  Utility." Finance Research Letters 7 (3):170­177.


                                            33
Melitz, Marc. 2003. "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
  Industry Productivity." Econometrica 71 (6):1695­1725.

Merton, Robert C. 1987. "A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete
  Information." Journal of Finance 42 (3):483­510.

Pflueger, Carolin, Emil Siriwardane, and Adits Sunderam. 2018. "A Measure of Risk Ap-
  petite for the Macroeconomy." Working paper, UBC .

Shleifer, Andrei. 1986. "Do demand curves for stocks slope down?" The Journal of Finance
  41 (3):579­590.

Vuolteenaho, Tuomo. 2002. "What Drives Firm-Level Stock Returns?" Journal of Finance
  57 (1):233­264.

Yermack, David. 1996.    "Higher market valuation of companies with a small board of
  directors."   Journal of Financial Economics 40 (2):185 ­ 211.     URL http://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0304405X95008445 .




                                          34
                                          Table 1
                              Firm Size Distribution by Region

 Region            Mkt Pct     Number of Firms     Sales Pct   NI. Pct   Inv. Pct   Emp. Pct
                                   United States (2016)
                         10                  5         6           15          8           2
                         20                 14        13           27         15           7
                         30                 26        22           40         22          18
                         40                 47        29           53         25          26
                         50                 82        38           63         32          33
                         60                138        50           75         46          42
                         70                231        64           84         60          53
                         80                396        73           91         72          62
                         90                761        85           99         84          77
                        100               3622       100          100        100         100
                                   United States (2006)
                         10                  6         8           15          7           3
                         20                 14        16           25         14          12
                         30                 27        24           36         24          17
                         40                 49        31           46         29          22
                         50                 84        41           58         37          31
                         60                146        52           67         46          40
                         70                242        64           77         59          52
                         80                423        75           86         69          63
                         90                872        87           95         83          78
                        100               4673       100          100        100         100
                                            2016
   Great Britain         50                  22          40        40         47          28
   Great Britain         90                 181          87        91         86          79
   Euro Area             50                  44          40        53         48          33
   Euro Area             90                 274          87        90         89          81
   Japan                 50                  85          38        54         50          34
   Japan                 90                 682          83        90         90          80
                                            2006
   Great Britain         50                  17          46        46         48          28
   Great Britain         90                 155          89        92         89          81
   Euro Area             50                  51          48        59         52          35
   Euro Area             90                 304          87        92         89          80
   Japan                 50                  70          38        54         48          35
   Japan                 90                 657          81        91         84          80

Each row represents the number of companies as well as the fraction of sales, net income,
investment, and employment represented by the top deciles of market cap. Firm-level
fundamentals are annual from FactSet from 2006 to 2016.

                                            35
                                        Table 2
             Market Capitalization of Largest Companies by Region in 2016

             United States                             Great Britain
   Apple Inc                       609   HSBC Holdings Plc                       161
   Alphabet Inc                    548   BP Plc                                  122
   Microsoft Corp                  480   British American Tobacco plc            106
   Berkshire Hathaway Inc          402   GlaxoSmithKline Plc                      94
   Exxon Mobil Corp                374   AstraZeneca Plc                          69
   Amazoncom Inc                   358   Vodafone Group Plc                       66
   Facebook Inc                    333   Diageo Plc                               66
   Johnson Johnson                 312   Reckitt Benckiser Group Plc              60
   JPMorgan Chase Co               307   Lloyds Banking Group Plc                 55
   Wells Fargo Co                  276   Prudential Plc                           52
               Euro Area                                   Japan
   Royal Dutch Shell Plc           237   Toyota Motor Corp                       176
   AnheuserBusch InBev SA/NV       205   Nippon Telegraph Telephone Corp          86
   Total SA                        124   NTT DoCoMo Inc                           85
   Unilever NV                     117   Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group Inc       83
   Industria de Diseo Textil SA    107   SoftBank Group Corp                      73
   Siemens AG                      105   KDDI Corp                                62
   SAP SE                          105   Japan Tobacco Inc                        59
   L'Oreal SA                      102   Honda Motor Co Ltd                       53
   Sanofi                          102   Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group Inc      52
   Medtronic Plc                    98   Mizuho Financial Group Inc               46

Top 10 companies by market cap within each region in 2016. Market cap is in billions of
USD. Price data is from FactSet.




                                           36
                                         Table 3
                                Largest Investors by Type

       Type                 Investor                                       AUM
       Households                                                           6588
       Inv. Large Passive The Vanguard Group, Inc.                          1598
       Inv. Large Active T. Rowe Price Associates, Inc.                      423
       Long-Term          Norges Bank Investment Management                  199
       Private Banking    Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC (Private Banking)           99
       Inv. Small Passive Managed Account Advisors LLC                        94
       Inv. Small Active PRIMECAP Management Co.                              84
       Hedge Funds        AQR Capital Management LLC                          62
       Brokers            Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC (Broker)         60

Largest investors in the United States by assets under management for each type in 2016.
Equity holdings data are from FactSet.




                                           37
                                        Table 4
                                    Largest Investors

 Investor                                                   Type                 AUM
                                United States (2016)
   The Vanguard Group, Inc.                                 Inv. Large Passive   1598
   BlackRock Fund Advisors                                  Inv. Large Passive   1069
   SSgA Funds Management, Inc.                              Inv. Large Passive    954
   Fidelity Management & Research Co.                       Inv. Large Passive    554
   T. Rowe Price Associates, Inc.                           Inv. Large Active     423
   Capital Research & Management Co. (World Investors)      Inv. Large Passive    328
   Wellington Management Co. LLP                            Inv. Large Active     324
   Northern Trust Investments, Inc.                         Inv. Large Passive    276
   Capital Research & Management Co. (Global Investors)     Inv. Large Active     250
   Norges Bank Investment Management                        Long-Term             199
   Total                                                                         5974
                                Great Britain (2016)
   The Vanguard Group, Inc.                                 Inv. Large Passive     61
   Legal & General Investment Management Ltd.               Inv. Small Passive     47
   Norges Bank Investment Management                        Long-Term              45
   BlackRock Investment Management (UK) Ltd.                Inv. Large Passive     43
   BlackRock Advisors (UK) Ltd.                             Inv. Small Passive     28
   Invesco Asset Management Ltd.                            Inv. Large Active      28
   Capital Research & Management Co. (World Investors)      Inv. Large Passive     28
   Capital Research & Management Co. (Global Investors)     Inv. Large Active      27
   SSgA Funds Management, Inc.                              Inv. Large Passive     27
   BlackRock Fund Advisors                                  Inv. Large Passive     27
   Total                                                                          359

Top 10 institutional investors by assets under management in the United States and Great
Britain in 2016. Equity holdings data are from FactSet.




                                           38
                                                                 Table 5
                                              Valuation and Earnings Regressions (4 Regions)

                                        United States         Great Britain            Euro Area                Japan
                                         mb      e5            mb         e5          mb         e5          mb         e5
                Foreign Sales           0.16    0.07          0.12       0.08        0.12       0.02        0.10       0.00
                                      (21.61)  (5.52)        (5.85)     (1.83)      (7.75)     (2.69)      (7.73)     (0.34)
                Lerner                  0.06    0.13          0.06       0.15        0.11       0.08        0.13       0.10
                                       (5.27)  (9.74)        (2.75)     (3.43)      (6.22)     (8.57)     (11.92)     (6.81)
                Sales to Book           0.19    0.19          0.21       0.16        0.14       0.06        0.15       0.09
                                      (30.52) (18.48)        (5.82)     (2.02)     (16.67)     (4.29)     (17.54)    (20.20)
                Dividend to Book        0.16    0.10          0.32       0.19        0.20       0.17        0.19       0.03
                                      (16.28)  (7.10)       (11.62)     (3.82)     (14.38)     (6.52)     (17.08)     (1.88)
                Market Beta            -0.06   -0.02         -0.04       0.04       -0.04      -0.02       -0.01       0.03
39




                                      (-3.19) (-1.03)       (-1.73)     (1.58)     (-2.63)    (-1.13)     (-0.31)     (2.08)
                Log Book Equity        -0.46   -0.18         -0.45      -0.23       -0.43      -0.20       -0.23      -0.09
                                     (-36.12) (-8.39)      (-12.82)    (-6.54)    (-47.96)   (-16.28)    (-12.25)    (-9.52)
                Adj. R2                 0.54    0.33          0.70       0.52        0.61       0.38        0.42       0.28
                Within Adj. R2          0.52    0.32          0.68       0.50        0.56       0.32        0.37       0.21
                Observations            8537    3090          1638       539         3027       1124        7100       2800


     Regressions of valuation ratios on firm-level characteristics for 4 regions. All regressions include year fixed effects. mb is the
     log market-to-book ratio at time t. e5 is cumulative earnings growth t to t + 5 adjusted for repurchases. Characteristics are
     measured at time t. Foreign sales is the fraction of sales from abroad, and Lerner is operating income after depreciation
     divided by sales, and market beta is 60-month rolling market beta where the market is the local MSCI index. Firm-level
     fundamentals are from FactSet from 2006 until 2016.
                                                                                Table 6
                                                                       Demand Estimation Summary

                               Households   Inv. Large Passive   Inv. Small Passive   Inv. Small Active   Inv. Large Active   Hedge Funds    Long-Term    Private Banking   Brok ers
                                                                                      United States
        Log Market-to-Book         -0.022                0.956                0.766              0.542                0.754          0.540       0.766              0.716     0.739
              Foreign Sales         0.133                0.014                0.033              0.022                0.025         -0.037       0.002              0.065     0.010
                      Lerner       -0.017               -0.003                0.021              0.035               -0.001         -0.029       0.041              0.042    -0.024
              Sales to Book         0.189                0.027                0.043              0.002                0.038          0.023       0.045              0.057     0.068
          Dividend to Book          0.294               -0.003                0.019             -0.092               -0.069         -0.126       0.024              0.031     0.080
               Market Beta         -0.073                0.003               -0.012             -0.026                0.018          0.027       0.020             -0.057     0.057
           Log Book Equity          0.899                1.269                1.077              0.592                1.078          0.546       1.148              0.941     1.205
                                                                                      Great Britain
        Log Market-to-Book         -0.457                0.663                0.805              0.700                0.709          0.745        0.707             0.768     0.689
              Foreign Sales         0.130                0.074                0.022              0.078                0.082         -0.019        0.026            -0.060    -0.061
                      Lerner        0.171               -0.003               -0.012             -0.031               -0.058          0.039        0.054            -0.022     0.014
40




              Sales to Book         0.527                0.135                0.005              0.003                0.137          0.020        0.086             0.031     0.063
          Dividend to Book          0.327                0.082                0.036             -0.026                0.028         -0.122        0.024             0.036     0.025
               Market Beta          0.127               -0.015               -0.055             -0.068               -0.176         -0.079       -0.075            -0.055    -0.027
           Log Book Equity          0.642                1.214                1.168              0.928                1.071          0.840        1.258             1.152     1.148
                                                                                       Combined
             Cross-Country                              0.191                0.330            0.268                   0.474         0.126        0.267              0.214     0.104


     Summary statistics of coefficient estimates from investor level demand system estimation in the United States and Great
     Britain. We report the weighted average of the parameter estimates for each investor in that group. To average the
     coefficients, we first compute the AUM-weighted average for a given investor group and year. We then average these across
     years for a given investor group. The cross-country coefficient is the estimate for the investor type. The household sector is
     constructed so that total holdings of a company add up to the company's market capitalization. Equity holdings data are
     from FactSet from 2006 until 2016.
                                            Table 7
                               Total repricing by investor type

                                                            Repricing
                                Share AUM      Total   AUM Scaled    Unit Elasticity
                                      United   States
          Inv. Large Passive           22.7     8.5           0.37              7.3
          Inv. Small Passive           15.8     8.6           0.54             10.1
          Inv. Small Active            16.8    22.3           1.33             18.6
          Inv. Large Active             9.6     9.2           0.96              8.1
          Hedge Funds                   4.2     5.7           1.37              4.0
          Long-Term                     4.5     1.8           0.39              1.7
          Private Banking               3.0     2.3           0.77              2.5
          Brokers                       1.2     0.9           0.75              0.8
                                      Great Britain
          Inv. Large Passive           16.5   6.3             0.38              9.7
          Inv. Small Passive           18.4   6.1             0.33             13.2
          Inv. Small Active            10.3   6.7             0.64             11.2
          Inv. Large Active             7.7   4.6             0.60              7.1
          Hedge Funds                   0.8   0.8             0.97              0.8
          Long-Term                     6.1   1.7             0.28              2.7
          Private Banking               2.3   1.3             0.57              1.8
          Brokers                       2.8   1.5             0.55              2.2

Share AUM is the percent of assets under management for each investor type. Total
repricing is the percent change in market cap if an investor type's demand changes to strict
market weights. AUM scaled repricing is total repricing divided by the share of assets
under management. Repricing with unit elasticity of demand is the percent change in
market cap if an investor type's demand changes to strict market weights and assuming
that the elasticity of demand is equal to 1. Each value is the time series average of the
yearly values. Firm-level fundamentals and equity holdings data are from FactSet from
2006 until 2016.




                                             41
                                             Table 8
                 Largest Repricing by Individual Investors (United States, 2016)

 Type                Name                                                  AUM (bn)    Active Share   Repricing (%)
 Inv. Large Active  T. Rowe Price Associates, Inc.                               423           0.45            4.06
                    Wellington Management Co. LLP                                324           0.41            2.80
                    Capital Research & Management Co. (Global Investors)         250           0.44            2.46
                    JPMorgan Investment Management, Inc.                         194           0.39            1.69
 Inv. Large Passive Fidelity Management & Research Co.                           554           0.33            3.86
                    The Vanguard Group, Inc.                                   1,598           0.09            2.98
                    Capital Research & Management Co. (World Investors)          328           0.37            2.78
                    SSgA Funds Management, Inc.                                  954           0.11            2.12
 Inv. Small Active PRIMECAP Management Co.                                        84           0.56            1.02
                    Jennison Associates LLC                                       77           0.57            0.98
                    ClearBridge Investments LLC                                   75           0.50            0.86
                    Janus Capital Management LLC                                  68           0.59            0.86
 Inv. Small Passive American Century Investment Management, Inc.                  80           0.35            0.64
                    State Farm Investment Management Corp.                        67           0.44            0.63
                    Managed Account Advisors LLC                                  94           0.31            0.62
                    BlackRock Advisors LLC                                        76           0.35            0.59
 Hedge Funds        AQR Capital Management LLC                                    62           0.45            0.59
                    Millennium Management LLC                                     38           0.51            0.35
                    Citadel Advisors LLC                                          30           0.57            0.35
                    Renaissance Technologies LLC                                  46           0.44            0.31
 Private Banking    Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC (Private Banking)                     99           0.28            0.58
                    Wells Fargo Clearing Services LLC                             69           0.34            0.51
                    Morgan Stanley Smith Barney LLC (Private Banking)             86           0.26            0.51
                    Bank of America, NA (Private Banking)                         68           0.27            0.41
 Long-Term          Norges Bank Investment Management                            199           0.12            0.50
                    APG Asset Management NV                                       48           0.24            0.28
                    Caisse de depot et placement du Quebec                        20           0.51            0.23
                    PGGM Vermogensbeheer BV                                       18           0.42            0.22
 Brokers            Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC                                      50           0.34            0.31
                    Credit Suisse Securities (USA) LLC (Broker)                   60           0.21            0.26
                    Citigroup Global Markets, Inc. (Broker)                       21           0.39            0.15
                    UBS Securities LLC                                            16           0.41            0.12


Top 4 investors within each type in terms of repricing. Repricing is calculated as percent
change in market cap if that individual investor's demand changes to strict market weights.
Firm-level fundamentals and equity holdings data are from FactSet from 2006 until 2016.




                                                       42
                                                                        Table 9
                                                       Change in Valuation Regression Coefficients

                           Inv. Large Passive   Inv. Small Passive   Inv. Small Active   Inv. Large Active   Hedge Funds    Long-Term    Private Banking   Brok ers
                                                                            United States
        Foreign Sales                    -1.2                  1.1              -10.9                 -2.6            8.4          2.2              -1.5        0.6
        Lerner                           23.0                  5.4              -20.1                 12.2           20.2         -3.5              -7.0        1.5
        Sales to Book                     2.6                  4.8               19.0                  2.3           -5.1          1.9              -1.3       -0.1
        Dividend to Book                 -0.8                  1.4               63.7                 15.3           22.8         -1.8               1.8       -0.6
        Market Beta                      -5.8                 -8.7               -3.5                 -9.5          -33.7         -7.6               1.2       -3.7
        Log Book Equity                   2.2                  8.0               48.0                  4.2           10.9          0.2               2.6       -0.1
        R-squared                        -1.9                 -5.0              -16.3                 -1.8           -4.9         -1.8              -1.2       -0.2
                                                                            Great Britain
        Foreign Sales                    -8.0                  7.1               -2.9                  0.2            0.4          5.1               3.6        4.4
        Lerner                            5.6                 11.3              13.4                  19.3           -2.9        -14.6               1.2        0.8
43




        Sales to Book                    -5.8                  8.4                6.2                 -0.4           -0.5         -1.2              -0.4        1.0
        Dividend to Book                  3.3                  2.5                5.1                  0.6            0.8          3.4               0.4        0.3
        Market Beta                      -9.0                 16.0              21.7                  35.9            6.0         10.8               0.7       -3.5
        Log Book Equity                   4.7                 11.6              12.1                   6.2            1.4          0.8               1.1        1.5
        R-squared                        -2.2                 -4.2               -3.2                 -3.2           -0.4         -0.6              -0.4       -0.6


     Percent change in regressions of valuation ratios on firm-level characteristics under each repricing scenario. Each column is the
     change in the coefficient from the actual valuation regression divided by the absolute value of the original regression coefficient
     and multiplied by 100. The new market-to-book ratios are calculated under the assumption that each investor type's demand
     changes to strict market weights. All regressions include year fixed effects. Characteristics are measured at time t. Foreign
     sales is the fraction of sales from abroad, and Lerner is operating income after depreciation divided by sales, and market beta
     is 60-month rolling market beta where the market is the local MSCI index. Firm-level fundamentals and equity holdings data
     are from FactSet from 2006 until 2016.
                                                                 Figure 2
                                               Time series of ownership by institutional type.

                                           United States                              Great Britain

                      1.00

                                                                                                                    Type
                                                                                                                       Households
                      0.75
 Share of Ownership




                                                                                                                       Inv. Large Passive
                                                                                                                       Inv. Small Passive
                                                                                                                       Inv. Small Active
                      0.50
                                                                                                                       Inv. Large Active
                                                                                                                       Hedge Funds
                                                                                                                       Long-Term
                      0.25
                                                                                                                       Private Banking
                                                                                                                       Brokers


                      0.00

                             2006   2008   2010   2012     2014   20162006     2008   2010   2012     2014   2016
                                                                   Year


Share of total ownership by type of institution in the United States and Great Britain by
year. Equity holdings data are from FactSet from 2006 until 2016.




                                                                          44
                                                                                Figure 3
                                                            Demand Curve Summary by Investor Type (United States)
                                                                 Log Market-to-Book                                                                                          Log Book Equity                                                                                           Foreign Sales
                           1.00



                           0.75                                                                                                    1.0                                                                                                    0.10




                           0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.05

                                                                                                                                   0.5

                           0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.00
     Demand Coefficient




                           0.00                                                                                                    0.0

                                                                               Lerner                                                                                          Sales-to-Book                                                                                             Market Beta

                           0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.04
                                                                                                                                  0.15
                           0.02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.00
                                                                                                                                  0.10

                           0.00

                                                                                                                                  0.05                                                                                                   -0.04

                          -0.02

                                                                                                                                  0.00
                                        s

                                                ive


                                                          ive


                                                                        ive


                                                                                    ive


                                                                                                ds

                                                                                                         erm


                                                                                                                     g


                                                                                                                              s




                                                                                                                                               s

                                                                                                                                                       ive


                                                                                                                                                                 ive


                                                                                                                                                                               ive


                                                                                                                                                                                           ive


                                                                                                                                                                                                       ds

                                                                                                                                                                                                                erm


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            g


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ive


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ive


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ive


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ive


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ds

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        erm


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    g


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s
                                   hold




                                                                                                                          ker




                                                                                                                                          hold




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ker




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  hold




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ker
                                                                                                                 nkin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        nkin




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nkin
                                                                                            Fun




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Fun




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fun
                                              ass


                                                          ass


                                                                     Act


                                                                                 Act




                                                                                                                                                     ass


                                                                                                                                                                 ass


                                                                                                                                                                            Act


                                                                                                                                                                                        Act




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ass


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ass


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Act


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Act
                                                                                                      g-T




                                                                                                                                                                                                             g-T




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     g-T
                                                                                                                         Bro




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Bro




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bro
                                  use




                                                                                                               Ba




                                                                                                                                         use




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ba




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 use




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ba
                                            eP


                                                      ll P




                                                                                                                                                   eP


                                                                                                                                                             ll P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           eP


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ll P
                                                                   ll

                                                                              rge




                                                                                                                                                                          ll

                                                                                                                                                                                     rge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ll

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rge
                                                                                          dge




                                                                                                                                                                                                 dge




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dge
                                                                                                     Lon




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lon




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Lon
                                                                ma




                                                                                                                                                                       ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ma
                                                                                                               ate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ate
                                  Ho




                                                                                                                                         Ho




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ho
                                                    ma




                                                                                                                                                           ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ma
                                          arg




                                                                                                                                                 arg




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         arg
                                                                          . La




                                                                                                                                                                                 . La




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         . La
                                                                                       He




                                                                                                                                                                                              He




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      He
                                                                .S




                                                                                                                                                                       .S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .S
                                                                                                           Priv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Priv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Priv
                                                    .S




                                                                                                                                                           .S




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .S
                                           .L




                                                                                                                                                  .L




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .L
                                                            Inv




                                                                                                                                                                   Inv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Inv
                                                                        Inv




                                                                                                                                                                               Inv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Inv
                                                Inv




                                                                                                                                                       Inv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Inv
                                       Inv




                                                                                                                                              Inv




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Inv




Summary of demand curves by investor type. We report the weighted average of the
parameter estimates for each investor in that group. To average the coefficients, we first
compute the AUM-weighted average for a given investor group and year. We then average
these across years for a given investor group. Firm-level fundamentals and equity holdings
data are from FactSet from 2006 until 2016.




                                                                                                                                                                               45
                                                            Figure 4
                                             Total Repricing By Size (United States)

                                            AUM Share       Repricing with Unit Elasticity of Demand
                                            Repricing       Repricing AUM Scaled


                             15
      Percent




                             10


                              5


                               0
                             1.2
      Repricing AUM Scaled




                             0.9


                             0.6


                             0.3


                             0.0
                                                                                                   l
                                     rg
                                        e               2             3            4             al
                                   La                                                         Sm
                                                               Size Decile

The top panel reports the fraction of assets under management, repricing, and repricing
assuming that the elasticity of demand is 1. Repricing is the percent change in market cap
if a size group's demand changes to strict market weights. Repricing with unit elasticity of
demand is the percent change in market cap if a size group's demand changes to strict
market weights and assuming that the elasticity of demand is equal to 1. The bottom
panel reports the change in market cap normalized by the fraction of ownership. Each bar
is the time series average of the yearly values. Firm-level fundamentals and equity holdings
data are from FactSet from 2006 until 2016.




                                                                 46
A.     Data construction

All FactSet data are from WRDS. We use FactSet fundamentals annual version 3 and FactSet
ownership version 5. MSCI return indices are from DataStream. Interest rate data are from
Global Financial Data.
    We combine data from these sources to build an annual end-of-year panel of firm-level
fundamentals and investor-level equity holdings from 2006 until 2016. Our fundamentals
data covers 4 regions: United States (US), Euro Area (EA), Great Britain (GB), and Japan
(JP). Our holdings data covers 2 regions: United States (US) and Great Britain (GB).
EA consists of companies in Austria, Belgium, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy,
Netherlands, Portugal, and Spain.

Market capitalization We combine monthly security prices and company-level shares
outstanding from monthly prices final usc and monthly prices final int with point-in-time
exchange rates from fx rates usd. We calculate company-level USD market cap using shares
outstanding (ff shs out) times price (price m) and convert to USD. Shares outstanding is the
common shares outstanding at the company level. If a company has more than one share
class, shares outstanding is adjusted for the relative par values of all share classes. Both
prices and shares outstanding are adjusted for splits.
    Some companies have many listed securities. To merge market caps with fundamentals,
we select a unique primary security fsym id for each company (factset entity id). We start
from the set of securities which we can calculate a USD market cap for and merge on security
and firm identifying information from sym coverage and ff sec coverage. We sequentially
select the first security for each company which is uniquely identified by the following criteria:
one security for the company, ff iscomp is 1 for the security, the security is identified as
primary by fsym primary equity id. If this procedure does not uniquely identify a primary
security, we do not include the company in our sample. This occurs in a very small number
of cases.
    For each firm-year we use the market cap reported at the end of December.

Fundamentals Fundamentals are in 4 files for each of 3 regions: ff FILE REGION where
FILE is one of basic af, basic der af, advanced af, advanced der and REGION is one of ap,
eu, am. We merge these 12 files together with point-in-time exchange rates from fx rates usd
and convert monetary values to USD. For fundamentals in December of each year we use
the most recently available fundamentals as of the end of June of that year.

     · Book equity is total shareholders equity (ff shldrs eq) plus deferred taxes and invest-
       ment tax credits (ff dfd tax itc) minus preferred stock (ff pfd stk). We set preferred
       stock to zero if it does not exist and drop negative book equity values.

     · Market equity is total value of common equity as detailed in the market capitalization
       section above.

     · Foreign sales share is international sales (ff sales intl) divided by total sales (ff sales).



                                                 47
   · Lerner is operating income before depreciation (ff oper inc bef dep) minus deprecia-
     tion and amortization (ff dep amort exp) if available or operating income (ff oper inc)
     divided by sales (ff sales).

   · Sales to book is sales (ff sales) divded by book equity

   · Dividends to book are dividends (ff div cf) divided by book equity.

   · Betas are from 60-month rolling regressions on MSCI local equity market index returns.
     Excess returns are calculated using 3-month rates from Global Financial data.

   · Net repurchases are ff stk purch cf minus ff stk sale cf and are set to 0 if missing.

    We winsorize beta at the 2.5% and 97.5% level and Winsorize dividend-to-book, and
sales-to-book at the 97.5% level by region-year. We set values of Lerner that are less than
-1 to -1.

Portfolio Holdings We build a panel of end-of-year equity holdings of US and GB com-
panies for institutional and non-institutional investors. FactSet collects data for global com-
panies and institutions, but the coverage outside of the US and GB is not sufficient for our
purposes of estimating a demand system. To remain consistent with FactSet's methodology
we construct holdings data for all countries and then select holdings of only US and GB
companies. We also limit our sample to 2006 until 2016 due to lower coverage in GB prior
to 2006.
    FactSet holdings data are from 4 broad sources:

   · 13F holdings (13F). 13F data are from mandatory 13F reports on US-traded equities
     held by institutions managing more than $100 million in US-traded securities. Data is
     in own inst 13f detail eq.

   · Sum of fund-level reports (SOF). Fund-level data are from SEC mandated reports in
     the US and are collected directly from funds managers by FactSet in other countries.
     Data is in own fund detail eq. Fund-level reports are aggregated to the institution
     level using the mapping from fund ids to institution ids in own ent funds.

   · Institutional Stakes (INST). Institutional stakes data for GB and are sourced from
     share registers (UKSR) and regulatory news service filings (RNS). FactSet analyzes
     share registers at minimum annually, though for companies larger than fledgling the
     frequency is quarterly. Institutional stakes data for the US are sourced from regulatory
     filings such as 10K, 13D, 13G, and proxies. For other countries FactSet collects data
     from various regulatory filings. Data is in own inst stakes detail eq.

   · Non-institutional stakes (NISTK). Non-institutional stakes are from regulatory filings
     and primarily represent holdings by firm insiders or by other companies. Data is in
     own stakes detail eq.




                                              48
    We combine data from the 4 sources. Securities are identified as either 13F US (fds 13f flag=1),
13F Canada (fds 13f ca flag=1), or UKSR (fds uksr flag=1) in own sec coverage. Holder's
are identified as 13F institutions (fds 13f flag=1) in own ent institutions. We use the follow-
ing rules to combine institutional holdings as is done by FactSet:

   · For UKSR securities, select UKSR or RNS positions (types W and Q) if the as of date
     is within 18 months of December of each year. If there are no intitutional stakes based
     filings for a given institution use SOF if the report is within 18 months of December
     of each year.
   · For 13F institutions and 13F US securities, use the 13F position if it is within 18
     months of December of each year unless there is a more recent INST position.
   · For 13F institutions and 13F CA securities, use the 13F position if it is within 18
     months of December of each year unless there is a more recent INST position. If there
     is are no 13F or INST positions, use SOF if it is within 18 months of December of each
     year.
   · For non-13F institutions and/or non-13F US/CA securities, use the INST position if
     it is within 18 months of December of each year for US securities and 21 month for
     non-US securities. If there is no INST position, use SOF if it is within 18 months of
     December of each year.
   · Use NISTK positions if they are within 18 months of December of each year.

    We merge on prices from own sec prices eq and calculate dollar values of holdings for
holdings of each security. We limit holdings to common equity and ADRs:
    (fref security type=SHARE,ADR,DR,GDR,NVDR and issue type=EQ in sym coverage)
    We aggregate dollar values of security-level holdings to company-level holdings using the
mapping in own sec entity eq.
    We classify institutions into types using FactSet's investor sub type in sym entity. Hedge
Fund=AR, FH, FF, FU, FS; Broker=BM, IB, ST, MM; Private Banking=CP, FY, VC;
Investment Advisor=IC, RE, PP, SB, MF; Long-term=FO,SV,IN;.
    We construct the Household sector so that total holdings of institutions and household
are equal to each firms market cap. On occasion, total holdings of institutions are great than
the market cap, in which case we proportionally scale back all institutions holdings.
    We split investment advisors into four groups. We first split investors into two groups
of equal size. Within each size group, we split investors above and below the median active
share. To have stable classifications across time, we collapse the classification across time and
classify an investor as small (active) if it is assigned to a group more than half the periods.
The active share is defined as the sum of the absolute value of the differences between the
actual portfolio weights of an investor and a market-weighted portfolio based on the stocks
held by the same investor, divided by two to avoid double-counting.
    We classify the outside asset as any firm which is outside of the top 90% of market cap
within each region. Any institution which has less that $1m in holdings in the outside asset,
is classified as a non-institutional stakes holder, or has less than 20 holdings across all years
is moved into the household sector.

                                               49
                                                       Figure A.1
                                               Comparison with IMF CPIS.

                                                                Source          FactSet        CPIS


                                       GB Holdings of US                                                   US Holdings of GB
        1000000




        750000




        500000




        250000




             0
                  06

                       07

                            08

                                  09

                                         10

                                              11

                                                   12

                                                           13

                                                                14

                                                                     15

                                                                           16


                                                                                    06

                                                                                          07

                                                                                               08

                                                                                                      09

                                                                                                             10

                                                                                                                  11

                                                                                                                       12

                                                                                                                               13

                                                                                                                                    14

                                                                                                                                         15

                                                                                                                                              16
                  20

                       20

                            20

                                  20

                                       20

                                              20

                                                   20

                                                        20

                                                                20

                                                                     20

                                                                          20


                                                                                   20

                                                                                          20

                                                                                               20

                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                              20
Total cross-border holdings of US and UK equities by US and UK investors. Equity
holdings are from the IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey and FactSet from
2006 until 2016.


B.   Model derivations

The first-order condition of investor i is given by

                                 ( g i - M B 0 ) -  i  i  i +  2 I Q i + yi = 0 ,                                                                  (28)

implying
                                         1                -1
                             Qi =            i i +  2 I      ( g i - M B 0 + yi )
                                         i
                                           1             i i
                                       =          I  -              (g i - M B 0 + yi )
                                         i  2          i i +  2
                                           1                             ci
                                       =       ( g i - M B 0 + yi ) -       ,                                                                      (29)
                                         i   2                         i  2 i

where ci = (i i +  2 )-1 i (g i - M B 0 + yi ) is a scalar that is common across all stocks.
Hence, an investor's demand for a given stock depends on its expected return (that is, the
expected growth rate of fundamentals relative to the stock's current valuation), its riskiness,
and the hedging benefit it provides. By substituting the assumptions that we made about

                                                                          50
expected growth rates and the stocks' riskiness in (4), (5), and (6) we obtain
               1                  1                                                        1
Q i (n) = -        M B 0 ( n ) +       g - ci      Y
                                               i + i                       x( n ) +             g (n) - ci i (n) + iY (n) ,
              i  2               i  2 i                                                   i  2 i

which is the expression announced in (7).
    By aggregating investors' demands and equating to supply, we solve for equilibrium asset
prices,

                                                               Qi = B ,                                                         (30)
                                                           i

where we use that the supply of each stock is normalized to one and Qi (n) = B (n)qi (n).
This implies
          1                           1                                                    1
-             M B (n) +                    g - ci      Y
                                                   i + i                 x(n) +                 g (n) - ci i (n) + iY (n) = B (n),
     i
         i  2                   i
                                     i  2 i                                           i
                                                                                          i  2 i

that is,

                                                                                                B ( n)
                M B (n) =                  m i  1i        x( n ) +       mi i (n) -  2                        .                 (31)
                                       i                             i                           i  i Ai


where  1i = g            Y
            i - c i i +  i ,                i (n)   = ig (n) - ci i (n) + iY (n), and

                                                           i-1            i Ai
                                             mi =             -1 =                ,                                             (32)
                                                           j j            j  j Aj


given our assumption that i = (i Ai )-1 .

C.       Numerical algorithm to compute the ridge estimator

We start from

               Et [(i,t (n) exp {- i X t (n)} - 1) Zt (n)] - D(i )  i -  T = 0.                                                 (33)
                   wi,t (n)                                                               (1)
where i,t (n) =    wi,t (0)
                            .       We start from an initial estimate,  i , which we discuss below. We
                                                                                                                  (1)            (2)
then use a first-order Taylor expansion of the moment conditions around  i                                              to find  i
                                                    (1)                                               (1)
                 Et     i,t (n) exp - i X t (n) - 1 Zt (n) - D(i )  i -  T -
                                                    (1)                                                     (2)         (1)
                  Et i,t (n) exp - i X t (n) Zt (n)X t (n) + D(i )                                    i - i
             = 0,




                                                                 51
implying
                                                                                                            -1
        (2)          (1)                                   (1)
       i       =  i + Et i,t (n) exp - i X t (n) Zt (n)X t (n) + D(i )                                           ×
                                                 (1)                                                  (1)
                     Et      i,t (n) exp - i X t (n) - 1 Zt (n) - D(i )  i -  T                                      .

We iterate on this procedure until convergence. Note that the numerator of the adjust-
ment term are the moment conditions in (33), implying that upon convergence, the moment
conditions are satisfied. For numerical stability, we limit the updating step for each of the
coefficients to 1 or -1.
                                    (1)
   To obtain the initial estimate,  i , we omit the zero holdings and use the linear moment
conditions

                                     (1)                                              (1)
                Et   ln i,t (n) -  i X t (n) Zt (n) - D(i )  i -  T                                 = 0,

implying
              (1)                                         -1
            i = [E [Zt (n)X t (n) ] + D(i )]                     Et [Zt (n) ln i,t (n)] + D(i ) T .

D.   Variance decompositions using characteristics

We show how our valuation regressions and earnings predictability regressions connect to
traditional variance decompositions. Starting from (25) without expectations, it holds
                                                                         
                                                    s-1
                           mbt (n) = c +                  et+s ( n ) -         s-1 r t +s ( n ) .                        (34)
                                           s=1                           s=1

Consider a linear projection of both sides on a set of characteristics, xt (n) as well as a time
fixed effect, which yields

                          amb,t + mb xt (n) = ae,t + e xt (n) - (ar,t + r xt (n)) ,

implying

                                            amb,t = ae,t - ar,t ,                                                         (35)
                                             mb = e - r .                                                                (36)

Hence, the fraction of market-to-book ratios that can be explained by characteristics, Var ( mb xt (n)),
satisfies the variance decomposition

              Var (mb xt (n)) = Cov (mb xt (n), e xt (n)) - Cov (mb xt (n), r xt (n)) ,




                                                               52
and the fraction due to returns therefore equals

                                                         mb x (mb - e )
                   Fraction due to expected returns =                   ,
                                                           mb x mb

and the fraction due to expected growth rates

                                                              mb x e
                   Fraction due to expected growth rates =            ,
                                                              mb x mb

with x = Var (x ). As characteristics are cross-sectionally standardized, if the characteris-
                                                   (mb -e )       e
tics are also uncorrelated, then the shares equal mb
                                                    mb
                                                            and  mbmb
                                                                       , respectively.
                                                    mb            mb




                                             53
