                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE IMPACT OF PRICES ON FIRM REPUTATION

                                          Michael Luca
                                          Oren Reshef

                                       Working Paper 27405
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27405


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2020, Revised December 2020




We are grateful for the comments and suggestions of Dan Elfenbein, Shane Greenstein, Troup
Howard, Simon Martin, Jesse Shapiro, Andrei Shleifer, Steve Tadelis, and Reed Walker. Funding
for this research was received from the Pershing Square Fund for Research on the Foundations of
Human Behavior. We thank Yelp for providing data for this analysis. The right to publish is not
tied to the results of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27405.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Luca and Oren Reshef. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Prices on Firm Reputation
Michael Luca and Oren Reshef
NBER Working Paper No. 27405
June 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. D4,D8,L0

                                           ABSTRACT

While a business's reputation can impact its pricing, prices can also impact its reputation. To
explore the effect of prices on reputation, we investigate daily data on menu prices and online
ratings from a large rating and ordering platform. We find that a price increase of 1% leads to a
decrease of 3%-5% in the average rating. Consistent with this, the overall distribution of ratings
for cheaper restaurants is similar to that of more expensive restaurants. Finally, these effects don't
seem to be driven by consumer retaliation against price changes, but by changes in absolute price
levels.


Michael Luca
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mluca@hbs.edu

Oren Reshef
Olin Business School
Washington University in St. Louis
oren@wustl.edu
1     Introduction
A firm's reputation is broadly considered to be one of its most important assets. As a
firm's reputation increases, so does the demand for its services and products, and is often
accompanied by increases in prices, consumer satisfaction, and profits. At the same time,
pricing decisions can also directly affect a business's reputation. For example, when product
quality is not immediately observed by customers, increasing prices might signal higher
quality. On the other hand, if consumers adjust for price when reporting quality, then a price
increase will harm firm's reputation in the long-run. To the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to explore the causal impact of price on reputation, as measured by its online ratings.
As elaborated below, our results show a negative relationship between pricing decisions and
reputation, highlighting an important downstream consequence of pricing decisions.
     We use data from Yelp--a consumer review website for local businesses. We begin by
looking at the cross-sectional distribution of Yelp star-ratings for restaurants, broken out
by price. If ratings were simply a proxy for quality, one might expect a positive relation-
ship between price and quality--with more expensive restaurants having higher ratings. In
contrast, we find that the rating distribution of cheap and most expensive restaurants are
broadly similar. The average rating for restaurants in the cheapest Yelp category is 3.4 and
the average rating for restaurants in the most expensive category is 3.6--a difference less
than a quarter standard deviation. We interpret this as suggestive evidence that ratings are
a function of both quality and price.
     To shed light on the causal impact of prices, we turn to daily transaction data--looking at
orders placed directly through the Yelp platform. We obtain access to item-level information
on all food orders finalized on the Yelp Transactions Platform. Our analysis focuses on two
main specifications: First, we look for changes in rating in response to changes in prices,
controlling for item-week fixed effects. Second, we restrict attention to narrow time bands
just before and just after sharp item-level price changes, and estimate the change in online
ratings. As an additional robustness test, for a subset of menu items, we take advantage of
specific details of our setting to estimate the impact on ratings received for the same item
at different price points at the same time.
     Across specifications, we find that increases in prices lead to lower ratings. A 1% increase
in price leads to a 0.05-0.14 decrease in rating on a scale of 1 to 3 (the scale used for delivery
purchases), which is approximately 2.5%-5% decrease for the average feedback. This effect
becomes increasingly important when considering that the average price change is about
3%-9%. These results are consistent with the cross-sectional evidence, and suggest that
higher prices are in fact affecting a restaurant's reputation, and that these effects are both


                                                2
statistically and economically significant.
     We argue that ratings are negatively affected by price-level because consumers adjust
their feedback based on prices. We then attempt to disentangle other mechanisms which
might affect consumers' rating behavior: We find that the effect is larger and generally more
statistically significant for users who are ordering from a restaurant for the first time relative
to people who have ordered before. This suggests that consumers indeed respond to price
levels rather than use low ratings as punishment for raising prices. This finding also supports
the notion that prices are, to some extent, used as a reference point or a signal to set users
expectations for quality, as users who have not previously ordered from that business are
likely to have the least prior knowledge of quality.
     Our results contribute to several streams of literature. First, we contribute to the lit-
erature on reputation building. Previous literature has shown that firms can affect their
reputation legitimately, by improving quality (Hubbard, 2002, Jin and Leslie, 2009, Board
and Meyer-ter Vehn, 2013, Cai et al., 2014, Proserpio and Zervas, 2017) or illegitimately,
by faking reviews (Mayzlin et al., 2014, Luca and Zervas, 2016). Our work sheds light on
the ways in which pricing decisions influence reputation. Second, our results contribute to
the literature on the content of online reviews, and the design of reputation systems (Bolton
et al., 2013, Li and Xiao, 2014, Dai et al., 2018, Li et al., 2020). While ratings are often
considered a proxy for quality, a growing literature documents biases and issues with con-
sumers' reviewing process (De Langhe et al., 2016, Nosko and Tadelis, 2018, Filippas et al.,
2018, Fradkin et al., 2018). Our work shows that ratings account for both quality and price.
Our paper contributes to the literature exploring the relationship between prices and ratings
(Dodds et al., 1991, Voss et al., 1998, Li and Hitt, 2010). We build on this literature, provid-
ing a large-scale empirical analysis of fine-grained observational panel data. More generally,
we contribute to the literature on pricing as a tool to signal quality (Klein and Leffler, 1981,
Shapiro, 1983, Wolinsky, 1983, Milgrom and Roberts, 1986, Bagwell and Riordan, 1991,
Caves and Greene, 1996, Martin and Shelegia, 2019) and benefits of introductory pricing
(Cabral et al., 1999, Schlee, 2001).
     Finally, our results have implications for businesses, platforms, and customers. Most
transaction platforms have some form of rating system to provide consumers with a signal
of sellers' quality (for example, Amazon, Taobao, Airbnb). Platforms such as Yelp and
TripAdvisor provide online ratings for businesses in offline markets as well. Online ratings
have been shown to impact prices and sales (Livingston, 2005, Jin and Kato, 2006, Chevalier
and Mayzlin, 2006, Resnick et al., 2006, Cabral and Hortacsu, 2010, Luca, 2016). Our
results suggest a tradeoff to increasing prices--in addition to reducing immediate sales, price
increases harm firm reputation. This dynamic impacts firms' pricing incentives, and has


                                                3
material implications to the value of rating to consumers. If consumers are unable to unpack
the impact of historic prices on rating, then this puts a wedge between true quality and
firm's reputation. Our results also have implications for platform designers, who might be
able to mitigate this concern and improve reputation mechanisms by taking into account
this effect.


2       Data and Empirical Design
2.1     Settings and Data
We study the impact of price on online ratings in a portion of the food delivery-service
industry in the United States, a 35 billion dollar industry, expected to grow at an average
annual rate of over 20% in the next 10 years.1 We focus on Yelp Transactions Platform,
an online platform launched in 2013 by the consumers' review website, Yelp. YTP enables
users to order from local restaurants.
     YTP operates as a part of the standard Yelp website and features a subset of restaurants
available on Yelp.2 Figure 1 depicts the process of ordering on YTP. Figure 1a presents
results of a search query on YTP: the shopper views a list of restaurants relevant to the
query and location as well as a map of the establishments. Restaurants' data are pulled
from the standard Yelp website and include the Yelp Star Rating, number of reviews, food
category, and Yelp Dollar Rating. Shoppers can then go to the business page to learn more
about the restaurant or initiate an order. Initiating an order redirects users to the restaurant
menu page, presented in 1b. Consumers can then choose specific menu items and finalize
the transaction.
     Following a transaction on YTP, users are prompted with the option to leave a review
for the restaurant.3 Feedback prompt may appear on the Yelp application or via email,
depending on the method by which the order was carried out. As displayed in Figure 1c the
feedback includes three parts: First, whether the delivery was late, early, or on time. Second,
overall experience from the delivery: Great, OK, or Bad (coded: 3, 2, and 1, respectively).4
Finally, if the consumer had a bad experience, she is solicited to list the specific reasons for

    1
     According to a UBS report.
    2
     Shoppers are directed to the platform by applying the "Delivery" or "Takeout" filters; by using similar
words in a search query; or by initiating an order from the search results page.
   3
     In addition, consumers can leave a review on the `traditional' restaurant yelp page. However, since we
cannot directly connect these reviews with specific deliveries, we do not include those in the main analysis.
   4
     TThis rating can be compared to the main Yelp Star Rating. We find a correlation of .41 between
YTP reviews and Star Ratings when including only restaurants with sufficient reviews (above 20 reviews).



                                                     4
the unfavorable experience.5
     We received transaction-level and establishment-level data from Yelp. Data includes all
restaurants available on YTP, Yelp's Star Rating, the type of food sold, the business location,
and Yelp's Dollar Ratings. Yelp's Star Rating system is a user-generated rating on a one-
to five-star scale. Dollar Ratings are meant to approximate the overall cost per dinner, and
are assigned by users and aggregated by Yelp. Dollar Ratings are based on users' input, and
take on four discrete values: $ = under $10, $$=11-30, $$$=31-60, and $$$$= over $61. We
begin by analyzing restaurant-level star-rating from the standard Yelp website. This dataset
includes a cross-section of all restaurants in Los Angeles, New York, and Houston (the cities
with the largest pool of Yelp reviews), as of January 2019.
     For the main analysis, we use proprietary Yelp and YTP data covering a period from
YTP's launch in 2013 until January 2019, with the majority of transactions occurring in the
last 2-3 years of the data. Here we discuss the main data used for the analysis. A detailed
discussion can be found in Appendix B. The data includes all food orders completed on YTP
during that period.6 For each transaction, we observe item-level description and price, the
date and time, the identity of the user and business, and, if the user left a review, the ratings
given.When looking at orders, we see the price paid--which includes both the base price,
and any add-on charges due to item modifications (such as an extra topping on a pizza, or
substituting shrimp for chicken in pad thai). Because of this, many observed price differences
may not be the result of item-level price changes but consumer-requested item modification.
While we cannot always pin down the exact modification, we can generally observe order-
item-level description, which sometimes details whether the item included an add-on. The
fixed effect regressions, which are used in the second part of the analysis, exclude items with
descriptions suggesting that the change in price resulted from a modification rather than a
base price change.7
     Nevertheless, we identify multiple cases where order modifications are not documented
in the item description (see Figure A3). To address this issue, we develop a simple algorithm
that further restricts our sample to better identify base price changes rather than item modi-

   5
      In this paper we think of the review as feedback regrading restaurant's quality. Naturally, the review
might also reflect other things, such as the ease of using the online platform or the efficiency of the delivery
service. To account for the latter, we include a control for whether a delivery was late. Nevertheless, if
consumers are rating anything which is not directly related to the restaurant, then this will likely add noise
to our estimate and go against us finding a statistically significant result.
    6
      Unfortunately, as part of the agreement with Yelp, we are unable to disclose sensitive business infor-
mation regarding the levels of platform or business performance. We cannot disclose, for instance, the total
number of orders or users on the platform, the number of orders per business, or revenue.
    7
      For instance, we exclude purchases which include words such as"Adjustment" or "Customize," as well
those that explicitly include surcharge amounts.



                                                       5
fications. We use the algorithm to focus on reviews received right around price changes. The
specific details of the sample selection algorithm are presented in Appendix B. Intuitively,
we begin by restricting attention only to items with sufficient observations and occurrences
in which the description does not suggest any item modifications. Then, for each item, we
remove price points that appear infrequently in the data (less than five times or 5%) or price
points that appear to be changing rapidly, such as $3, $5, and then back to $3. Finally, we
exclude periods in which we observe more than one prevailing price. We perform a myriad of
robustness tests in order to test the sensitivity of our result to altering the core assumptions
of the algorithm, making it more or less conservative (Appendix C).


2.2     Research Design and Empirical Specification
We are interested in identifying the impact of prices on subsequent ratings. The central
challenge we face is that prices are endogenously chosen, and thus likely to be correlated
with unobserved characteristics such as input costs, quality, or shifts in demand.
     One approach is to look at within restaurant variation over time. This might eliminate
some of the selection concerns. However, even within restaurants, unobserved demand shocks
are likely to impact pricing changes over time. For example, restaurants may become more
popular and neighborhoods become trendier. These secular trends however, occur over a
long time horizon. Because we have daily data, we can mitigate this concern by focusing
on the change in ratings just before and just after a price change ­ looking for changes in
ratings a few days before and after price changes.8 This essentially rests on the assumption
that the exact date that a price change is implemented doesn't coincide with other changes.
     We provide several pieces of supporting evidence for this identification strategy. First,
we provide suggestive evidence that restaurants don't respond to changes in the competitive
environment frequently: over a period of almost 3 years, less than 15% of items ever change
prices. The most plausible explanation is that restaurants tend to have relatively high menu
costs (Hobijn et al., 2006, Bils and Klenow, 2004). Thus, even if there are sharp changes
impacting a restaurant's demand or cost, such as a write up in Food and Wine or a spike in
the price of tomatoes, menu costs create a friction that hinders updating prices in the very
short run. Second, we find that prices usually change at the restaurant level rather than for
specific items. For instance, Figure A1 shows the number of price changes in a given week
within a restaurant for the three restaurants with the most price changes in our data. It
is clear that restaurants rarely update specific items, but instead redesign the whole menu.

   8
      In the main specification, we use 10 days before and after the price change. In Appendix C, we test
the robustness of the main results to alternative definitions.


                                                   6
In fact, the median restaurant changes about one third of its menu each time it updates
prices. This suggests that restaurants wait until they have a sufficient number of changes to
justify the costly price update. Thus, price changes are not correlated, at least in the very
short run, with item-level changes, such as changes in dish recipe or ingredients, but with
restaurant-level changes.
     Some changes, such as kitchen renovation or hiring a new chef, might impact all dishes
simultaneously. However, it seems unlikely that price would adjust instantly (over a few day
period) as one can expect a transition period for these improvements to affect food quality.
Moreover, one might expect genuine improvements in quality to tend to lead to higher prices
and higher ratings. This goes in the opposite direction of the reputational harm of higher
prices that we observe.
     Finally, as a robustness test, we estimate an additional specification, which takes advan-
tage of an institutional detail unique to YTP. Since YTP operates with multiple partners,
who sometimes tend to update prices at varying quickness, we can occasionally observe the
same item being sold at different prices at the same time. This allows us to isolate the
impact of price on ratings, while holding fixed all other factors that might affect restaurant's
ratings.
     The first empirical specification uses a myriad of fixed effects to estimate the impact of
price on ratings, controlling for item, restaurant, and time effects:

                            Yjt = ln(P ricejt ) + Xjt + w + j + µwj +            jt                         (1)

     An observation is one item in a transaction. w is the week index, j denotes item-business
combination , and t is an index for specific dates. Y denotes the outcome of interest: Order
rating, on a scale of 1 to 3, or whether the order received (did not received) the highest
(lowest) ratings. P rice is the price of the item per order, excluding taxes and delivery fees.9
X is a vector of controls which includes: a dummy for pickup or delivery, the share (in
monetary terms) of the item out of the total transaction price, whether the delivery was
marked as `late', the delivery partner, and day-of-the-week (non-parametrically). w denotes
calendar week fixed effect, j denotes item-level fixed effect, and µwj denotes week-item
fixed effect. Naturally, when the latter is included, it absorbs the first two fixed effects.
To be conservative, standard errors are clustered at the item-business level. The parameter
of interest,  , should be interpreted as the impact of percentage changes in price on the

   9
       In our data, ratings are given at the order-level, while prices are determined at the item-level. This is
likely to add noise to our estimate and works against rejecting the null hypothesis. Nevertheless, in Appendix
C we conduct robustness checks in which we restrict our analysis only to the largest (most expensive) item
in each order.


                                                       7
outcome variable. This specification uses the full sample, excluding items with descriptions
suggesting item modifications.
    The second empirical specification focuses on narrow time windows around sharp price
changes:

                                  Yjt = ln(P ricejt ) + Xjt + G +        jt                               (2)

     Here--beyond the indices and variables defined in equation 1--G is an index for item-
business X price change and  is the fixed effect per item price change.10 Standard errors are
clustered at the item-price level. This specification uses the most restrictive sample selection
criteria, based on the algorithm discussed in Section 2.1 and Appendix B.


3        Results
3.1      Motivating Evidence
To motivate the main analysis we start by analyzing the relationship between prices and
ratings in the standard Yelp website. We do not have the exact prices for this broader set
of restaurants. However, we have a price index that Yelp uses, which is in terms of Yelp
Dollar Signs (as described in Section 2.1). We use a cross-section from January 2019 on
all restaurants in New York City, Los Angeles, and Houston, the three cities with most
restaurants on Yelp.
     Figure 2 presents the distribution of ratings (at the restaurant level) broken out by
price. Panel A presents the raw distribution of Star Ratings by Dollar Ratings, and Panel B
presents the same distribution controlling for city and food type, i.e. pizza, Mexican food,
etc. The figure suggests that, though higher prices are correlated with higher ratings, the
impact is marginal. The distributions mostly overlap, with similar modes but slightly fatter
tails at the lower end for cheaper places.
     Appendix Table A1 presents the results formally. In general, we find no statistically
significant differences between the ratings of one- and two-dollar restaurants. We find that
three-dollar restaurant received higher ratings than one-dollar restaurant, but the relation is
economically small: Across all specifications, on average, three-dollar restaurants have 0.14
higher star ratings compared to one-dollar restaurants (an increase of about 3.5% for the

    10
      Consumers may respond differently to price increases and price reductions. Unfortunately, we are
unable to separate the two since we rarely observe any price reductions. Thus, our results should be generally
interpreted as the ratings' response to price increases



                                                      8
median business),11 even though, on average, they are more than 4 times more expensive.
     This suggests that more expensive restaurants do not receive overwhelmingly higher
ratings, consistent with our hypothesis that ratings are price adjusted. One alternative
explanation is that more expensive restaurants offer the same level of food quality as cheaper
ones. If that is indeed the case, however, it would be difficult to explain how these expensive
restaurants manage to stay in business over time without offering compensation for the
hefty price tag. Nevertheless, in the next subsection we attempt to more directly identify
the relation between price and ratings.


3.2     Evidence from YTP
Subsequent analysis focuses on ratings received on YTP. The main advantage is that this
data allows us to match reviews with orders, specific items, and prices. In particular, we use
price variation within items to estimate the impacts of price changes on ratings received.
     Fixed Effects Regressions The first set of results uses a myriad of fixed effects to
control for unobserved differences across items and within-item over time. The results are
presented in Table 2. Each column presents an estimation of Equation 1, with a different
set of fixed effects. The specific fixed effects are detailed below each column.
     Column (1) presents the effect of price on ratings without any item- or week-level fixed
effects. While statistically significant, the estimated relation is economically small, a 1%
increase in price leads to an average increase of 0.006 in rating, on a scale of 1 to 3. The
average price change in this sample is about 3%, which implies an increase of about 0.018 in
rating, or about 0.006% change. This positive but weak result echoes the pattern presented
in Figure 2, and suggests that higher priced items are not much higher rated in the cross-
section.
     Column (2) adds item- and week-level fixed effects. The estimated effect of prices on
subsequent ratings is statistically significant and negative. We find that a 1% increase in
prices causes an average drop of 0.052 in ratings. The same back-of-the-envelope calculation
as conducted above, suggests that for the average price changes, this implies a decrease of
about 5.6% in restaurant's ratings. Column (3) presents a similar result, with an even more
restricting specification, which accounts for the item-week fixed effect, effectively comparing
ratings of the same item at different price points within a given calendar week. The coefficient
is -0.048 and is statistically significant.

   11
      Note that in this specification we look at the standard Yelp Star Rating, which is given on a scale of
1 through 5. In contrast the main analysis is based on the YTP order ratings, which are on a 1 to 3 scale.
Thus, similar magnitudes in absolute terms have different interpretations in percentage terms.



                                                     9
     Columns (4) and (5) decompose the three levels, by examining the impact of price on
the (linear) probability of receiving the highest rating ("Great") or not receiving the lowest
rating ("Bad"), respectively. We find that prices impact ratings across the board; higher
prices both decrease the likelihood of receiving the highest ratings (Column (4)) and decrease
the likelihood of not getting the lowest rating (Column (5)).
     In Appendix C, we conduct several robustness test to these results: As an additional
robustness check, we conduct an analysis in which we restrict attention only to the largest
or most expensive item in each order Additionally, we test the sensitivity of the analysis to
different levels of clustering the standard errors, such as at the order, business, or user-level.
Finally, we test whether the effect persists when controlling for reviewer identity, i.e., we
compare reviews for the same item sold at a different price to the same consumer.
     Taken together, the results of Table 2 find that, within-item and in a small time frame,
prices have a negative effect on rating. This result is consistent with our main hypothesis;
conditional on quality, as firms raise prices, subsequent ratings suffer.
     Sharp Price Changes For the following analysis, we restrict attention to reviews given
around sharp price changes. Our sample selection criteria is intendedly conservative, and
thus we omit the vast majority of data and remain only with a small core of cleanly defined
price changes. A detailed discussion on the rationale guiding our decisions is presented in
Appendix B.
     Figure 3 presents the results graphically; We find a sharp drop in average ratings fol-
lowing a price increase. The formal results are presented in Table 2. Due to the restrictive
sample selection rules we impose, the number of observations and items is substantially lower
than present in Table 1. This approach, while reducing our sample size, provides arguably
the cleanest estimate of the impact of prices on restaurant rating. Examining only sharp
price changes allows us to avoid issues related to spurious price changes and incomplete data.
     Column (1) presents the main specification. We find that a 1% increase in price leads
to an average decrease of 0.11 in rating on a scale of 1 to 3. For this sample, the average
price change is about 9%, suggesting that an average price change is decreasing subsequent
ratings by over 30%. This effect is substantially larger than described in Table 2 because
the estimated coefficient is more than double in magnitude, and because the average price
change in this sample is almost triple in size. The latter is likely to be the result of the
sample selection criteria, which might only be picking up large price changes, and excluding
small price changes from the analysis. Nevertheless, even for the average price change in the
sample, 3%, the predicted reduction in ratings is about 12%.
     In Columns (2) and (3) we change the selection criteria, making it either more lenient
or more restrictive, respectively. A detailed discussion of how these alternative samples are


                                               10
constructed is presented in Appendix B.12 The estimated magnitudes are consistent with
the ones presented in Column (1) and remain statistically significant across specifications.
Columns (4) and (5) estimate the effect of price increases on the probability of receiving the
highest rating or not receiving the lowest rating, respectively. The estimation uses a linear
probability model. Together, these two columns suggest that the effect is primarily driven
by reduction in the highest score, with about 66% attributed to reduction in the highest
ratings and about 33% from increases in the lowest rating category.
     We conduct several robustness tests to explore the sensitivity of the main results to
variable definitions and coding. We also examine the importance of the allowed window
around price changes.13 In addition, we relax the linear probability assumption using ordered
and conditional logit models. Finally, similar to the fixed effects regressions, we test the
robustness of our finding to including only the most expensive item in each order, and the
sensitivity to different levels of clustering the standard errors. Appendix C presents the
estimation results of robustness tests.
     Across the board, we find evidence that price increases lead to reductions in ratings. The
estimated effect is consistent across specifications and is around 0.11, i.e. a 10% increase in
price leads to a 1.1 average increase in rating (over 30%). We thus conclude that prices have
a significant and substantial negative effect on user ratings.


3.3     Mechanism and Alternative Research Designs
The Role of Retaliation In the previous section we found that price has a deleterious
effect on subsequent firms' ratings. In this section, we explore whether the effect is driven
by the price levels, or by existing customers who are retaliating against the change in price.
For instance, Kahneman et al. (1991) and Eyster et al. (2017) highlight the ways in which
reference points can affect decisions. Repeat consumers might think about the restaurant's
previous prices as a reference point, and retaliate against price increases. Alternatively,
consumers might simply be reacting to the price expressing their discontent with the price
change(Hirschman, 1970).
     To shed light on this, we split the sample into existing customers (who have seen both

  12
      To summarize: First, there are cases in which there is some overlap between two prevailing prices. In
the main specification we exclude all of these observations. In contrast, in Column (2) we use the lowest
price. This definition is somewhat more lenient than the main specification. Second, Column (3) presents
the most restrictive specification, we only include products that ever had two prices and that these prices
never overlap.
   13
      Consistent with Column 1 in Tables 1 and A1, the effect diminishes as the window becomes larger, but
becomes larger in magnitude when we narrow the window.



                                                    11
the lower and the higher price) and new customers (for whom prior menu prices are less
salient). If the effect is driven by retaliation against price changes, one would expect the
effect to attenuate for users who haven't ordered from the specific restaurant in the past.
     Table 3 shows the impact of prices on ratings when restricting the sample only to users
who order from a specific restaurant for the first time. The structure is similar to Table 2,
but with the sample restricted to new users. Column (1) presents the estimation results for
our main specification. The coefficient is -0.126, is slightly larger in magnitude than the one
estimated in the full sample, -0.11. Similarly, the estimates in Columns (2) - (5) are slightly
larger than their counterparts using the full sample.14
     These results suggest that retaliation against price increases is not the main driver of the
negative relation between prices and ratings, as first-time users seem to be more responsive
to price increases. We interpret these as suggestive evidence of the role ex ante expectations
in determining ratings. The fact that new consumers are more affected by price together with
the fact that price may signal higher quality, can be indicative of the fact that consumers
are reducing their rating because the item does not live up to the expectations formed based
on its hefty price tag.
     Alternative designs The main identifying assumption of the main research design is
that within a narrow time window price changes are orthogonal to other unobserved changes
in items. While we provide some anecdotal evidence to support this claim, this assumption
is fundamentally untestable. In order to corroborate our main results, we introduce two
alternative research designs.
     First, as discussed in Section 2.1 and presented in Figure A3, for most items there are
no price changes and when there are price changes, they occur simultaneously. We interpret
this stylized fact as implying that price changes are either stemming from restaurant-level
shocks or that restaurants have high menu costs and update their menu only when a sufficient
number of changes has accumulated. Either way, we argue that restricting our attention only
to times when multiple prices were simultaneously adjusted can, at least partially, alleviate
some of the potential concerns regarding item-level unobserved changes.
     To this end, we conduct additional analysis, restricting attention to weeks in which we
observe more than 5, 10, or 20 of the restaurant's items changing price; a sizable change
given that the average restaurant in our sample only sells about 30 items. The results
are presented in Appendix Table A7. Similar to the main analysis, we find a consistent
negative and significant relation between price and ratings. The estimated magnitudes are

  14
      In Column (3) the estimate is much larger and noisier than the other specifications. This might be due
to the sharp decrease in the number of items included in that sample. We can not, however, reject the null
that it is the same as the coefficient estimated in the main specification, -0.135.


                                                    12
substantially larger than the main specification. However, the results are much noisier,
probably due to the smaller number of observations.
     Second, while the above design helps alleviate price changes related to item-level un-
observed changes, one potential concern that remains is that all restaurant items change
simultaneously. Ideally, we would want to compare the exact same item at the same time,
but at different prices. As it turns out, for a small subset of items, we can actually see that
natural experiment. To understand how this might occur, we need to understand the insti-
tutional details behind YTP: YTP does not perform the delivery itself but connects users
with delivery firms, referred to as partners. If the same restaurant is affiliated with multi-
ple partners, then the YTP algorithm assigns the delivery to one of the partners. Notably,
consumers cannot change that decision. Apparently, there are multiple instances in which
an item changes price, but certain partners are quicker than others to update the price.15
Thus, there are short time windows in which different partners sell the same item at different
prices, one at the old price and one at the new price. An example of an actual item can
be found in Figure A2; The price increased from $7 to $9 for both partners, but partner B
updated the price before partner A did. This means that, for a short time window, the same
item sold at both $7 and $9. Thus, we can treat prices as randomly assigned and estimate
the impact of price increases on ratings.
     The results are presented in Table A8. Column (1) presents the estimation results on
rating. The coefficient on log price is -0.075. This estimate is slightly smaller than the
main specification, though we cannot reject the null that the estimated coefficient is equal
to the average result from the main specification, -0.11. Columns (2) and (3) present the
decomposition by highest and lowest rating received. Similar to the main specification, the
magnitude of the effect on the number of "Great" reviews is larger. This effect, however,
as opposed to the impact on the number of reviews that are not "Bad" is not statistically
significant, possibly due to the small number of observations.
     Reviewers Selection Price changes also have the potential to affect the type of con-
sumers going to and reviewing a restaurant. For example, customers who tend to visit
restaurants with higher prices might be more (or less) stringent reviewers than those who
go to restaurants with lower prices. To explore whether selection of reviewers is driving the
relation between price and ratings, we construct a harshness score for each user based on
the average rating given across all transactions excluding the current transaction (leave-out
mean), as described in Appendix B. We first test whether price levels are correlated with

  15
      It doesn't seem that there are particular partners which are always late and others that are predomi-
nantly early to update price. In any case, we control for partner identity in all specifications.



                                                    13
reviewers harshness, and second whether controlling for reviewers' harshness mitigated the
relation. The results are presented in Table A6. We do not find evidence of significant
selection of harsher reviewers following price increases. For instance, in Column (1) we see
that the effect of price on average reviewers' harshness is small and statistically insignificant.
Similarly, we find that controlling for reviewers' harshness slightly decreases the estimated
coefficients, but the results remain statistically and economically significant.
      Another possibility is that reviewers who are less price sensitive or have strong preference
for a specific item go for items with higher prices. Our main results show that reviewers
adjust their reviews for price. To the extent that reviewers of higher priced items are less
price sensitive or have strong preferences, the adjustment we see is likely smaller than if
reviewers were randomly drawn.


4        Discussion
In this paper we study the impact of price on firm reputation, as measured by its online
ratings. We collaborate with Yelp Transaction Platform to obtain item-level prices and
ratings. Using several research designs, we find that price increases lead to a decrease in
subsequent ratings. Our preferred specification suggests that a 1% increase in price leads
to a 0.11 decrease in ratings, about 4% for the average restaurant. Thus, ratings are price-
adjusted rather than conveying objective quality.
     This result has several important implications to consumers, firms, and rating system
designers. First, the results speak to the welfare gain and value of reputation systems to
consumers. For instance, if consumers are unable to unpack the impact of historic prices on
ratings, or they have some incorrect beliefs about how raters incorporated price into reviews,
then this would put a wedge between items' true quality and the perceived reputation. This
mechanism does more than introducing noise into consumers' decision-making process, but
instead creates consistent biases in specific directions.
     Second, consistent with the above analysis, strategic sellers might be tempted to take
advantage of misguided consumers by setting low introductory prices. Initial low prices can
mechanically boost ratings and allow some firms to eventually take advantage of their good
reputation by increasing sales and prices. More generally, our results point to a tradeoff--
price increases don't just reduce present demand, but can potentially harm future demand
by decreasing firm reputation. We expect this negative effect to attenuate as the number of
reviews grows larger.16 Finally, platform makers can improve existing reputation mechanisms

    16
         Our work focuses on ratings for delivery orders. The effect is likely to vary across contexts - across


                                                       14
by redesigning the rating mechanism to account for the impact of historic prices on reviews
received.
    Lastly, in this setting the mechanism driving the adverse impact of prices on ratings is
somewhat unclear. We believe the two most plausible explanations are that consumers rate
net utility, i.e. quality minus (or over) price, rather than quality, or that consumer rate the
deviation from their ex ante expectation, i.e. value minus expectation, and that expectation
is positively correlated with prices. Unfortunately, we are unable to fully disentangle these
to mechanisms in our setting. We believe that the effect is driven by a mixture of these
two forces: On the one hand, we do find that repeating users are affected by price, which
implies that deviations from expectations are not the sole mechanism driving the results.
On the other hand, new consumers seem to be more affected, so expectations seem to play
some role. Future work might be able to take advantage of other settings and institutional
details in order to decompose the main effect and quantify the relative magnitudes of these
two forces.




platforms (e.g. Yelp vs UberEats), across categories (e.g. products vs services), and across user types (e.g. in
restaurant diners may react differently than delivery orders). One direction for future research is to explore
the extent to which this effect generalizes to products, other services, and even dine-in restaurants.


                                                      15
References
Bagwell, K. and Riordan, M. H. (1991). High and declining prices signal product quality. The
  American Economic Review, pages 224­239.

Bils, M. and Klenow, P. J. (2004). Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices. Journal of
  Political Economy, 112(5):947­985.

Board, S. and Meyer-ter Vehn, M. (2013). Reputation for quality. Econometrica, 81(6):2381­2462.

Bolton, G., Greiner, B., and Ockenfels, A. (2013). Engineering trust: reciprocity in the production
  of reputation information. Management science, 59(2):265­285.

Cabral, L. and Hortacsu, A. (2010). The dynamics of seller reputation: Evidence from ebay. The
  Journal of Industrial Economics, 58(1):54­78.

Cabral, L. M., Salant, D. J., and Woroch, G. A. (1999). Monopoly pricing with network externali-
  ties. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 17(2):199­214.

Cai, H., Jin, G. Z., Liu, C., and Zhou, L.-a. (2014). Seller reputation: From word-of-mouth to
  centralized feedback. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 34:51­65.

Caves, R. E. and Greene, D. P. (1996). Brands' quality levels, prices, and advertising outlays:
  empirical evidence on signals and information costs. International Journal of Industrial Organi-
  zation, 14(1):29­52.

Chevalier, J. A. and Mayzlin, D. (2006). The effect of word of mouth on sales: Online book reviews.
  Journal of marketing research, 43(3):345­354.

Dai, W., Jin, G., Lee, J., and Luca, M. (2018). Aggregation of consumer ratings: an application
  to yelp. com. Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 16(3):289­339.

De Langhe, B., Fernbach, P. M., and Lichtenstein, D. R. (2016). Navigating by the stars: Investi-
  gating the actual and perceived validity of online user ratings. Journal of Consumer Research,
  42(6):817­833.

Dodds, W. B., Monroe, K. B., and Grewal, D. (1991). Effects of price, brand, and store information
  on buyers' product evaluations. Journal of marketing research, 28(3):307­319.

Eyster, E., Madarasz, K., and Michaillat, P. (2017). Pricing when customers care about fairness
  but misinfer markups. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Filippas, A., Horton, J., and Golden, J. (2018). Reputation inflation. New York University, Working
  Paper.


                                                16
Fradkin, A., Grewal, E., and Holtz, D. (2018). The determinants of online review informativeness:
  Evidence from field experiments on airbnb.

Hirschman, A. O. (1970). Exit, voice, and loyalty: Responses to decline in firms, organizations,
  and states, volume 25. Harvard university press.

Hobijn, B., Ravenna, F., and Tambalotti, A. (2006). Menu costs at work: restaurant prices and
  the introduction of the euro. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(3):1103­1131.

Hubbard, T. N. (2002). How do consumers motivate experts? reputational incentives in an auto
  repair market. The Journal of Law and Economics, 45(2):437­468.

Jin, G. Z. and Kato, A. (2006). Price, quality, and reputation: Evidence from an online field
  experiment. The RAND Journal of Economics, 37(4):983­1005.

Jin, G. Z. and Leslie, P. (2009). Reputational incentives for restaurant hygiene. American Economic
  Journal: Microeconomics, 1(1):237­67.

Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L., and Thaler, R. H. (1991). Anomalies: The endowment effect, loss
  aversion, and status quo bias. Journal of Economic perspectives, 5(1):193­206.

Klein, B. and Leffler, K. B. (1981). The role of market forces in assuring contractual performance.
  Journal of political Economy, 89(4):615­641.

Li, L. and Xiao, E. (2014). Money talks: Rebate mechanisms in reputation system design. Man-
  agement Science, 60(8):2054­2072.

Li, L. I., Tadelis, S., and Zhou, X. (2020). Buying reputation as a signal of quality: Evidence from
  an online marketplace. The RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Li, X. and Hitt, L. M. (2010). Price effects in online product reviews: An analytical model and
  empirical analysis. MIS quarterly, pages 809­831.

Livingston, J. A. (2005). How valuable is a good reputation? a sample selection model of internet
  auctions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(3):453­465.

Luca, M. (2016). Reviews, reputation, and revenue: The case of yelp. com. Com (March 15, 2016).
  Harvard Business School NOM Unit Working Paper, (12-016).

Luca, M. and Zervas, G. (2016). Fake it till you make it: Reputation, competition, and yelp review
  fraud. Management Science, 62(12):3412­3427.

Martin, S. and Shelegia, S. (2019). Underpromise and overdeliver?­online product reviews and firm
  pricing. Working Paper.


                                                 17
Mayzlin, D., Dover, Y., and Chevalier, J. (2014). Promotional reviews: An empirical investigation
  of online review manipulation. American Economic Review, 104(8):2421­55.

Milgrom, P. and Roberts, J. (1986). Price and advertising signals of product quality. Journal of
  political economy, 94(4):796­821.

Nosko, C. and Tadelis, S. (2018). The limits of reputation in platform markets: An empirical
  analysis and field experiment. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Proserpio, D. and Zervas, G. (2017). Online reputation management: Estimating the impact of
  management responses on consumer reviews. Marketing Science, 36(5):645­665.

Resnick, P., Zeckhauser, R., Swanson, J., and Lockwood, K. (2006). The value of reputation on
  ebay: A controlled experiment. Experimental economics, 9(2):79­101.

Schlee, E. E. (2001). Buyer experimentation and introductory pricing. Journal of Economic Be-
  havior & Organization, 44(3):347­362.

Shapiro, C. (1983). Premiums for high quality products as returns to reputations. The quarterly
  journal of economics, 98(4):659­679.

Voss, G. B., Parasuraman, A., and Grewal, D. (1998). The roles of price, performance, and
  expectations in determining satisfaction in service exchanges. Journal of marketing, 62(4):46­61.

Wolinsky, A. (1983). Prices as signals of product quality. The review of economic studies, 50(4):647­
  658.




                                                 18
Figures

Figure 1: Visualization of the Ordering and Review Process on Yelp Trans-
actions Platform




          (a) Searching on YTP                                    (b) Ordering on YTP




                                        (c) Rating on YTP


  Note: Panel A presents the search results for delivery on YTP in San Francisco. Panel B presents the
  menu where consumers can pick the specific items and finalize the transaction. Panel C presents review
  process on YTP.




                                                 19
Figure 2: Motivating Evidence from a Cross-Section of Yelp Star-Ratings




                          .5




                                                                         .5
                          .4




                                                                         .4
                          .3




                                                                            .3
                Density




                                                                     Density
                          .2




                                                                         .2
                          .1




                                                                         .1
                          0




                                                                         0
                               0     1   2            3   4     5                -4    -2            0      2
                                             Rating                                   Normalized Ratings


                                                          $                           $$
                                                          $$$ & $$$$

 Note: This figure presents the density distribution of Yelp Star-Ratings by Dollar-Ratings in the three
 cities with the most restaurants on Yelp, as of January 2019. Panel A present the raw distribution. Panel
 B presents the normalize distribution by city and food category.



                Figure 3: The Impact of Price Change on Ratings
                 Ratings




                               -10                -5                 0                     5               10
                                                          Days from Price Change


 Note: This figure presents the raw relation between ratings and days to price increases. The day of price
 increase is normalized to zero.




                                                                    20
Tables

Table 1: The Impact of Prices on Ratings Using Fixed Effect Specifications

                             (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)               (5)
                          Ratings      Ratings      Ratings     P("Great")      P(Not "Bad")
   Price (pct.)           0.006       -0.052       -0.048        -0.023           -0.025
                          (0.000)      (0.005)      (0.013)       (0.011)          (0.005)

   Pickup                 0.035        0.028       0.025          0.020            0.005
                          (0.000)      (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.000)

   Late                   -0.914      -0.870       -0.852        -0.606            -0.246
                           (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.003)       (0.002)           (0.002)
   Observations           5822058     5822058      5822058       5822058           5822058
   Adjusted R2              0.234       0.317        0.448         0.385             0.440
   # of Items             2038040     2038040      2038040       2038040           2038040
   Controls                   X           X            X             X                 X
   Week FE                                X            X             X                 X
   Item FE                                X            X             X                 X
   Week X Item FE                                      X             X                 X
  Note: This table reports regression coefficients from five separate regressions. An observation is a
  (rated) transaction item. Outcomes are transaction rating, and the probability that the order (didn't)
  received the (lowest) highest rating. The independent variable is the natural logarithm transformation,
  and should be interpreted as percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and delivery dummies,
  share of item of total order (in monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-of-the-week fixed
  effect. In addition, week, item, and interaction fixed effects are marked below. Standard errors are in
  parentheses and are clustered at the item-level.
  * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                  21
 Table 2: The Impact of Prices on Ratings Using Sharp Price Changes

                         (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)               (5)
                       Ratings       Ratings      Ratings     P("Great")       P(Not "Bad")
    Price (pct.)      -0.112        -0.122       -0.135        -0.074            -0.038
                       (0.040)       (0.038)      (0.051)       (0.032)          (0.016)

    Pickup             0.029        0.029        0.079          0.022              0.007
                       (0.010)      (0.009)      (0.014)        (0.008)            (0.003)

    Late              -0.853        -0.864       -0.751         -0.607            -0.246
                       (0.022)       (0.021)      (0.017)        (0.015)           (0.013)
    Observations        22512         25004        15460          22512             22512
    Adjusted R2         0.256         0.260        0.108          0.207             0.176
    # of Items          6953          7499         6096           6953               6953
Note: This table reports regression coefficients from five separate regressions. An observation is a (rated)
transaction item. Outcomes are transaction rating, and the probability that the order (didn't) received
the (lowest) highest rating. The independent variable is natural logarithm transformation, and should
be interpreted as percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and delivery dummies, share of
item of total order (in monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-of-the-week fixed effect.
Regressions also include an item X price change group fixed effects, where observations are grouped by
reviews received around price changes. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the item-
group level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                  22
 Table 3: The Impact of Prices on Ratings for First Time Users Only

                          (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)               (5)
                       Ratings       Ratings      Ratings     P("Great")       P(Not "Bad")
    Price (pct.)       -0.126       -0.128       -0.236         -0.077           -0.049
                       (0.051)       (0.049)      (0.086)       (0.043)          (0.021)

    Pickup             0.035        0.034        0.122           0.026             0.009
                       (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.021)         (0.012)           (0.004)

    Late              -0.862        -0.876       -0.674         -0.595            -0.267
                       (0.027)       (0.026)      (0.022)        (0.018)           (0.016)
    Observations        12472         14258        6477           12472             12472
    Adjusted R2         0.268         0.271        0.093          0.209             0.191
    # of Items          3771          4122         2742            3771              3771
Note: This table reports regression coefficients from five separate regressions. An observation is a (rated)
transaction item. The sample is restricted only to consumers ordering from the restaurant for the first
time. Outcomes are transaction rating, and the probability that the order (didn't) received the (lowest)
highest rating. The independent variable is natural logarithm transformation, and should be interpreted
as percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and delivery dummies, share of item of total order
(in monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-of-the-week fixed effect. Regressions also include
an item X price change group fixed effects, where observations are grouped by reviews received around
price changes. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the item-group level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                  23
A                               Appendix Figures and Tables

Figure A1: Visual Representation of Restaurants' Price Changing Patterns
             .3




                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                     .2         .15
                                                                                                      .3
Fraction of Price Changes




                                                                              Fraction of Price Changes




                                                                                                                                                         Fraction of Price Changes
                    .2




                                                                                          .2




                                                                                                                                                                     .1
  .1




                                                                                                                                                      .05
                                                                                            .1
             0




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                    01jan2015      01jan2016          01jan2017   01jan2018                01jan2016       01jan2017          01jan2018   01jan2019                                   01jul2017   01oct2017    01jan2018   01apr2018   01jul2018
                                               Date                                                                    Date                                                                                   Date



                            Note: This figure presents the temporal pattern in weekly price changes within restaurant for the three
                            restaurants with the most price changes in the sample.




                                                                                                                       24
    Figure A2: Variation in Item-Level Prices Across Delivery Partners
         Price




                                                 Date

                                        Partner A       Partner B


Note: This figure presents the price of one menu item across two delivery partners, marked in A and B.




                                                 25
                 Figure A3: Examples of Item-Level Price Variation Over Time
        4.5




                                                                          4
        4.4




                                                                          3.8
        4.3




                                                                          3.6
                                                                  Price
Price
        4.2




                                                                          3.4
        4.1




                                                                          3.2
        4




                                                                          3
                                 Date                                                      Date



                                              (a) "Good" price variation
        20




                                                                          14
                                                                          13
        18




                                                                          12
Price




                                                                  Price
 16




                                                                          11
        14




                                                                          10
        12




                                                                          9




                                 Date                                                      Date



                                        (b) "Good" price variation with noise
        14




                                                                          14
        12




                                                                          12
Price




                                                                  Price
 10




                                                                          10
        8




                                                                          8
        6




                                 Date                                                      Date



                                               (c) "Bad" price variation


              Note: This figure presents the temporal pattern in weekly price changes for six different items.




                                                            26
      Table A1: The Correlation Between Dollar-Rating and Star-Rating

                     (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
                 Star Rating      Star Rating      Star Rating      Star Rating      Star Rating      Star Rating
$$                  -0.025           -0.025              0.014          0.085            -0.035           0.021
                    (0.013)          (0.013)            (0.012)        (0.063)          (0.023)          (0.029)
$$$                0.078            0.078            0.112            0.228             0.064            0.125
                   (0.020)          (0.020)          (0.019)          (0.065)           (0.033)          (0.035)
$$$$               0.139            0.139            0.173             0.230             0.110           0.147
                   (0.042)          (0.042)          (0.043)           (0.092)          (0.081)          (0.086)
Observations        31663            31663            34218            35162            35133            35162
Controls             Zip           Zip X Cat       Zip X Type           City         City X Cat       City X Type
Clusters          Zip X Cat        Zip X Cat        Zip X Cat       City X Cat       City X Cat       City X Cat
 Note: This table reports regression coefficients from six separate regressions. An observation is a restau-
 rant's Star Rating. The sample includes all restaurants in New York city, Los Angeles, and Houston on
 January 2019. Outcome is the Yelp Star Rating and the independent variable is the Yelp Dollar-Rating.
 Location and food category fixed effected are marked below each column. Standard errors are in paren-
 theses and are clustered by category interacted with city or zip-code, as indicated below each column.
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                   27
   Table A2: Robustness of Main Results - Alternative Specifications

                       Linear Specifications                     Non-Linear Specifications
                     (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)              (6)
                  Ratings      Ratings       Ratings     Ratings      P("Great")      P(Not "Bad")
Price (pct.)      -0.158       -0.044       -0.154       -1.000         -0.588          -1.922
                  (0.069)      (0.023)       (0.046)     (0.461)        (0.325)         (0.884)

Pickup             0.019       0.026                     0.174          0.174             0.468
                  (0.015)      (0.006)                   (0.065)        (0.065)           (0.205)

Late             -0.810       -0.856                     -3.035         -3.035            -3.728
                  (0.034)      (0.015)                    (0.111)        (0.111)           (0.226)
Observations       9333         46941        22513         22512          22512             22513
Adjusted R2        0.261        0.254        0.058         0.447          0.183             0.474
# of Items         3338         22246         6953          6953           6953              6953
Window               5            15           10            10             10                10
Note: This table reports regression coefficients from six separate regressions. An observation is a (rated)
transaction item. The sample only includes reviews given within a narrow window of days around the price
change, as indicated below each column. Column (4) is an ordered logit specification, and columns (5) and
(6) use logistic regression. Outcomes are transaction rating, and the probability that the order (didn't)
received the (lowest) highest rating. The independent variable is natural logarithm transformation, and
should be interpreted as percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and delivery dummies, share
of item of total order (in monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-of-the-week fixed effect.
Regressions also include an item X price change group fixed effects, where observations are grouped by
reviews received around price changes. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the item-
group level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                  28
         Table A3: Robustness of Main Results - Level of Clustering

                        (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)
                      Ratings     Ratings     Ratings      Ratings     Ratings      Ratings     Ratings
Price (pct.)          -0.112      -0.112      -0.112       -0.112       -0.048     -0.048       -0.048
                      (0.046)     (0.049)     (0.051)      (0.049)      (0.026)     (0.013)     (0.026)
Pickup                0.029       0.029       0.029        0.029       0.025        0.025       0.025
                      (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.004)      (0.002)     (0.004)
Late                 -0.853       -0.853      -0.853      -0.853       -0.852      -0.852      -0.852
                      (0.021)      (0.023)     (0.025)     (0.023)      (0.008)     (0.004)     (0.008)
Observations           22512       22512        22512       22512      5822058     5822058      5822058
Adjusted R2            0.256       0.256        0.256       0.256       0.448       0.448        0.448
Week FE                                                                   X           X            X
Item FE                                                                   X           X            X
Week X Item FE                                                            X           X            X
Cluster Var.           Item        Order      Business       User       Order      Business       User

Note: This table reports regression coefficients from eight separate regressions. An observation is a
(rated) transaction item. Outcome is transaction rating. The independent variable is natural logarithm
transformation, and should be interpreted as percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and
delivery dummies, share of item of total order (in monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-
of-the-week fixed effect. Columns (1)-(4) also include an item X price change group fixed effects, where
observations are grouped by reviews received around price changes. Columns (5)-(8) include week, item,
and interaction fixed effects. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the level indicated
below each column.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                 29
Table A4: Robustness of Main Results - Including only Largest Item in Order

                                   (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)
                                Ratings       Ratings      Ratings       Ratings      Ratings
        Price (pct.)            -0.151        -0.176        -0.099      -0.088       -0.079
                                (0.066)       (0.071)      (0.096)       (0.009)      (0.027)

        Pickup                   0.023        0.033        0.119        0.030         0.032
                                 (0.014)      (0.015)      (0.022)      (0.001)       (0.002)

        Late                    -0.817       -0.842       -0.864        -0.873       -0.855
                                 (0.029)      (0.034)      (0.046)       (0.002)      (0.005)
        Observations              11434        9562         5303        2630264      2630264
        Adjusted R2               0.247        0.244        0.118         0.328        0.477
        # of Items                3243         3072         2230        1154752      1154752
        Week FE                                                             X            X
        Item FE                                                             X            X
        Week X Item FE                                                                   X
  Note: This table reports regression coefficients from five separate regressions. An observation is a (rated)
  transaction item. The sample only includes the most expensive item in each transaction. Outcomes
  are transaction rating. The independent variable is natural logarithm transformation, and should be
  interpreted as percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and delivery dummies, share of item of
  total order (in monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-of-the-week fixed effect. Columns
  (1)-(3) also include an item X price change group fixed effects, where observations are grouped by reviews
  received around price changes. In Columns (4)-(5), week, item, and interaction fixed effects are marked
  below. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the item-group level.
  * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                    30
Table A5: Robustness of Fixed Effect Regressions - Buyer Fixed Effects

                                        (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
                                      Ratings     Ratings       Ratings      Ratings
             Price (pct.)            -0.038       -0.018       -0.031         -0.002
                                      (0.005)     (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.005)

             Pickup                  0.013        0.011          0.002        0.001
                                     (0.001)      (0.003)       (0.002)      (0.009)

             Late                    -0.756       -0.726       -0.695       -0.688
                                      (0.002)      (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.014)
             Observations            5822058      5822058      5822058      5822058
             Adjusted R2               0.627        1.379        0.673        1.003
             # of Items              2038040      2038040      2038040      2038040
             Item FE                     X            X            X            X
             Week FE                     X            X            X            X
             User FE                     X            X            X            X
             Week X Item FE                           X                         X
             User X Item FE                                        X            X
Note: This table reports regression coefficients from four separate regressions. An observation is a (rated)
transaction item. Outcome is transaction rating. The independent variable is the natural logarithm
transformation, and should be interpreted as percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and
delivery dummies, share of item of total order (in monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-
of-the-week fixed effect. In addition, week, item, buyer, and interaction fixed effects are marked below.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the item-level.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                  31
               Table A6: The Impact of Prices on Users Harshness
                            Impact on Reviwer Harshness                    Controlling for Review Harshness
                    (1)              (2)                   (3)                 (4)        (5)          (6)
               Avg. Ratings    Avg. P("Great")      Avg. P(Not "Bad")       Ratings    Ratings      Ratings
Price (pct.)      -0.028            0.006                -0.032             -0.128     -0.146       -0.116
                 (0.050)           (0.035)               (0.017)            (0.059)    (0.057)      (0.062)

Pickup            0.042             0.023                 0.012              0.009      0.010        0.019
                  (0.012)           (0.008)               (0.004)           (0.012)    (0.011)      (0.013)

Late             -0.324             -0.221                -0.099           -0.700      -0.671       -0.773
                  (0.024)            (0.015)               (0.010)          (0.027)     (0.027)      (0.027)
Observations       15300              15300                 15300            15300       15300        15300
Adjusted R2        0.114              0.126                 0.093            0.384       0.438        0.291

Note: This table reports regression coefficients from six separate regressions. An observation is a (rated)
transaction item. The sample only includes users who left reviews around price changes. Outcomes in
columns 1-3 are the average rating behavior of user across all orders (not just around price changes),
excluding the current transaction. Outcome in columns 4-6 are the item rating and described further
in the text. The independent variable is natural logarithm transformation, and should be interpreted as
percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and delivery dummies, share of item of total order
(in monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-of-the-week fixed effect. Columns 4-6 also
control for raters' harsheness, as described in the main text. Regressions also include an item X price
change group fixed effects, where observations are grouped by reviews received around the price change.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the user level and item-group level in columns
1-3 and 4-6, respectively.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                  32
Table A7: The Impact of Prices on Ratings Using Only Multiple Price
Changes

                                        (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
                                     Ratings      Ratings       Ratings      Ratings
                 Price (pct.)        -0.246       -0.281       -0.635       -0.217
                                     (0.125)      (0.119)       (0.239)      (0.075)

                 Pickup               0.008        0.017         0.002       -0.008
                                     (0.025)      (0.023)       (0.036)     (0.015)

                 Late               -0.858       -0.941        -0.822       -0.912
                                     (0.060)      (0.054)       (0.092)      (0.037)
                 Observations         3126         3748          1214         8319
                 Adjusted R2          0.240        0.256         0.246        0.228
                 # of Items           1047         1021           296         2323
                 Cutoff                 5            10            20           10
  Note: This table reports regression coefficients from four separate regressions. An observation is a (rated)
  transaction item. The sample only includes reviews given around multiple price changes within restaurant,
  the minimal numbers of weekly price changes are indicated below each column. Outcome is transaction
  rating. The independent variable is natural logarithm transformation, and should be interpreted as
  percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and delivery dummies, share of item of total order (in
  monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-of-the-week fixed effect. Regressions also include
  an item X price change group fixed effects, where observations are grouped by reviews received around
  price changes. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at the item-group level.
  * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                    33
 Table A8: The Impact of Prices on Ratings Using Cross-partner Variation

                                           (1)           (2)              (3)
                                        Ratings     P("Great")       P(Not "Bad")
                     Price (pct.)       -0.075         -0.044           -0.031
                                        (0.038)       (0.028)          (0.016)

                     Pickup             0.067          0.050             0.017
                                        (0.013)        (0.010)           (0.004)

                     Late              -0.855         -0.673            -0.212
                                        (0.013)        (0.029)           (0.014)
                     Observations        14795          14795             14795
                     Adjusted R2         0.060          0.044             0.070
                     # of Items          4162            4162              4162
    Note: This table reports regression coefficients from six separate regressions. An observation is a (rated)
    transaction item. The sample only includes reviews given around price changes in which there is a lag
    between different partners. Outcomes are transaction rating, and the probability that the order (didn't)
    received the (lowest) highest rating. The independent variable is natural logarithm transformation, and
    should be interpreted as percentage changes. All regressions include pickup and delivery dummies, share
    of item of total order (in monetary terms), whether delivery was late, and day-of-the-week fixed effect.
    Regressions also include an item X price change group fixed effects, where observations are grouped by
    reviews received around the lagged price change. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered at
    the item-group level.
    * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




B        Data and Data Cleaning
Data for motivating evidence This dataset includes a snapshot of Yelp Star Ratings for
all restaurants in Los Angeles, New York, and Houston, as of January 2019. While the Yelp
Star Ratings presented to users are rounded to the nearest half star, I use the underlying,
continuous, rating. Data includes restaurant city, zip-code, and food category. There are
over 244 unique food categories in the data, and some, such as Japanese food and sushi, are
clearly not mutually exclusive and are likely to be decent substitutes. In order to control
for those similarities, in an additional specification we aggregate food categories to 10 main
categories.17
     Data for main analysis We use YTP data on food orders from 2013 through January
2019. We restrict our attention to orders conducted in the US. We exclude orders that were

  17
     The ten categories are: Asian, pizza, Mexican & Latin, European, Arab-Indian, meat & seafood,
American, coffee & pastry, sandwiches, and other.



                                                      34
not completed or canceled by the user, as well as orders from businesses that were marked
as fake or fraudulent. Price data excludes taxes or delivery fees. We do not include tips,
discounted items, or orders in which a coupon was applied. We also exclude items where the
description suggests item modification or additional fees.
     To identify price changes, we develop a simple algorithm for data cleaning and sample
selection. First, we exclude items for which we have less than ten observations or have no
price variation. Second, we omit prices that appear five or less times in our data. This step
helps clean out noise in the data. Third, we define the price-time-period as the interquartile
range (date-wise) plus half the interquartile range, i.e. if we observe an item-price with 25%
of observations prior to February 10 until and 25% following February 20, then we define
the price-time-period as February 5 to 25 (10-(20-10)/2, 20+(20-10)/2). We then exclude all
price points that fall outside the price-time-period. This step pins down the period in which
the price was prevalent. Fourth, we allow for transition periods (lags) in which there are two
prevailing prices, but: (1) only allow for overlap for up to 10 days, (2) one price (usually
the lower one) must prevail in the period prior to the overlap and the other price prevail in
the period following the overlap, and (3) most price observations for both price points occur
outside of the overlap. In cases where two or more prices prevail, we omit all prices from the
analysis.
     As a robustness test, we alter the last step to exclude only the higher price of the two.
The rationale behind this slightly more lenient definition is that item modification usually
results in a price increase, and thus the lower price is more likely to be the baseline price.
Finally, we test an alternative sample selection algorithm in which we completely abandon
the assumptions above: We do not mark any observations as "noise" and instead drop all
items with more than two price, we then drop all items where there is any overlap, even in
transition, between the two prices. This specification is far more restrictive, as it does not
allow for price variation outside of the coded price change.
     Finally, to construct users' harshness measure We include only reviews left on YTP,
rather than the standard Yelp platform. Note that while we only look at this measure for
users who left a review within a narrow window around price changes, in constructing users'
historical harshness we use the entire schedule of their ratings, both before and after the
current review. In addition, we restrict attention only to users who have left a total of five or
more reviews. Finally, we also construct measures of average propensity to leave a "Great"
review and a not leaving a "Bad" review.




                                               35
C     Additional Robustness Tests and Specifications
This appendix discusses the robustness checks conducted for the main results. All relevant
figures and tables are in Appendix A.
     Table A1 presents the formal analysis of the motivating evidence. We regress Yelp Star
Ratings on the Dollar Sign Ratings. Coefficients should be interpreted as the impact of the
relevant Dollar Rating on Star Rating compared to one-dollar rating (the omitted category).
For instance, in Column (1), two-dollar is correlated with a decrease of -0.025 stars and
this effect is only marginally statistically significant. three- and four-dollars are correlated
with increases of 0.078 and 0.139 stars above the one-dollar rating, respectively. Back of
the envelope calculation suggests that those imply increases of about 2.2% and 3.5% for the
median business.
     The different columns control for different combinations of geographic location (city or
zip codes), and food categories, as described in Appendix B. The qualitative results are
robust across columns: Two-dollar restaurants are generally not higher ranked compared to
one-dollar restaurants. In fact, the impact of additional dollar sign seems, if anything, to
have a weak negative effect (Columns (1), (2) and (5)).
     Moving to a three- or four-dollar restaurant has a more positive effect on ratings, with
four-dollar restaurants rated marginally better than three-dollar ones. Note, however that
only 1% of all restaurants receive a four-dollar rating, and hence these two levels are aggre-
gated in Figure 2. The average magnitude across columns is approximately 0.14, which is
about 3.5% of the median Star Rating.
     Figure A3 presents the motivation for the cleaning algorithm. Panel A presents items
with "good" price variation; in each period there is only one prevailing price and a clear-cut
transition. This is the ideal data for our purposes. Unfortunately, much of the data we have
looks more like Panel B: It is clear that there are some dominant prices in each period and
price changes are sharp and clear. We can, however, see that there are additional prices in
each period, adding noise to the data. These additional price points appear sporadically, and
are, for the most part, above the dominant price. For these items, we discard observations
at non-dominant prices. Finally, Panel C presents price variation which doesn't have clear
price changes. We discard all of these items.
     Table A2 presents the robustness tests for the main results. In Columns (1) and (2) we
change the size of the window around price changes. Recall that in the main results presented
in Table 2, we include observation within 10 days of the price changes. In contrast, Columns
(1) and (2) include feedback received for orders which took place 5 and 15 days from the
price change, respectively. As we can see in Column (1) when narrowing the window to 5


                                              36
days the estimated effect of log price is -0.158, slightly larger in magnitude than the main
specification. In Column (2), we broaden the window to 15 days. the estimate effect is
attenuated, -0.044, and is marginally statistically significant (P-value is 0.056). This result
is consistent with the motivating evidence present in the text; without controlling sufficient
control for time-varying item-level changes, the estimated relation between prices and ratings
becomes null.
     In Column (3) we exclude the transaction-level control, Xjt in Equation 2. We are
particularly interested in excluding the indicator for whether an order arrived late. The
reason is that this indicator is based on consumer feedback and it could be the case that
consumer reporting is, at least partially, affected by other factors (such as the rating they
intend to give or even price), which would bias our results. Luckily, the estimated coefficient
is actually larger than the main specification and is significant at 1%. Note, however, that
the adjusted R2 is substantially reduced when excluding these controls, as expected.
     Columns (4)-(6) are equivalent to Columns (1) and (4)-(5) in the Table 2, with non-
linear specifications. In particular, ratings for orders are given on an ordinal scale: "Bad",
"Good", and "Great", which we code as 1, 2, and 3, respectively. However, it is not clear
that "Good" is worth twice as much as "Bad" and two-thirds of "Great". Columns (4)-(6)
address this issue by using non-linear specifications. We run an ordered logit regression in
Column (4) and conditional logit regressions in Columns (4)-(5). The impact of price on
ratings remain qualitatively similar and statistically significant.
     In our data, prices are assigned at the item-level and ratings at the order-level. As a
robustness check, we explore an analysis that is conducted at the item level. Specifically, we
conduct a sensitivity test in which we restrict our attention to the largest (most expensive)
item in each order. For example, if an order includes a pizza and garlic bread, we will be
including the pizza. Table A4 presents the results. Naturally, this exercise significantly
reduces the number of observations at our disposal: to be included in the analysis, we must
observe orders of the same item before and after the price change, within a narrow time
window; both transitions must be rated; and the item has to be the largest item in both
orders. Nevertheless, though the number of observations is significantly lower than the main
analysis, the main results remain statistically significant and largely the same magnitude for
both the fixed effect and the sharp change regressions.
     Table A3 presents the sensitivity of the main results to alternative levels of clustering
the standard errors. In particular, it tests the robustness of main results to clustering at the
item, order, business, and user-levels. Note the fixed effect regressions presented in Tables
1 and 2 were clustered at the item and item-price-change levels, respectively. In this table,
we show the results for the main specification in each research design: Column 3 in Table 1


                                              37
and Column (1) in Table 2. Additional analysis, which is not presented here for conciseness,
conducts the same exercises for the other specifications presented in those tables. Across the
board, we find that the results are robust to different levels of clustering."
     Table A5 controls for reviewers' identity. All four columns include controls, and week
and item fixed effects. We also add buyer fixed effects to all specifications. Columns (2)
and (4) include week X item fixed effects and Columns (3) and (4) include buyer X week
fixed effect. The results are all qualitatively consistent with our main results. The coefficient
in the last column is small and statistically insignificant, which is not surprising given how
restrictive the analysis is. In particular, since we include both Week X Item and User X
Item, the regression is equivalent to running a regression with Week X Item X Buyer. Thus,
the coefficient is only estimated off of cases in which we observe: the same buyer buying
the same item at the same restaurant at the same week, but at different price, and leaves a
review both times. Naturally, we rarely observe such cases; this happens less than 0.1




                                               38
