                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           BELIEF DISTORTIONS AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

                                      Francesco Bianchi
                                     Sydney C. Ludvigson
                                           Sai Ma

                                      Working Paper 27406
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27406


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                            June 2020, Revised October 2020




We thank Marios Angeletos and Fabrice Collard for providing data on their estimated cyclical
shocks, and Michael Boutros, Josue Cox, Justin Shugarman, and Yueteng Zhu for excellent
research assistance. We are grateful to Marios Angeletos, Rudi Bachmann, Fabrice Collard,
Andrew Foerster, Xavier Gabaix, David Her-shleifer, Cosmin Ilut, Anil Kashyp, Laura
Veldkamp, and to seminar participants at Chicago Booth, Duke, the Federal Reserve Board,
Richmond Fed, the July 2020 NBER Behavioral Macro workshop, the New Approaches for
Modeling Expectations in Economics Conference (London), 2019, the III Conference on Applied
Macro-Finance (Melbourne), 2019, 2020 Fed System Econometrics Meeting, King's Business
School, and the 2020 Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics Workshop on Asset Pricing,
Macro Finance, and Computation for many helpful comments. The views expressed are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Francesco Bianchi, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Belief Distortions and Macroeconomic Fluctuations
Francesco Bianchi, Sydney C. Ludvigson, and Sai Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 27406
June 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. E03,E17,E7

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper combines a data rich environment with a machine learning algorithm to provide new
estimates of time-varying systematic expectational errors ("belief distortions") embedded in
survey responses. We find that distortions are large on average even for professional forecasters,
with all respondent-types over-weighting their own belief relative to other information. Fore-casts
of inflation and GDP growth oscillate between optimism and pessimism by quantitatively large
margins, with over-optimism associated with an increase in aggregate economic activity. Biases
in expectations evolve dynamically in response to cyclical shocks. Biases about economic growth
display greater initial under-reaction while those about inflation display greater delayed over-
reaction.

Francesco Bianchi                                Sai Ma
Social Sciences Building, 201B                   Federal Reserve Board,
Department of Economics                          C Ave & 20th Street NW
Duke University                                  Washington, DC 20551
Box 90097                                        sai.ma@frb.gov
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and CEPR
and also NBER
francesco.bianchi@duke.edu

Sydney C. Ludvigson
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10002
and NBER
sydney.ludvigson@nyu.edu
1    Introduction
How important are belief distortions in economic decision making and what role do they play
in macroeconomic      uctuations? Large theoretical literatures have emerged to argue that sys-
tematic expectational errors embedded in beliefs can have important dynamic e¤ects on the
economy. Less is known about the empirical relation of any such distortions to macroeconomic
activity.
     To formalize our notion of "belief distortion,"let us de...ne it in general terms as an ex ante
expectational error generated by the systematic mis-weighting of available information demon-
strably pertinent to the accuracy of the belief. This de...nition nests those that consider errors
generated by merely omitting relevant information to include any instance where information is
suboptimally given too much or too little weight. In the theoretical macroeconomic literatures
where distorted beliefs play a role, economic agents make systematic expectational errors due
to a wide variety of reasons. These include the presence of information frictions driven by ratio-
nal or behavioral inattention, the use of simple extrapolative rules, the intentional adoption of
conservatively pessimistic beliefs, the over-reaction to incoming news, or the presence of skewed
priors, among others.
     In this study we are interested in three questions. First, how distorted are observed beliefs
about the macroeconomy? Second, are any such distortions related to macroeconomic activity?
Third, how do distortions vary with the business cycle? Answers to all three questions are
inextricably tied to the measurement of belief distortions.
     A fundamental challenge in this regard is that no objective measure of such distortions exists.
So far, empirical work has largely proceeded by investigating whether forecast errors made by
survey respondents deviate from the standard of full information and rational expectations.
Yet a review of the literature discussed below ...nds little agreement on how such a theoretical
standard should be measured. Existing studies di¤er according to the speci...c surveys that are
investigated, the segment of the population that is surveyed, the topic of the survey questions,
the time period to which the survey questions pertain, and the empirical methodology used
to identify systematic errors in expectations. Perhaps most important, given the wide-ranging
theoretical literatures cited above and the vast amount of information that could be considered
ex ante known and pertinent to economic decision making, it is not obvious what benchmark
model of beliefs should be applied to measure any distortion in survey responses.
     This paper proposes new measures of systematic expectational errors in survey responses and
relates them to macroeconomic activity. Our objective is to construct and study a comprehen-
sive, methodologically consistent, econometric measure of belief distortions in macroeconomic
expectations by looking across a range of surveys, a range of agent types, and a range of ques-
tions about future economic outcomes. Returning to our de...nition of belief distortions above,
it is clear that such a measurement requires four key ingredients.
     First, we require direct evidence on what economic decision-makers actually believe. For

                                                 1
this we obtain data from several di¤erent surveys, di¤erent survey questions, and broad cross-
sections of survey respondents with di¤erent beliefs. Second, we must cope with the theoretically
vast quantity of available information that is possibly pertinent to belief accuracy. For this,
we use tools for data rich environments along with machine learning to process hundreds of
pieces of information that would have been available to survey respondents in real time at daily,
quarterly, and monthly sampling intervals. Third, we must account for other bona ...de features
of real time decision making, such as the out-of-sample nature of foreword-looking judgements.
Failure to properly account for either the data rich environment in which survey respondents
operate or the out-of-sample nature of their forecasts can lead to erroneous conclusions about
belief distortions and their relation to the macroeconomy. Conversely, using information that
may have been un available to survey respondents to compute a standard of non-distorted beliefs
could be equally erroneous. To address these issues, we develop a dynamic machine learning
algorithm to detect demonstrable, ex ante expectational errors in real time. The fourth and ...nal
ingredient is the availability of observations on both survey responses and objective economic
information over a su¢ ciently long time span. This is required to reduce sampling noise, as
is necessary to distinguish bad luck in a random environment from a systematic mis-weighting
of information, as well as to statistically infer the relation of any belief distortions to dynamic
macroeconomic      uctuations.
    With these ingredients in hand, we ask whether cross-sections of survey respondents with
di¤erent beliefs systematically mis-weight pertinent economic information. If the machine de-
tects a sustained pattern of demonstrable, ex ante errors in survey respondents'forecasts, the
magnitude of these distortions should be evident from the relative (machine versus respondent-
type) forecast errors once averaged over a sample su¢ ciently long so as to eliminate di¤erences
in ex post predictive outcomes attributable to pure randomness.
    Machine learning is itself a model of belief formation. We argue that it provides an appro-
priate benchmark for quantifying biases in survey responses, for at least two reasons. First,
optimized approaches to real world decision and prediction problems almost always require the
e¢ cient processing of large amounts of information. This clearly applies to professional fore-
casters who are presumably among the most informed agents in the economy, but also to other
agent-types, including investors, ...rms, governments, and even households. Machine algorithms
are advantageous in this regard because they are explicitly designed to cope with large amounts
of information. This is important because a benchmark based on a small amount of arbitrarily
chosen information could fail to reveal systematic expectational errors or, conversely, lead to
spurious evidence of systematic error. Second, the machine can easily be coded to adapt to
new information as it becomes available and to make out-of-sample forecasts on this basis.
Thus the approach does not run the risk of spuriously indicating that respondent performance
is suboptimal merely because of the existence of structural breaks and/or the arrival of new
information that even an e¢ cient information processing algorithm could have learned about


                                                2
only slowly over time.
     Inherent in our machine-based approach is the idea that minding key features of real world
expectation formation is essential when establishing a benchmark against which belief distor-
tions are measured. Whether doing so matters in practice, however, is an empirical question.
On this question, we can report at least three ways in which our results di¤er from some in
the extant literature. First, in contrast to well known results from in-sample regressions, we
...nd little evidence that lagged ex ante revisions in survey forecasts have predictive power for
average survey forecast errors. Second, information found elsewhere to be consequential for
out-of-sample prediction in a low-dimensional setting is often found to be unimportant in our
high-dimensional, data rich setting. Third, measures of belief distortions created by comparing
ex ante survey expectations with ex post historical outcome data overstate the magnitude of
distortion.
     Our main economic ...ndings may be summarized as follows. First, across a range of surveys,
variables, and respondent-types with heterogeneous beliefs, the machine model produces lower
mean squared forecast errors over an extended evaluation sample, sometimes by large margins.
A key ...nding is that survey respondents of all types place too much weight on their own forecast
relative to other objective economic information, and are in that sense overcon...dent.
     Second, survey expectations of in   ation for the median respondent of all surveys are biased
upward on average, a direction we shall refer to as "pessimistic." By contrast, survey expec-
tations of economic growth professional forecasters and corporate executives are "optimistic"
on average­   i.e., biased upward, while they are very slightly pessimistic for households. Profes-
sional forecasters are especially optimistic about economic growth from 2010-2018, when the
median professional forecast of economic growth was biased upward by an amount equal to 37%
of actual GDP growth during this period. These averages mask large variation over time and
across respondent-types.
     Third, an increase in pessimism about in      ation has the   avor of a cost-push shock and is
associated with an increase in the real wage and a decrease in real investment, real GDP, and
the price level. By contrast, an increase in optimism about economic growth has the opposite
e¤ect and leads to a sizable and more protracted in crease in real activity, the price level, and
also the stock market. Importantly, these results are speci...c to innovations in the systematic
expectational errors survey respondents make, and not to their expectations per se. Indeed,
positive innovations to an index of GDP growth expectations have very di¤erent e¤ects and are
not associated with a boom in economic activity or the stock market.
     Fourth, survey respondents initially under-react to cyclical shocks but later over-react, a
pattern consistent with that documented in Angeletos, Huo, and Sastry (2020) (AHS). The
magnitudes of under- and over-reaction are, however, smaller than that reported in AHS. We
...nd that under -reaction preponderates in expectations of economic growth, while the more
predominant bias in in      ation expectations is delayed over -reaction.


                                                3
    Fifth, although our machine learning algorithm indicates that sparsity is often optimal even
in the presence of a high degree of information processing capacity, the precise information
utilized changes from period to period. This result underscores the importance of using a
dynamic, large-scale information processing algorithm to achieve the optimal forecast, even if
much of the information is associated with a coe¢ cient that is shrunk all the way to zero most
of the time.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related literature. Section
3 describes our econometric and machine learning framework. Section 4 describes results per-
taining to our estimates of belief distortions, while Section 5 contains results on their relation
to macroeconomic activity. Section 6 concludes. A large amount of additional material on our
data construction, estimation procedures, and additional robustness checks have been placed
in an Appendix for online publication.

2   Related Literature
Our estimates provide a benchmark to evaluate theories for which information capacity con-
straints, extrapolation, sentiments, ambiguity aversion, and other departures from full informa-
tion, rational expectations play a role in business cycles.
    In these theoretical literatures, economic agents make systematic expectational errors for a
variety of reasons. These reasons include the presence of information frictions that lead agents
to act in a "boundedly rational" manner because they are incapable of attending to all the
available information at a given moment (e.g., Mankiw and Reis (2002); Woodford (2002);
Sims (2003); Reis (2006a, 2006b); Gabaix (2014)). Alternatively agents may be inattentive for
broader behavioral reasons (e.g., Gabaix (2020)). A key implication of these theories, explored
in well known work by Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), is that individuals under-react to
objective economic information.
    Other theories postulate that individuals use simple extrapolative rules or over-weight "rep-
resentative"events in reacting to incoming news (e.g., De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Wald-
mann (1990); Barberis, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998); Barberis, Greenwood, Jin, and Shleifer
(2015); Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2018); Gennaioli and Shleifer (2018); Bordalo, Gen-
naioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2018)). Related theories propose that individuals overweight their
personal experiences (e.g., Malmendier and Nagel (2011, 2015)). A key implication of some of
these theories is that individuals over-react to objective information.
    A literature on "sentiments" postulates that communication frictions can cause aggregate
expectations to exhibit statistical biases (e.g., Angeletos and La'O (2013); Angeletos, Collard,
and Dellas (2018b); Milani (2011, 2017)). Other models feature "con...dence shocks," or am-
biguity averse agents who are deliberately pessimistic on average (e.g., Hansen and Sargent
(2008); Epstein and Schneider (2010); Ilut and Schneider (2015); Bianchi, Ilut, and Schneider
(2017); Ilut and Saijo (2020); Bhandari, Borovicka, and Ho (2019)), or agents with skewed pri-


                                                4
ors (Afrouzi and Veldkamp (2019)). There remains a question of whether ambiguity aversion
or skewed priors would be revealed in survey responses. If not, such models need some other
mechanism to explain the systematic expectational errors documented here and elsewhere.
     Finally a theoretical literature in economic psychology studies how basic properties of cog-
nition can give rise to human biases in expectation formation (e.g., Woodford (2013); Khaw,
Stevens, and Woodford (2017)).
     Any of the above theories provide a mechanism through which a relatively unbiased and
potentially more information-e¢ cient machine operating in a data rich environment would
provide forecasts that deviate from those made by humans and possibly be more accurate. The
objective of this study is to provide new measures of such deviations and to investigate their
relation to macroeconomic       uctuations.
     On the empirical side, our work follows a growing body of literature that reports evidence
of belief distortions and relates them to economic activity. These papers include those that
...nd evidence of departures from rational expectations in predicting in    ation and other macro
variables (Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2012, 2015); Fuhrer (2017)), the aggregate stock market
(Bacchetta, Mertens, and van Wincoop (2009); Amromin and Sharpe (2014), Greenwood and
Shleifer (2014); Adam, Marcet, and Buetel (2017)), the cross section of stock returns (Bor-
dalo, Gennaioli; La Porta and Shleifer (2017)), credit spreads (Greenwood and Hanson (2013);
Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2018)), and corporate earnings (DeBondt and Thaler (1990);
Ben-David et. al. (2013); Gennaioli, Ma, and Shleifer (2016); Bouchaud, Kruger, Landier, and
Thesmar (2017)). Although these studies di¤er widely according to their empirical design, none
take into account the data rich context in which survey respondents operate or the dynamic,
out-of-sample nature of their forecasts, gaps our study is designed to ...ll.
     These very di¤erences lead our ...ndings to diverge in notable ways from some in the extant
literature. For example, following Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), we ask whether ex ante
revisions in the average forecast reduce average ex post forecast errors, as would be indicative
of models that imply under-reaction to economic news. Using the methodology proposed in
this paper, we ...nd no evidence that they do. Instead, the coe¢ cients on forecast revisions are
shrunk to zero by the dynamic machine algorithm in favor of placing greater absolute weight
on other pieces of information. Even if no information beyond the forecast revision itself is
included, the forecast revision ceases to be a useful predictor of forecast errors in a dynamic
context when predictions are simply made out-of-sample rather than in-sample. These ...ndings
do not, of course, necessarily imply an absense of under-reaction. But we argue that they
underscore the challenges with relying on low-dimensional, in-sample regressions as means of
establishing evidence on either under- or over-reaction in macroeconomic expectations.
     The literature discussed so far has little to say about overcon...dence. Yet our ...nding that
survey respondents of all types systematically place too much weight on their own forecasts
relative to other information is one of the most robust patterns we uncover. In this regard, our


                                                5
...ndings recall an extensive ...nance literature that provides theory and evidence of overcon...-
dence and its role in explaining a range of stylized facts about stock return predictability and
trading patterns. Ground breaking contributions include Odean (1998), Daniel, Hirshleifer, and
Subrahmanyam (1998), Barber and Odean (2000) and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam
(2001). Daniel and Hirshleifer (2015) provide an overview of this literature. Daniel and Hir-
shleifer (2015) de...ne overcon...dence in the context of ...nancial markets as "having mistaken
valuations and believing in them too strongly." In our context, overcon...dence means that the
respondent-type believes too strongly in whatever private information or prior is embedded her
survey response. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ...rst to ...nd pervasive evidence
of overcon...dence in macro economic expectations that is related to macroeconomic outcomes.
     Our work also connects with a pre-existing econometric forecasting literature. Like any
econometric model, the machine learning algorithm we develop is incapable of perfect foresight.
Accordingly, it occasionally produces large forecast errors that are only evident ex post, some of
which occur at economic turning points. We view this as an important result that underscores
the role of largely unforeseen events in generating large prediction error, not all of which can
be attributed to a systematic bias in expectations. At the same time, the machine algorithm
proposed here produces notable information-processing e¢ ciency gains relative to best-...tting
econometric speci...cations studied in an extensive pre-existing econometric forecasting litera-
ture. For example, a prior forecasting literature ...nds that survey forecasts of in       ation are
extremely di¢ cult if not impossible to beat with statistical models in out-of-sample forecast-
ing (e.g., Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007), Del Negro and Eusepi (2011), Andersen, Bollerslev,
Christo¤ersen, and Diebold (2011), Genre, Kenny, Meyler, and Timmermann (2013), and Faust
and Wright (2013)). By contrast, our machine learning algorithm, with its focus on detecting
demonstrable ex ante errors, performs better in out-of-sample forecasting than every percentile
of all of the survey forecast distributions that we study.
     Finally, we are aware of relatively little work that has used machine learning as a benchmark
against which belief distortions are measured. An important exception is Martin and Nagel
(2019) who use it to study models of expected stock returns in the cross-section. Although their
context is very di¤erent from ours, they ...nd, as we do, that accounting for the interplay between
a data rich environment and dynamic, out-of-sample forecasting generates ...ndings about belief
distortions that di¤er considerably from prior frameworks that side-step these aspects of real
world decision making.

3     Econometric and Machine Learning Framework
This section describes our econometric and machine learning framework. The analysis we
undertake requires a su¢ ciently long time series of observations, including those on survey
responses. Since the panel elements of our survey data are too limited to do the analysis
on a respondent-level basis, we instead consider respondents of a particular type, de...ned to


                                                 6
be those in speci...c percentiles of the survey forecast distribution. A maintained assumption
is that survey respondents know their own "type," so that they have a sense of where in
the time t forecast distribution their response is located. We argue that this assumption is
likely to be a reasonable ...rst-order approximation, since respondents can observe past forecast
distributions including those from the most recent quarter. Moreover, given the practice of many
professional forecasters to continuously communicate updates of their forecasts with clients and
the press, these respondents are likely to have very good information about their location in
the distribution even contemporaneously.
    Let yj;t+h generically denote an economic time series indexed by j whose value in period
                                                                   (i)
h     1 a survey forecaster is asked to predict at time t. Let Ft generically denote a survey
forecast made at time t and let superscript (i) denote the i th respondent-type, where i denotes
either the mean belief, in which case "i = "   , or the respondent located at the ith percentile of
the survey forecast distribution, i.e., "i = 65"refers to the belief of the respondent at the 65th
                    (65)
percentile. Thus Ft [yj;t+h ] denotes the survey expectation of yj;t+h that is formed at time t
by the respondent at the 65th percentile of the survey distribution.
    In order to identify possible distortions in beliefs, it is imperative that the benchmark
model of belief formation be as rich as possible, so that our measure of distortion does not
miss pertinent information or pertain only to a small number of arbitrarily chosen information
variables.
    To address this problem we take a two-pronged approach that combines di¤usion index
estimation with machine learning. The di¤usion index estimation component is a preliminary
dimension-reduction step wherein a relatively small number of dynamic factors are estimated
from hundreds of economic time-series. Nonlinearities are readily captured in this step by
including polynomial functions of estimated dynamic factors, or by forming additional factors
from polynomials of the raw data. The second step in our analysis is to use estimated factors as
part of a dynamic machine algorithm of regularized estimation that optimally trade o¤ down-
weighting information against reduced parameter estimation error. Di¤usion index forecasting
is increasingly used in data rich environments, so we cover this step in the Online Appendix
and focus below on the machine learning algorithm.

3.1    Machine E¢ cient Benchmark
Let xC       C            C 0
      t = (x1t ; : : : ; xN t ) generically denote a dataset of economic information in some category
C that is available for real-time analysis. We assume that xC             it has an approximate factor
                                                                C
structure as detailed in the Online Appendix, where Gt is an rG 1 vector of latent common
factors ("di¤usion indexes"        ) with C i a corresponding rC     1 vector of latent factor loadings.
    Collect all factors from di¤erent datasets of category C , as well as nonlinear components
(polynomials of factors and factors formed from polynomials of raw data) into a single rG
dimensional vector Gt . Let G        ^ t denote consistent estimates of a rotation of Gt and let the rW


                                                   7
dimensional vector Wt contain additional non-factor information that will be speci...ed below.
                                    0
Finally, let Zjt         ^ 0t ; Wjt
                  yj;t ; G       0
                                      be a r = 1 + rG + rW vector which collects the data at time t
                                                                                   0
and let Zjt     yj;t ; :::; yj;t        ^0        ^0       0          0
                                                                be a vector of contemporaneous
                                   py ; Gt ; :::; Gt pG ; Wjt ; :::; Wjt pW
                                                                                        ^ 0t , Wjt
and lagged values of Zjt , where py ; pG ; pW denote the total number of lags of yj;t ; G       0
                                                                                                   ,
respectively. Even with the use of factors, Zjt can be of high dimension.
   With these data in hand, consider the following machine learning benchmark forecasting
model for outcome variable yj;t+h and survey respondent-type i:
                                     (i)        (i) (i)               (i)0
                    yj;t+h =         j     +    j F Ft    [yj;t+h ] + Bj Z Zjt +   jt+h ;   h   1   (1)
        (i)
where Bj Z is a K 1 vector of coe¢ cients, with K = r + py + pG rG + pW rW the number of
                                          (i)       (i)
right-hand-side variables other than Ft , and j is an intercept term. Given the potentially
large number of information variables that might be relevant for the outcome yj at t + h,
equation (1) is estimated using machine learning tools, as discussed below.
    Estimation of the speci...cation in (1) delivers a time t machine learning belief about yj;t+h ,
           ( i)
denoted Et [yj;t+h ]. We de...ne the machine e¢ cient benchmark as a set of parameter re-
strictions that would imply the survey forecaster in the ith percentile processes all available
information at time t as e¢ ciently as the machine. This benchmark corresponds to the following
parameter restrictions:              ( i)       (i)       (i)
                                     j F = 1; Bj Z = 0; j = 0:                                  (2)
Systematic expectational errors in the survey forecast are revealed by deviations from the above
                                                                                            (i)
benchmark, generated by a mis-weighting of information contained in Zjt or "1"(i.e., Bj Z 6= 0
     (i)                                                        (i)              (i)
or j 6= 0) and/or the survey respondent'     s own forecast, Ft [yj;t+h ] (i.e., j F 6= 1). When
              (i)                                                                  (i)
estimates of j F di¤er from unity, the benchmark implies that the forecast Ft [yj;t+h ] could
have been improved by giving it more or less weight relative to other objective information.
    We compute a dynamic measure of a survey respondent-type'       s belief distortion by taking
the di¤erence between the survey forecast and the machine forecast, a time t quantity we call
the "bias"for brevity. Denote the bias of forecaster i at time t as
                                               ( i)       (i)                (i)
                                           biasj;t    Ft [yj;t+h ]      Et [yj;t+h ] :              (3)
                                                                                                    (i)
    Several points about the resulting measure of belief distortion bear emphasis. First, biasj;t
captures ex ante expectational errors, not ex post forecast errors, or "mistakes."In particular,
bias in expectations is measured relative to the machine forecast, not relative to the ex post
outcome. One implication of this is that it is possible that every respondent-type is biased
vis-a-vis the machine ex ante, even though there will always be some respondent-type that is
"right" ex post.
    Second, the machine benchmark of belief formation is a type-speci...c benchmark that adopts
the perspective of a forecaster-type who is in the ith percentile of the survey forecast distrib-
ution in period t. The machine is given any information that the survey forecaster in the ith

                                                                 8
                                                                                           (i)
percentile could have observed at time t, including her own forecast Ft [yj;t+h ], as well as all
objective economic information contained in Zjt . Allowing the benchmark to be type-speci...c
is crucial for capturing the role played, if any, by private information or priors in measured
belief distortions, since doing so allows the machine to optimally re-weight the information
contained in respondent-type forecasts against other objective economic information that is
publicly available. Were there no data limitations, the benchmark could instead be respondent-
speci...c. Unfortunately, operationalizing this approach using the learning algorithm described
below would require a far longer time-series element for individual survey respondents than is
available in the surveys.1
    Third, the machine is given only that information at time t that the survey respondent-
type in the ith percentile could have observed at time t, and nothing more. This is important
because superior machine forecasts formed with ex post information that we cannot be certain
the survey respondent could have observed in real time might simply re        ect the bene...t of
hindsight, rather than genuine systematic expectational error. For this reason, some popular
techniques for forming benchmarks to measure forecaster bias, such as meta forecasts that pool
multiple survey forecasts at time t to form a meta forecast, are ruled out because individual
survey respondents do not have access to all the other analysts predictions in real time.

3.2     Quantifying Belief Distortions
To measure any distortions in survey expectations, we compare the forecast accuracy of the
survey respondent-type with that of the machine. Such a comparison requires a su¢ ciently
large number of observations on relative accuracy to eliminate di¤erences in ex post predictive
outcomes attributable to pure random error. We therefore compare relative forecast perfor-
mance over an extended evaluation sample. If the machine benchmark consistently produces
more reliable forecasts over an extended sample, we conclude that there exist systematic ex-
pectational errors, and quantify their magnitude by the ratio of mean squared forecast errors
(MSE). Otherwise we conclude there is no systematic bias in survey expectations.
    To quantify any distortions, we need to estimate the machine speci...cation. We simplify
notation by collecting all the independent variables and coe¢ cients on the right-hand-side of
(1) into a single matrix and vector and writing the machine model as:
                                                           ( i)
                                           yj;t+h = Xt0    j      +   jt+h                                  (4)
                                     0                                             0
                    ( i)                       ( i)       (i)     (i)        (i)
where Xt = 1; Ft [yj;t+h ] ; Zjt         and   j          j ;     jF ;   Bj Z          .
   1
    The learning algorithm described below employs rolling estimation and training sample windows that could
be as long as 34 quarters once combined, a span of data that must be available before the ...rst out-of-sample
machine forecast can be recorded. By contrast, the length of time that individual respondents remain in the
survey samples is comparatively short. For example, for the Survey of Professional Forecasters survey on ination
expectations, the average forecaster remains in our sample just 18.5 quarters, with gaps in participation that
would require ...lling in missing values.


                                                       9
                                   0         0 0
    Let XT = (yj;1 ; :::yj;T ; :::X1 ; :::; XT ) be the vector containing all observations in a sample of
                                             (i)
size T . We consider estimators of j that take the form
                                              ^(i)
                                               j = m XT ;
                                                                      ( i)
                                                                             ;
                   (i)
where m XT ;             de...nes an estimator as a function of the data XT and a non-negative reg-
ularization parameter vector (i) estimated using cross-validation. Denote this latter estimator
b (i) and denote the combined ...nal estimator ^ (i) XT ; b (i) . Our main approach uses the
                                                 j

Elastic Net (EN) estimator, where (i) is a bivariate vector that uses dual (lasso and ridge)
penalties to achieve both shrinkage and sparsity.2
   The estimation of (4) is repeated sequentially in rolling subsamples, with parameters esti-
mated from information known at time t used predict variables yj;t+h in subsequent periods.
This leads to a sequence of machine e¢ cient beliefs about yj;t+h . Denote the coe¢ cients and
regularization parameters obtained from an estimation conducted with information through
            (i)       (i)                                                    (i)       (i)
time t as ^ j;t and ^ t , respectively. Note that the time t subscripts on ^ j;t and b t are used
to denote one in a sequence of time-invariant parameter estimates obtained from rolling sub-
samples, rather than estimates that vary over time within a sample. Likewise, we shall denote
                                             (i)
the time t machine belief about yj;t+h as Et [yj;t+h ], de...ned by
                                                              ( i)               ( i)
                                                        Xt0 ^ j;t XT ; b t
                                      ( i)
                                    Et [yj;t+h ]                                        :
Forecast errors are di¤erentially denoted for the survey and machine
                                                  (i)           (i)
                                 survey errort+h = Ft [yj;t+h ]                         yj;t+h
                                                  (i)          ( i)
                               machine       errort+h   =     Et      [yj;t+h ]         yj;t+h :

Survey and machine MSEs denoted with F and E subscripts, i.e.,
                                               P                  (i) 2
                 survey MSE     M SEF = (1=P ) P i=1 (survey errort+h )                                    (5)
                                               P                     (i) 2
               machine MSE      M SEE = (1=P ) P i=1 (machine errort+h )                                   (6)

where P is the length of the forecast evaluation sample. To reduce notation clutter, we leave
o¤ superscripts "(i)" in the de...nitions above, but the reader is reminded that these statistics
also depend on the respondent-type. Distortions in survey responses are quanti...ed by the ratio
M SEE =M SEF over an extended forecast evaluation sample.
    In this setting, high degrees of parameter estimation error and over-...tting are likely even
with the aid of dynamic factors. Moreover, our desired benchmark must be e¢ cient at out-of-
sample prediction in a dynamic context, which is to say it must minimize biases that could be
discovered ex ante. Our next step is to therefore use machine learning along with data driven
regularization to address the high-dimensional, dynamic learning problem.
   2
     We have also implemented the approach in simulated data and hold-out samples for lasso and ridge sepa-
rately, for random forest, and for empirical Bayes linear regression. The EN estimator was the best performing,
followed by lasso, while random forest and Bayesian regression performed poorly.


                                                         10
3.3      Machine Learning Algorithm
We present a dynamic machine learning algorithm developed to detect demonstrable, ex ante
expectational errors in real time. The full estimation and evaluation procedure involves iterating
on the following steps, which are described in greater detail in the Appendix.
                                                             e is partitioned into two subsam-
   1. Sample partitioning: At time t, a prior sample of size T
      ple windows: an "in-sample"estimation subsample consisting of the ...rst TIS observations,
      and a hold-out "training"subsample of TT S subsequent observations, i.e., Te = TIS + TT S .

   2. In-sample estimation: Initial estimates of (i) are obtained with the EN estimator
      using observations 1; :::; TIS , given an arbitrary ...xed (non-random) starting value for
       ( i)                                   (i)       (i)
       t . Denote this initial estimate      TIS XTIS ; t    ; where " " denotes the value of the
                                                   ( i)
       estimator given an arbitrary                t .
                                                                                                      (i)
   3. Training and cross-validation: The regularization parameter t is estimated by min-
                                     (i)
      imizing mean-square loss L t ; TIS ; TT S over pseudo out-of-sample forecast errors gen-
      erated from rolling regressions through the training sample, where

                      (i)                           1         PTIS +TT S   h         (i)                  (i)
                                                                                                                                  2
                L     t ; TIS ; TT S                             =TIS          X0   j;     XTIS ;         t            yj;   +h       ;   (7)
                                                TT S      h
                        ( i)              (i)                                              (i)                  (i)
       and where j; XTIS ; t is the time                           EN estimate of          j     given          t     and data through
       time in a sample of size TIS .
   4. Steps 1-3 are repeated over a grid of estimation and training sample window lengths TIS
      and TT S such that alternative partitions satisfy TIS + TT S        e, where shorter window
                                                                          T
      lengths remove consecutive observations n at  the start of o the prior sample. The ...nal ma-
                                                  (i)
                           (i)
      chine estimator of j;t XT e; t
                                    (i)
                                         uses   b     b     b                    (i)
                                                                   = argmin L t ; TIS ; TT S and
                                                  t ; TIS ; TT S
                                                                                             ;TIS ;TT S

       is denoted    b (i)        b (i)
                                e; t
                               XT           :
                       j;t

   5. Out-of-sample prediction: The values of the regressors at time t are used to make
                                                        (i)
      a true out-of-sample prediction of yt+h , using b j;t XT b (i) , and the machine forecast
                                                             e; t
                               (i)          (i)
       error yt+h      Xt0 b j;t XT b
                                  e; t            stored.
   6. Roll forward and repeat: The prior sample of data is rolled forward one period, and
      steps 1-5 are repeated.3 This continues until the last out-of-sample forecast is made for
      yj;T , where T is the last period of our sample.

   Referring back to the notation in (5) and (6), M SEE is computed by averaging across the
                                                                 e + h),...,T . We refer to this
sequence of squared forecast errors from step 5 for periods t = (T
subperiod as the forecast evaluation sample.
   3
    For example, if the prior iteration used data from 1; :::; T  e and an in-sample subperiod that started with data
                                                                    e +1 and the in-sample partician from 2; :::; TIS +1.
from 1; :::; TIS , the next iteration starts with data from 2; :::; T


                                                                  11
    Several points about the above procedure bear emphasizing. First, the algorithm ensures
that the machine forecast selected from step 4 can only di¤er from the survey forecast if it
demonstrably improves pseudo out-of-sample prediction in the rolling training samples prior
to making a true out-of-sample forecast in step 5. Otherwise, the machine adopts the survey
forecast. It follows that the true out-of-sample forecasts of the machine recorded in step 5 can
di¤er from those of the survey only if demonstrable, ex ante biases are detected. The resulting
measure of belief distortion therefore explicitly excludes ex post mistakes that the machine
algorithm could only have understood with hindsight. An implication of this ex ante approach
is that more than one type can show no bias if the machine is unable to detect patterns in
extraneous economic data that can be exploited in real time to improve forecasts. We quantify
the overall magnitude of forecaster bias with the ratio M SEE =M SEF taken over the evaluation
sample.
    Second, the machine algorithm is repeated for each i and for each t in the evaluation
sample. Because each new training renews the optimized selection of in-sample estimation and
training sample windows lengths, the machine can in principle adapt to a changing economic
environment. This can be important for all the parameter estimates but especially so for the
estimate of the intercept, which functions as a latent time-varying mean.
    Third, the speci...cation just described is unlikely to be well suited to capturing extreme
nonlinearities associated with times of rapid economic change, as in recessions. We therefore
augment the machine algorithm so that it switches to a simpler speci...cation when a speci...c
recession indicator passes a threshold in real time. For this purpose we use the 10-year minus
3-month Treasury term spread. When the term spread is su¢ ciently low in the real time
sample, the machine bases its forecasts solely on a term spread dummy indicator. At time t,
the machine considers di¤erent dummy indicators that take the value 1 when the term spread
at t h is at or below some threshold, where the threshold is chosen to minimize mean-square
loss in the relevant training sample immediately prior to the actual forecast.

3.4    Data
The data used for this study fall into several categories. For each category the sources and
details are left to the Appendix.
   Survey Data The ...rst data category is the survey data. We study three di¤erent surveys
that ask about expectations for future in     ation and aggregate economic activity: the Survey of
Professional Forecasters (SPF), the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers (SOC), and
the Blue Chip Survey (BC). The ...rst covers professional forecasters in a variety of institutions,
the second covers households and is designed to be representative of the U.S. population, and
the third covers executives of ...nancial ...rms. Data from the SPF and the SOC are publicly
available; BC data were purchased and hand-coded for the earlier part of the sample.
   The SPF is a quarterly survey. Respondents provide both nowcasts and quarterly forecasts

                                                12
from one to four quarters ahead. We focus on the survey questions about the level of the GDP
de  ator (PGDP) and the level of real GDP. We also use SPF forecasts of 10-year-ahead CPI
in  ation as information variables.
    The SOC asks households directly about in       ation, and we use the questions on whether
households expect prices to go up or down during the next twelve months to gauge their
expectations about in    ation. Following Curtin (2019), we take these forecasts to be most
relevant for annual consumer price index (CPI) in     ation, and therefore compare SOC forecasts
to actual outcomes for CPI in     ation. Since the SOC doesn'  t directly ask about GDP growth,
we take the approach discussed in Curtin (2019) which is based on responses to question A7:
About a year from now, do you expect that in the country as a whole business conditions will
be better, or worse than they are at present, or just about the same? This qualitative economic
forecast is converted to a point forecast for GDP growth by ...tting a regression of future GDP
growth data to the balance score for A7 (% respondents expect economy to improve - % expect
worsen + 100) using rolling regressions and real-time GDP data.
    For the BC survey, we use questions in which forecasters are asked to predict the average
quarter over quarter percentage change in Real GDP and the GDP de            ator, beginning with
the current quarter and extending four to ...ve quarters into the future.
    For all surveys, we align the timing of survey response deadlines with real-time data, so that
respondents and machine could only have used data available in real time before the survey
deadline.
    Real Time Macro Data A real-time macro dataset provides observations on the left-
hand-side variables on which forecasts are formed obtained from the Philadelphia Fed'  s Real-
Time Dataset. Following Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), to construct forecasts and forecast
errors, we use the vintage of ination and GDP growth data that is available four quarters after
the period being forecast. We also use the real time macro data to form real-time quarterly
macro factors from a constructed dataset of real-time quarterly macro variables observed on or
before the day of the survey deadline at each date t. The resulting real-time macro dataset,
contains observations on 92 real-time macro variables. Our real time macro variable dataset
also include data on home and energy prices, which are not revised and so do not have multiple
vintages. The complete list of macro variables is given in the Online Appendix.
    Monthly Financial Data To take into account ...nancial market data, we form factors
from a panel dataset of 147 monthly ...nancial indicators that include valuation ratios, growth
rates of aggregate dividends and prices, default and term spreads, yields on corporate bonds
of di¤erent ratings grades, yields on Treasuries and yield spreads, and a broad cross-section of
industry equity returns. We convert the monthly factors formed from the dataset into quarterly
factors by using the ...rst month's observation for each quarter.
    Daily Financial Data "Up-to-the-forecast" ...nancial market information is accounted
for by using daily data on ...nancial indicators up to one day before the survey respondents

                                               13
forecasts are due. The daily ...nancial dataset includes series from ...ve broad classes of ...nancial
assets: (i) commodities prices (ii) corporate risk variables including a number of di¤erent credit
spreads measuring default risk (iii) equities (iv) foreign exchange, and (v) government securities.
In total, we use 87 such series (39 commodity and futures prices, 16 corporate risk series, 9
equity series plus implied volatility, 16 government securities, and 7 foreign exchange variables),
with the complete set of variables reported in the Online Appendix. In order to use both daily
and quarterly data in our estimation, we combine di¤usion index estimation of daily ...nancial
factors with mixed data sampling frequency techniques, described in detail in the Appendix.
    Additional Non-Factor Data A number of other non-factor variables are also included
                               0
in the machine model in Wjt      . These include the ith percentile'
                                                                   s own nowcast for the variable
being forecast, lags of the ith percentile' s own forecasts and those of other percentiles, higher-
order cross-sectional moments of the lagged forecast distributions, several autoregressive lags
of the left-hand-side variables, long-term trend in    ation measures, and measures of detrended
employment and GDP (Hamilton, 2018).
    In all, once factors are formed the machine model entertains a total of 68 predictor variables
for in ation and 72 predictor variables for the GDP growth. Below we refer to estimated factors
with an economic name. The economic name makes use of group classi...cations for individual
series and output from time series regressions of individual series onto estimated factors. This is
done for each time period in our evaluation sample by computing a marginal R2 from regressions
of each of the individual series in a given panel dataset onto each factor, one at a time. For
example, if regressions of non-farm payrolls onto the ...rst common macro factor from the real
time macro panel dataset exhibits the highest average (across all time periods of our evaluation
sample) marginal R2 , then that factor is labeled an "Employment" factor and normalized so
that it increases when non-farm payrolls increase.

4    Estimates of Belief Distortions
This section reports results using our estimates of belief distortions across di¤erent respondent-
types, surveys, and variables. Before getting into our main ...ndings, we begin with some
preliminary analysis to illustrate the role played by two key elements of our machine learning
problem for establishing whether and by how much beliefs are distorted.
    One key element pertains to the principle of out-of-sample versus in-sample forecasting, a
principle best illustrated by contrasting results from ex ante and ex post econometric analyses.
Survey respondents are asked to make genuine out-of-sample forecasts, and so we require our
benchmark against which belief distortions are measured to do so as well. To illustrate the
potential importance of this for the measurement of belief distortions, let us consider the in-
sample regressions run in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) (CG), which show that mean
survey forecast errors are positively predicted by ex ante mean forecast revisions. We reproduce
their ...ndings for the SPF on updated data in panel A of Table 1. Consistent with CG, we

                                                 14
                                          Table 1: d
               Table 1: CG Regressions of Forecast Errors on Forecast Revisions
                                        Panel A: In-sample Regressions (CG Sample)
                                                     ( )                   ( )        ( )       ( )                 ( )
                       Regression:       t+3    Ft         [   t+3 ]   =         +             Ft      [   t+3 ]   Ft 1     [   t+3 ]   +   t 1;t 2   +   t

                       Constant                                             0:001 0:077
                          t-stat                                           (0:005)
                                                                               ( 0:442)
                       Ft [ t+3;t ]     Ft 1 [ t+3;t ]                     1:1941:141
                          t-stat                                           (2:496)
                                                                                (2:560)
                        t 1;t 2                                                  0:021
                         t-stat                                                 (0:435)
                       R2                                  0:195                 0:197
                                              Panel B: Out-of-sample Regressions
                                                     ( )                   ( )        ( )       ( )                 ( )
                       Regression:       t+3    Ft         [   t+3 ]   =         +             Ft      [   t+3 ]   Ft 1     [   t+3 ]   +   t+3

                       Method                                    Forecast Sample                                       MSECG /MSEF
                       Rolling 5 years                           1975:Q4 - 2018:Q2                                        1:38
                       Rolling 10 years                          1980:Q4 - 2018:Q2                                        1:29
                       Rolling 20 years                          1990:Q4 - 2018:Q2                                        1:31
                       Recursive 5 years                         1975:Q4 - 2018:Q2                                        1:69
                       Recursive 10 years                        1980:Q4 - 2018:Q2                                        1:60
                       Recursive 20 years                        1990:Q4 - 2018:Q2                                        1:33

In-sample versus out-of-sample regressions using CG speci...cation. Panel A reports the in-sample
results over the sample used in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) (CG), 1969:Q1 to 2014:Q4. Newey-West
corrected t-statistics with lags = 4 are reported in parenthesis. Panel B reports the ratio of out-of sample
mean-squared-error (MSE) of the CG model forecast to that for the survey forecast computed using di¤erent
rolling or recursive estimation windows. The MSE for the CG model averages the (square of the) forecast
                                                                       ( )
errors   t+3
                 ( )              ( )
                bt+3 ; where bt+3 = b t
                                               ( )
                                                     + 1 + bt                    Ft
                                                                                     ( )
                                                                                           [   t+3 ]
                                                                                                            b ( ) F(    )
                                                                                                                            [   t+3 ] :   In both panels, the regression
                                                                                                              t    t    1

estimation uses the latest vintage of in    ation in real time and, following CG, computes forecast errors with
real-time data available four quarters after the period being forecast. Annual in     ation is de...ned as t+3;t =
 Pt     Pt+1   Pt+2   Pt+3
Pt 1     Pt    Pt+1   Pt+2 , and Ft [ t+3;t ] is the mean forecast of annual ination as of time t from the Survey
of Professional Forecasters (SPF). The sample of Panel B spans the period 1969:Q1 - 2018:Q2. *sig. at 10%.
**sig. at 5%. ***sig. at 1%.


...nd strong evidence that lagged forecast revisions predict next period' s forecast error in these
regressions. Moreover, other information, e.g., lagged in     ation, is found to be unimportant
in predicting forecast errors once the information in forecast revisions is taken into account,
a ...nding also consistent with CG.4 CG observe that these ...ndings are consistent with the
implications of theories that feature information frictions and under-reaction to aggregate news.
     The bottom panel of Table 1 reports results from the same regression forecasts, but this time
run out-of-sample rather than in-sample. Over a range of forecast evaluation subsamples using
either rolling or recursive regressions, we ...nd that the mean SPF survey forecast generates
much lower prediction error than a speci...cation that attempts to exploit any information that
   4
    We include one lag of the quarterly in    ation rate as an additional control variable, consistent with the
procedure implemented in CG. There is a typo in the published version of CG that erroneously indicates their
procedure controlled for one lag of annual rather than quarterly in ation.



                                                                                     15
may be contained in the lagged revision of the mean forecast. In other words, in contrast to the
in-sample ...ndings, information on lagged forecast revisions substantially worsens predictions
of mean survey forecast errors in an out-of-sample context. This result recalls a body of prior
econometric evidence ...nding that survey forecasts of in   ation are hard to beat or even match
with statistical models when forecasts are conducted out-of-sample.5
    The contradictory in-sample and out-of-sample evidence could be attributable to an unstable
empirical relationship. Instability can create a high degree of sampling error so that what is
revealed to be important ex post is simply not apparent ex ante. Whatever the cause, it is
impossible to establish the extent to which beliefs are distorted due to information frictions
or any other reason unless the benchmark against which distortions are measured adheres
to the same forecasting context survey respondents were faced with at the time they made
their predictions. After all, even agents (such as our machine) who possess vast information
processing capacity will optimally downweight information that might appear relevant ex post if
it systematically fails to improve forecasts ex ante. It would not be correct to interpret this type
of downweighting as under-reaction to genuine economic news or as evidence of a systematic
bias in expectations. We return to the question of whether lagged forecast revisions contain
any valuable predictive information for mean forecast errors in our machine learning estimation
section below.6
    A second key element of our learning problem is the data rich environment. To illustrate
the importance of this, we consider an exercise in the spirit of Chauvet and Potter (2013),
who considered a wide range of low dimensional statistical models for predicting GDP growth
and found that a second-order autoregression performed best for one-quarter ahead predictions
when evaluated in a hold-out sample. Table 2 shows the estimated autoregressive coe¢ cients
estimated from rolling, one-quarter-ahead, out-of-sample forecasting regressions of GDP growth
on predictors, in two speci...cations. A high dimensional speci...cation entertains a very large
numbers of potential predictor variables, as our machine estimation described above does.
Among these predictors, we include the two autoregressive lags. A low dimensional speci...cation
uses the two autoregressive lags and only two additional predictors: the SPF median forecast of
GDP growth and its current nowcast, both of which are also included in the high dimensional
model. Evidently, the coe¢ cient on the ...rst autoregressive lag, large in the low-dimensional
setting, is zero once additional information is entertained. This result does not imply that
sparse speci...cations are rarely optimal (indeed we report below that they often are). What
it points to is the di¢ culty with knowing which small number of predictor variables are likely
to be informative without the bene...t of hindsight a¤orded an academic study examining a
single hold-out sample. The challenge for real time decision making is that di¤erent pieces
   5
      For example, Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007), Del Negro and Eusepi (2011), Andersen, Bollerslev, Christof-
fersen, and Diebold (2011), Genre, Kenny, Meyler, and Timmermann (2013), and Faust and Wright (2013).
    6
      As an aside, we note that the machine forecast errors do not exhibit a correlation with lagged machine
forecast revisions, even in in-sample regressions. These results are reported in the Online Appendix.


                                                     16
                                        Table 2: d
                   Table 2: Average coe¢ cients on the ...rst two AR lags
                                  High Dimensional           Low Dimensional
                              1        0:0000                    0:0076
                              2         0:0025                    0:0044
Note: This table reports average autoregressive coe¢ cients from one-year-ahead rolling regressions of real GDP
growth on predictors. 1 is the average coe¢ cient on the ...rst AR lag; 2 is the average coe¢ cient on the
second. The high dimension estimation entertains very large numbers of potential predictors, in addition to
the autoregressive lags, while the low dimension setting uses only two additional predictors. The sample spans
1995:Q1-2018:Q2.


of information may become relevant at di¤erent points in time and forecasts that have not
entertained large and varied datasets risk missing relevant information.

4.1     Forecast Comparison
This subsection presents a comparison of the accuracy of forecasts made by the machine bench-
mark and the survey respondents. In all cases, we focus on four-quarter-ahead forecasts. For
each survey, we evaluate the relative forecast performance over the longest common sample
available for all machine speci...cations in a given survey after taking into account the di¤erent
in-sample and training-sample window lengths chosen by the machine for each forecaster type.
The estimation sample used by the machine varies slightly across surveys due to di¤erences in
data availability. This in turn leads to slightly di¤erent forecast evaluation samples across sur-
veys. For SPF in     ation and GDP growth forecasts, the estimation sample is 1969:Q3-2018:Q3
and the forecast evaluation sample for both variables is 1995:Q1 to 2018:Q2. For SOC, the
estimation sample is 1978:Q1-2018:Q3 for GDP growth and in          ation, while the forecast eval-
uation samples are 1995:Q1-2018:Q2 for GDP growth and 1996:Q4-2018:Q2 for in             ation. For
BC, the estimation sample is 1986:Q1-2018:Q3 for GDP growth and in         ation, while the forecast
evaluation samples are 1997:Q1-2018:Q2 for GDP growth and 1997:Q3-2018:Q2 for in              ation.
Table 3 reports the ratio of the out-of-sample machine M SEE to survey M SEF for in            ation
and GDP growth for all three surveys over their respective forecast evaluation samples.
    The top panel of Table 3 shows that the machine model performs better than the survey
forecasts of in  ation for all surveys as measured by the ratio M SEE =M SEF , which is less than
one for all percentiles, sometimes by large amounts. To put this ratio in the same units as an
in-sample R2 , the table also reports an out-of-sample R2 for the machine vis-a-vis the survey as
  2
ROOS     1 M SEE =M SEF . The overall magnitude by which the machine model improves on
the survey forecasts is in most cases sizable, which is notable since survey forecasts of in   ation
are known to be di¢ cult to beat or even match by statistical models out-of-sample, as discussed
above. The one exception is for the mean SPF forecast, where the improvement is modest with
M SEE =M SEF = 0:95. But by contrast, the ratio M SEE =M SEF for the median SPF forecast


                                                      17
                                               Table 3: Machine Learning versus Survey Forecasts
                                                                     (i)       (i) (i)          (i)
                                                   ML: yj;t+h =      j     +  [yj;t+h ] + Bj Z Zjt + jt+h
                                                                               j F Ft
                                                                       Table 3: d
                                                                   In ation Forecasts
                                                         Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF)
              Percentile          Median Mean          5th 10th 20th 25th 30th 40th 60th 70th                          75th 80th 90th 95th
              M SE E =M SE F       0:85  0:95          0:56 0:74 0:83 0:90 0:88 0:89 0:74 0:70                         0:67 0:59 0:55 0:47
              OOS R2               0:15  0:05          0:44 0:26 0:17 0:10 0:12 0:11 0:26 0:30                         0:33 0:41 0:45 0:53
                                                          Michigan Survey of Consumers (SOC)
              Percentile          Median Mean          5th 10th 20th 25th 30th 40th 60th 70th                          75th 80th 90th 95th
              M SE E =M SE F       0:58  0:42          0:22 0:28 0:46 0:58 0:67 0:65 0:37 0:21                         0:16 0:12 0:05 0:03
              OOS R2               0:42  0:58          0:78 0:72 0:54 0:42 0:33 0:35 0:63 0:79                         0:84 0:88 0:95 0:97
                                                           Blue Chip Financial Forecasts (BC)
              Percentile          Median Mean          5th 10th 20th 25th 30th 40th 60th 70th                          75th 80th 90th 95th
              M SE E =M SE F       0:84  0:84          0:58 0:60 0:85 0:85 0:86 0:91 0:78 0:69                         0:65 0:59 0:48 0:38
              OOS R2               0:16  0:16          0:42 0:40 0:15 0:15 0:14 0:09 0:22 0:31                         0:35 0:41 0:52 0:62
                                                                     GDP Forecasts
                                                         Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF)
18




              Percentile          Median Mean          5th 10th 20th 25th 30th 40th 60th 70th                          75th 80th 90th 95th
              M SE E =M SE F       0:89  0:93          0:72 0:83 0:82 0:86 0:89 0:90 0:87 0:82                         0:81 0:82 0:71 0:65
              OOS R2               0:11  0:07          0:28 0:17 0:18 0:14 0:11 0:10 0:13 0:18                         0:19 0:18 0:29 0:35
                                                          Michigan Survey of Consumers (SOC)
              Percentile          Median
              M SE E =M SE F       0:74
              OOS R2               0:26
                                                  Blue Chip Financial Forecasts (BC)
              Percentile          Median Mean 5th 10th 20th 25th 30th 40th 60th 70th 75th 80th 90th 95th
              M SE E =M SE F       0:76  0:83 0:77 0:75 0:89 0:82 0:81 0:77 0:76 0:73 0:70 0:65 0:67 0:66
              OOS R2               0:24  0:17 0:23 0:25 0:11 0:18 0:19 0:23 0:24 0:27 0:30 0:35 0:33 0:34
     Machine v.s. survey mean-square-forecast errors. MSEE and MSEF denote the machine and survey mean-squared-forecast-errors, respectively,
     for 4-quarter-ahead forecasts, averaged over the evaluation sample. The out-of-sample Rsquared, OOS R2 , is de...ned as 1-MSEE =MSEF . The vintage
     of observations on the variable being forecast is the one available four quarters after the period being forecast. The evaluation period for the Survey of
     Professional Forecasters (SPF) is 1995:Q1 to 2018:Q2; for the Michigan Survey of Consumers (SOC) is 1996:Q4 to 2018:Q2; and for the Bluechip (BC)
     survey is 1997:Q3 to 2018:Q2.
is 0:85. It is worth remembering that the mean SPF forecast is always an amalgam that does
not correspond to the belief of any single respondent-type in the survey. It is arguably less
relevant to the study of what, if any, systematic errors individuals may make when forming
macroeconomic expectations. These ratios are similar for the BC survey, as shown in the last
panel, where in this case M SEE =M SEF is 0.84 for both the mean and the median respondent-
type. In general, the magnitude of measured belief distortions about future in         ation is much
larger for SOC respondents than for the SPF and BC respondents, as shown in the middle panel.
The SOC mean and median M SEE =M SEF ratios are 0.58 and 0.42, respectively, implying large
out-of-sample R2 statistics.
    For GDP growth, the lower panel of Table 3 shows that machine model is also always more
accurate than the survey respondent no matter which respondent-type or survey is studied.
The M SEE =M SEF ratios for the mean and median SPF forecasts of GDP growth are 0.83
and 0.89, respectively, while for the BC survey they are 0.83 and 0.76, respectively. For the
SOC, there is only a single forecast, denoted as if it corresponds to the "median" household.
This is because the SOC forecast is constructed from the balance score for business conditions
expectations, a construction that eliminates the heterogeneity (see above). The M SEE =M SEF
for this single SOC forecast of GDP growth is 0.74.
    Given these gains in forecast accuracy, it is of interest to consider the nature of the empirical
speci...cations chosen by the machine. Figure 1 reports a scatter plot that quanti...es the strength
of the estimated ridge and lasso penalties, with each point representing a combination of the two
penalties chosen for one time period of the evaluation sample. The y-axis displays the degree of
sparsity implied by the L1 (lasso) penalty, as measured by the fraction of non-zero coe¢ cients.
The x-axis displays the degree of shrinkage implied by the L2 (ridge) penalty, as measured by
1= 1 + b2;t , where b2;t is the estimated ridge penalty parameter for period t. The right border
of the plot is the case where there is no ridge penalty at all, while the top edge of the plot is
the case where there is no lasso penalty. We see that the machine algorithm often results in a
sparse speci...cation. In many time periods the fraction of non-zero coe¢ cients hovers around
10% or less, though in some periods the machine chooses little if any sparsity, but much greater
L2 shrinkage. Occasionally, the machine chooses minimal sparsity and minimal L2 shrinkage.
This implies that achieving the e¢ ciency gains of the machine over the extended evaluation
sample requires entertaining large amounts of information in every period, even though much
of that information is associated with a coe¢ cient that is shrunk all the way to zero most of
the time.

4.2    Dynamics of Belief Distortions
                                                                                  (i)    ( i)
To investigate the dynamics of systematic expectational errors, we report biasj;t Ft [yj;t+h ]
 (i)
Et [yj;t+h ] over our evaluation sample, where the units are the same as the forecasts themselves
and are in annual percentage points. Figure 2 shows biases associated with the mean and


                                                 19
                                                                                                    Figure 1: Degree of Sparsity and Shrinkage
                                                         SPF Inflation               SOC Inflation                 BC Inflation                SPF GDP                      SOC GDP                   BC GDP
     Sparsity: fraction of nonzero coefficients


                                                   1                           1                            1                            1                           1                          1


                                                  0.8                         0.8                          0.8                         0.8                         0.8                         0.8


                                                  0.6                         0.6                          0.6                         0.6                         0.6                         0.6


                                                  0.4                         0.4                          0.4                         0.4                         0.4                         0.4


                                                  0.2                         0.2                          0.2                         0.2                         0.2                         0.2


                                                   0                           0                            0                            0                           0                          0
                                                          0.6    0.8      1           0.8    0.9      1              0.8    0.9    1      0.5                1            0.5              1     0        0.5       1
                                                        Shrinkage: 1/(1+ 2)         Shrinkage: 1/(1+ 2)          Shrinkage: 1/(1+ 2)       Shrinkage: 1/(1+ 2)           Shrinkage: 1/(1+ 2)      Shrinkage: 1/(1+ 2)

     Degree of Sparsity and Shrinkage. The ...gure displays a scatterplot of the strength of the ridge and LASSO penalties estimated from training
     samples over time for predicting median in       ation or real GDP growth. For each observation in the evaluation sample from 1995:1-2018:Q2 (94
     observations), the y-axis displays the degree of sparsity implied by the estimated L1 penalty, 1 , in units of the fraction of non-zero regression coe¢ cients,
     and the x-axis displays the degree of shrinkage implied by the estimated L2 penalty, 2 in units of 1= (1 + 2 ).
20




                                                                                         Figure 2: Biases in the Mean and Median Survey Forecasts
                                                         SPF Inflation              SOC Inflation                 BC Inflation                SPF GDP                       SOC GDP                   BC GDP
                                         1.5
                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                               4                          0.5                                                                                   4
                                                   1
                                                                                                                                         4                           2

                                         0.5                                   2                            0                            3                           1                          2

                                                                                                                                         2                           0
                                                   0
                                                                               0                          -0.5                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                    -1
                        -0.5                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                    -2
                                                                              -2                                                         0                                                     -2
                                                  -1                                                       -1
                                                                                                                                                                    -3
                                                                                                                                        -1
                                                         2000    2010                2000    2010                 2000    2010               2000    2010                 2000     2010              2000   2010
                                                                                                           NBER recession               Median bias             Mean bias
                                                                                                                                           (i)      (i)              (i)
     Biases in the consensus forecasts. The ...gure reports the time series                                                            biasj;t+h = Ft     [yj;t+h ] Et [yj;t+h ]   for i = 50; mean. NBER recessions are
     shown with grey shaded bars. The sample spans the period 1995:Q1-2018:Q2.
median respondents for all three surveys.
    Figure 2 shows that systematic errors in the mean and median forecasts vary substantially
over time and can range between 50% and 400% of the average annual in         ation or GDP growth,
depending on the survey. Survey forecasts for GDP growth oscillate between "optimism" and
"pessimism." For GDP growth the ...gure shows extended periods of over-optimism that are
especially prevalent for professional forecasters in the post-Great Recession part of our subsam-
ple. From 2010:Q1 to 2018:Q2, the median SPF forecast of GDP growth is biased upward by
0.83% at an annual rate, or 37% of actual GDP growth during this period. This large upward
bias since 2010 makes a large contribution to the upward bias over the full evaluation sample
(1995:Q1-2018:Q2), which is also sizable and amounts to 20% of observed GDP growth. These
distortions are quite similar for the median BC expectation of GDP growth. For the SOC,
the average bias is close to zero even though the SOC forecast is less accurate than the SPF
or BC forecasts. This happens because the SOC forecast makes systematic errors of greater
magnitude that     uctuate more wildly between optimism and pessimism. And for all surveys,
there are large spikes in the biases at the cusp of the 2000-2001 recession, which we discuss
further below.
    For in  ation, Figure 2 shows that mean and median expectations are biased upward (a
direction we de...ned above as "pessimistic" ) over most of the sample for the SPF and the SOC,
while the BC survey exhibits an average bias that is close to zero.7 Despite being upwardly
biased on average over the full sample, median in     ation forecasts exhibit a downward bias from
2011 to 2014 that ranges across surveys from ­     0.34% to -1.03% at an annual rate, or -19% to
-47% of actual in   ation during this period. Given that in     ation has been declining over time,
this could be interpreted as evidence of a learning process.
    Figure 3 contrasts the common and heterogenous components of these belief distortions
over time, breaking them out by survey. The common component is measured as the ...rst
                                     (i)
principle component (PC) of biasj;t across all percentiles i, with heterogeneity exhibited by
                         ( i)
the distribution of biasj;t across i.8 For all surveys, we observe substantial variation in belief
distortions over time that is common across SPF respondents. For SPF and BC, the optimism
about economic growth in the aftermath of the Great Recession is present in the common
component, as is a downward bias to in     ation expectations for much of this same time period.
   7
       Whether an upward bias in in   ation expectations should be viewed as pessimism or optimism may depend
on the time period. Bhandari, Borovicka, and Ho (2019) argue that a general interpretation of higher expected
in   ation as optimism is at odds with surveys of in   ation attitudes, but others have argued that a downward
bias in in   ation expectations could be interpreted as pessimism during speci...c episodes, such as when nominal
interest rates are at the zero-lower-bound (Masolo and Monti (2015)). We use "pessimistic" as a short-hand
labeling device for upwardly biased in     ation expectations, regarding the interpretation as roughly right for
households in most time-periods.
     8
       Since the PCs and their factor loadings are not separately identi...able, the loadings are normalized by
   0
(      ) =N = Iq where N is the number of bias(i) series over which common factors are formred and q is the
number of common factors. This implies that the units for these series have no straight-forward interpretation
in terms of the raw data.


                                                       21
                                                  Figure 3: Common and Heterogeneous Distortions


                                                                            Biases 1st PC
              SPF Inflation                  SOC Inflation                     BC Inflation                      SPF GDP                        BC GDP
                                      15
     4                                                                  2
                                                                                                      15                              15
                                      10
                                                                        1
     2                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                      10
                                        5                               0
                                                                                                                                       5
     0                                                                 -1
                                                                                                       5
                                        0                                                                                              0
                                                                       -2
     -2                                                                                                0                               -5
                                       -5                              -3

                                                                       -4                                                             -10
     -4                                                                                                -5
                                      -10
     1995 2000 2005 2010 2015               2000 2005 2010 2015        1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1995 2000 2005 2010 2015

                                                                            Biases Distribution
22




                                                                                                       6                               6
                                      15
     2                                                                  1
                                                                                                       4                               4
                                      10
     1                                                                                                 2                               2
                                        5                               0

     0                                                                                                 0                               0
                                        0                              -1
     -1                                                                                                -2                              -2
                                       -5
                                                                       -2
     -2                                                                                                -4                              -4
                                      -10
     1995 2000 2005 2010 2015          1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1995 2000 2005 2010 2015        1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                               Rec.         Med         Mean         5          10          20       25         30
                                               40           60          70           75         80          90       95

          Common and heterogeneous belief distortions. The ...rst row reports the ...rst principal component of the biases across di¤erent surveys. For each
                                                                        (i)     (i)           (i)
          respondent type, the second row reports the time series biasj;t+h = Ft [yj;t+h ] Et [yj;t+h ]. The ...gure does not report the SOC GDP bias because
          only one series is available in that case. NBER recessions are shown with grey shaded bars. The sample is 1995:Q1-2018:Q2.
At the same time, there is substantial heterogeneity across responses that varies over time, with
greater dispersion observed in recessions. For the SPF, the most optimistic and pessimistic
responses di¤er in some recession periods by more than 4% for GDP growth and by more than
2% for in   ation, and similarly for the BC survey. For the SOC, heterogeneity in the magnitude
of belief distortions on in   ation is enormous, especially immediately after the Great Recession,
where the forecast of annual in     ation from the respondent-type at the 95th percentile is almost
15%, while that for the respondent-type at the 5th percentile is less than 5%.
     Figure 4 compares forecasted and actual values over time. The ...gure displays the median
forecast of four-quarter-ahead in     ation or GDP growth over our evaluation sample along with
the actual in   ation or GDP growth rate during the corresponding four quarter period being
forecast. For all surveys, the machine has been more accurate not just on average but also con-
sistently over the last ...ve years of the evaluation sample from 2013:Q2 to 2018:Q2, sometimes
by large amounts. For GDP growth, the ratio M SEE /M SEF for the median SPF forecast is
0.70 over this subperiod, while it is 0.69 for median BC forecast. Both surveys under-perform
in this subperiod due to over-optimism. For in        ation, the ratio M SEE /M SEF over this same
subperiod is 0.47 for the median SOC forecast while it is 0.67 for the median BC forecast. That
the machine does best at the end rather than beginning of the evaluation sample is noteworthy
because it suggests that advances in information-processing technology over the sample are not
the main reason for the machine'       s superior forecasting performance. In fact, the machine is
likely to face disadvantages of its own attributable to a lack of access to some forms of timely
information that survey respondents surely have access to either because that information is
inherently intangible and can only be used in a judgemental component of a forecast, or because
a real time format for that information was never suitably archived.
     Figure 4 shows that professional forecasters made large forecast errors that were overly
optimistic about GDP growth at the onset of the Great Recession, as noted in Gennaioli and
Shleifer (2018). This pattern is likewise evident in Figure 4 for all surveys studied here. The
...gure shows that large forecast errors were made during this episode by the machine as well,
with the machine algorithm doing somewhat better than the SOC forecast, only slightly better
than the BC forecast, and about the same but if anything slightly worse than the SPF forecast.
This occurs despite the fact that the machine algorithm takes into account hundreds of pieces of
real time information including that encoded in numerous ...nancial series and dozens of credit
spreads, recorded at daily, monthly, and quarterly sampling intervals. Large ex post forecast
errors during the Great Recession are arguably more understandable when placed in the broader
context of the time, which was characterized by unusually elevated objective uncertainty about
the macroeconomy (see Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng (2015) and Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2019)).
This episode underscores the role of largely unforeseen events in generating occasionally large
prediction error, not all of which can be attributed to a systematic bias in expectations.



                                                23
              Figure 4: Forecasted versus Actual Ination, GDP Growth

                       SPF Inflation                                     SPF GDP growth
                                                           6
        3
                                                           4
        2                                                  2
                                                           0
        1                                                  -2
                                                           -4
       1995     2000     2005    2010   2015               1995      2000     2005        2010     2015

                       SOC Inflation                                     SOC GDP growth
        6                                                  6
        4                                                  4
                                                           2
        2                                                  0
        0                                                  -2
                                                           -4
       1995     2000     2005    2010   2015               1995      2000     2005        2010     2015

                  Blue Chip Inflation                                Blue Chip GDP growth
                                                           6
        3
                                                           4
        2                                                  2
                                                           0
        1                                                  -2
                                                           -4
       1995     2000     2005    2010   2015               1995      2000     2005        2010     2015

                   NBER recession       Machine forecast        Survey forecast          Realized value


Forecasted and Actual variables. For each variable and survey, the ...gure reports the median survey
forecast of in ation or GDP growth over the next 4 quarters, the corresponding machine forecast, and the
realized in ation or GDP growth values during this period. Realized values are measured in real-time data
as the vintage available four quarters after the period being forecast. NBER recessions are shown with grey
shaded bars. The sample is 1995:Q1-2018:Q2.


4.3     Bias Decomposition
If the machine algorithm generates better forecasts, the survey respondents must be either
missing or mis-weighting pertinent economic information. This raises the question of what
type of information the algorithm ...nds was responsible for the systematic errors? We address
this question by decomposing the belief distortion. Recall that the time t bias is de...ned as the
di¤erence between the survey respondent-type and machine forecasts:
               ( i)       (i)          ( i)   (i)              (i) (i)
           biasj;t+h                                                           ^ (i)0 Zjt
                        Fj;t+hjt Ej;t+hjt =Ft [yj;t+h ] ^ j ^ j F Ft [yj;t+h ] B jZ
                        h           i h     (i )
                                                         i h                 i
                               ( i)                 ( i)          ^ (i)0 Zjt
                     =       ^ j + 1 ^ j F Ft [yj;t+h ] + B         jZ                         (8)
                        | {z } |                 {z      } |        {z       }
                            Intercept            Survey                 Info variables

We are interested in the contribution of the three terms on the right-hand-side of (8), shown
                                              (i)
in large square brackets. We decompose biasj;t+h into these three sources of variation. The
                                              (i)
sum of these three terms equals 100% of biasj;t+h . This decomposition gives an indication of
which information is most mis-weighted by the survey respondent-type, and by how much.
                     ( i)
The intercept term ^ j changes over the evaluation sample through the dynamic estimation

                                                    24
algorithm and is akin to a time-varying latent conditional mean applied to the most recent
rolling subsample window. We refer to this parameter as a "rolling mean"and denote it with a
                        ( i)                 (i)
t subscript, i.e., ^ j;t. The estimates ^ j F and B   ^ (i)0 also vary over the evaluation sample and are
                                                        jZ
likewise denoted with a t subscript.
      It is useful to consider the magnitude and signs of the coe¢ cients in the components above.
                                                                    (i)
Consider the coe¢ cient on the survey forecast. If ^ j F;t < 1, this implies that the machine
improves forecasts by downweighting the survey forecast in favor of giving more weight to other
                                            (i)
information. Thus an estimate of ^ j F;t < 1 implies that the respondent-type over -weighted
whatever information or prior that was embedded in her own belief while paying too little
attention other objective information that was publicly available, consistent with notions of
                                                             (i)
overcon...dence discussed above. Conversely, if ^ j F;t > 1, the machine improved forecasts by
giving greater weight to the survey forecast than the implicit weight given by the respondent-
type to her own forecast, consistent with undercon...dence. For the information variables and
the rolling mean, any estimate of B      ^ (i)0 6= 0 or ^ (    i)
                                                              j;t 6= 0 indicates that the machine improved
                                           j Z ;t
                                                                        (i)
forecasts by giving greater absolute weight to Zj;k;t or ^ j;t compared to the respondent-type'          s
implicit weight of zero conditional on her own forecast. Thus we refer to any estimate with
^ (i)0 6= 0 or ^ (
B
                    i)
                   j;t 6= 0 as under -weighting of these sources of information.
   j Z ;t
      Figure 5 reports, for each survey and each variable, the contribution to the median bias of the
three terms in square brackets in (8) at each point in time over our forecast evaluation samples.
                                                                                            (50)
The solid lines in each sub...gure of Figure 5 report the total median bias, biasj;t+h , while the
contributions of the three terms in square brackets in (8) are reported as bar charts, with the
height of the bar showing the absolute magnitude by which that component contributed to the
bias. Any above (below) zero bar indicates that the term contributed positively (negatively) to
the overall bias. Since there are many terms in the information variable term, the ...gure reports
contributions only for the most quantitatively important information variable contributors to
the bias at each time t. In the case of the survey contribution, we further indicate with
color coded bars whether a contribution to the bias was created by the respondent-type having
over- or under-weighted her own forecast. A red bar indicates that the median respondent-type
                                                 ( i)
over -weighted her own forecast (i.e., ^ j F;t < 1); consistent with overcon...dence, while a blue
bar indicates that she under -weighted, consistent with undercon...dence. For the intercept and
information variables terms, any bar with a non-zero height indicates that the respondent-type
gave too little absolute weight to that information. Recessions are shown in the ...gure by light
grey shaded bars.
      A key ...nding exhibited in Figure 5 that is robust across all surveys and all variables is that
survey respondents almost always place too much weight on their own forecast relative to other
objective economic information, and are in that sense overcon...dent. This happens not only
for all surveys and for both in       ation and GDP growth expectations, but also for virtually all
time periods. This is exhibited in the ...gure by the frequent and tall red bars in the Survey


                                                   25
                                                                         Figure 5: Bias Decomposition: Median Forecast

                                                                                                              Survey Forecast
              SPF Inflation                             SOC Inflation                            BC Inflation                                        SPF GDP                                      SOC GDP                                         BC GDP
     4                                           8                                                                                   5                                               4
                 Overweight                                                              2
                 Underweight                                                                                                         4                                                                                                   4
     3                                           6
                                                                                                                                     3                                               2                                                   3
     2                                           4                                       1
                                                                                                                                     2                                                                                                   2
                                                 2                                                                                                                                   0
     1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                         0                                           1
                                                 0
     0                                                                                                                               0                                               -2                                                  0
                                                 -2
                                                                                         -1                                                                                                                                          -1
      1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                        2000 2005 2010 2015                     2000 2005 2010 2015                        1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                     1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                               2000 2005 2010 2015

                                                                                                                Rolling Mean
                                                                                                                                     4                                                                                                   4
     0                                           0                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                     2                                                   2
                                                 -5                                                                                  2
     -2                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                -10                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                         -2                                          0                                                                                               -2
     -4
                                                -15
26




                                                                                         -3                                          -2                                              -2                                              -4
     -6
                                                -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -6
                                                                                         -4                                          -4
      1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                        2000 2005 2010 2015                     2000 2005 2010 2015                      1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                       1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                               2000 2005 2010 2015

                                                                                                               Information Variables
     6                                          15                                                                                   4                                                                                                   4
                                                                                         1                                                                                           2
     4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3
                                                10                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                         0                                                                                           0
     2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                 5                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
     0                                                                                   -1                                                                                          -2
                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                                                                     -2
      1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                        2000 2005 2010 2015                     2000 2005 2010 2015                        1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                     1995 2000 2005 2010 2015                               2000 2005 2010 2015
                 Long Run CPI (lag 1)                        Long Run CPI (lag 1)                      Long Run CPI (lag 1)                              TRM: 10Y - 3M                                 TRM: 10Y - 3M                                   TRM: 10Y - 3M
                 Daily Factor: Corporate Risk                Daily Factor: Commodities                 Survey Forecast Lags                              Survey Forecast Lags                          Fin. Factor: Equity Risk Factor                 Fin. Factor: Equity Risk Factors
                 Survey Forecast Lags                        Survey Forecast Lags                      Detrended output (lag 1)                          Macro Factor: Emp.(1 lag)                     Survey Forecast Lags                            Survey Forecast Lags
                 Daily Factor: Treasury                      Macro Factor: Emp.(1 lag)                 Daily Factor: Treasury                            GDP Growth (lag 2)                            Macro Factor: Emp.                              Daily Factor: Corporate Risk


     Decomposition of Bias. The ...gure plots contributors to the median bias Ft
                                                                                                                                  (50)
                                                                                                                                         [yj;t+h ]
                                                                                                                                                        (50)
                                                                                                                                                       Et      [yj;t+h ] =            ^j
                                                                                                                                                                                          (50)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 + 1     ^ (50) F(50) [yj;t+h ]                  ^ (50)0 Zjt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B
                                                                                                                                                                                                           jF    t                                 jZ
                                                                                                                                    (50)                     (50)
     at each time t. The solid black lines in each subpanel plot the median bias, Ft [yj;t+h ] Et [yj;t+h ]. The barcharts in the ...rst row panel report
            (50)  (50)                                           (50)
      1 ^ j F Ft [yj;t+h ] ; those in the second row report ^ j ; those in the third row report B  ^ (50)0 Zjt for the most important predictor contributors
                                                                                                     jZ
     to the time t bias. Red bars indicate that the survey forecast was given too much weight relative to the machine e¢ cient forecast, corresponding to
            (50)
      1 ^ jF     > 0. Blue bars indicate that the survey forecast was given too little weight relative to the machine e¢ cient forecast, corresponding to
          1   ^ (50) < 0. NBER recessions are shown with grey shaded bars.
                jF
Forecast panels of the ...rst row. The length of the bars indicates that the respondent-type'      s
over-weighting of her own forecast contributes in most cases to quantitatively large distortions
in macro expectations. For example, the ...rst panel in Figure 5 indicates that the median SPF
respondent'  s forecast of four-quarter-ahead in     ation contributed 4%­  or more than 100%­    to
the total upward bias in in     ation expectations during several periods at the end of the Great
Recession. That the bars are all red rather than blue indicates that the machine improved
forecasts by greatly downweighted the survey forecast in these periods in favor of placing more
absolute weight on other objective economic information.
     If the median forecaster typically placed too much weight on her own forecast, then by
de...nition she placed too little absolute weight on other information. The bottom two rows of
Figure 5 gives an indication of the type of other objective economic information that was mis-
weighted by the median forecaster over time. A key ...nding here is that the type of information
is not static but instead changes over time. For example, regarding in       ation expectations the
third rows shows that, during the Great Recession, too little attention was paid by the median
SPF respondent to daily data on corporate credit spreads and to monthly data on long-run
survey in   ation forecasts, while in the years between 2010 and 2015 the median respondent
paid too little attention to daily information on Treasury yields and lagged values of the SPF
forecasts. The type of information that was under-weighted varies also across surveys. For
the SOC under-weighting of long-run CPI survey forecasts shows up right before the Great
Recession, but not elsewhere in the sample, while the BC median forecast under-weighted this
information after the Great Recession while subsequently giving too little weight to lagged
survey forecasts.
     Turning to expectations of economic growth, Figure 5 shows that the over-optimism dis-
played by professional forecasters (both SPF and BC) in the post-Great Recession period was
largely driven, at ...rst, by paying too little attention to the predictable slowing of average eco-
nomic growth captured by the rolling mean, and then subsequently by an over-con...dence in
their mistaken beliefs that accounts for more than 100% of the bias in the last ...ve years of the
sample.
     Taken together, the ...ndings in Figure 5 underscore the crucial role of considering extensive
and varied information in reducing forecaster bias. Although our machine learning algorithm
often chooses sparse speci...cations, di¤erent sparse information sets are relevant at di¤erent
points in time. Since it is impossible to know with certainty which information may be relevant
ex ante, "openness" to wide-ranging and rich sources of information are vital for improving
forecast accuracy over extended periods of time.
     We close this section by returning to the question of whether revisions in survey forecast
are an important contributor to expectational biases. To do so, we run the following machine
version of the CG regressions, which use the mean forecast F( ) and put forecast errors on the



                                                27
left-hand-side:
                   ( )                 ( )       ( )    ( )               ( )                ( )0
         j;t+3    Ft [   j;t+3 ]   =         +    FR   Ft [   t+3 ]   Ft    1   [   t+3 ]   +BZ Z t   +   t+h :   (9)

The machine estimation of the above speci...cation di¤ers from the CG estimation in three
ways. First, the machine forecasts are made out-of-sample rather than in-sample. Second, the
machine entertains the large-scale information-set Z t as additional predictor variables. Third,
the machine uses the EN estimator and dynamic cross-validation algorithm described above,
while CG use least squares. Denote the estimate of the coe¢ cient on forecast revisions from this
                             ( )
machine estimation with FR and that from the univariate, in-sample least squares regression
            ( )
of CG as CG .
                                         ( )
    Figure 6 reports the coe¢ cients j FR obtained from estimating (9) using the machine al-
gorithm. Since the estimation is repeated on rolling samples using real time information up
                                                                    ( )
to time t; the ...gure reports the entire time-series of estimates bj FR,t using a bar chart, where
                                                       ( )
the height of the bar indicates the magnitude of b           and the time period t of the forecast
                                                                 j FR,t
evaluation sample 1995:Q1-2018:Q2 is given on the x-axis. Time periods for which there is no
                         ( )                                               ( )
bar displayed indicate bj FR, = 0: For comparison, in-sample estimates b CG from the CG least
squares regressions are shown as separate horizontal lines, one for each of three estimation sam-
ples: 1969:Q1-2014:Q4 (CG sample), 1969:Q1-2018:Q2 (our full sample) and 1995:Q1-2018:Q2
                                                                          ( )
(our machine forecast evaluation sample). The horizontal lines for b           over the ...rst two
                                                                                                 CG
samples are both close to 1.2, while that for the shorter recent sample are smaller by half. By
                                 ( )
contrast, the machine estimates bj FR,t are always much smaller than the in-sample least squares
            ( )
estimates b  CG when those are obtained using the two longer subsamples, and they only match
or exceed the half-as-large value in the shorter recent sample in one time period. Instead, the
coe¢ cients on forecast revisions are shrunk all the way to zero by the machine algorithm in
88 out of 94 quarters in favor of placing greater absolute weight on other pieces of information
                      ( )
contained in Z t or b ;t . These ...ndings do not indicate an important role for ex ante revisions
in predicting average ex post forecast errors.

5     Belief Distortions and Macroeconomic Fluctuations
This section studies the dynamic relationship between our measured belief distortions and
macroeconomic activity. The ...rst subsection uses Vector Autoregressions (VARs) to explore
whether innovations in belief distortions are related to macroeconomic uctuations. The second
subsection uses linear projections to study how cyclical shocks a¤ect belief distortions.

5.1    Belief Distortions in a Macro VAR
To investigate the relation of our measured belief distortions to macroeconomic uctuations,
we use the common factor component of our measured distortions, which we denote biast ,


                                                         28
                                                 Figure 6: Coe¢ cient on Forecast Revisions

                                1.6


                                1.4


                                1.2


                                    1


                                0.8


                                0.6


                                0.4


                                0.2


                                    0
                                    1995                       2000                       2005                              2010              2015
Coe¢ cient on Forecast Revisions. The blue bar plots the estimated coe¢ cient on the forecast revision from
regressions of forecast errors on forecast
                                       0
                                           revisions and additional
                                                             1
                                                                    regressors for the mean of the SPF ination
                                                                      B ( )                                              C
forecast:   |
                t+3      Ft
                          {z
                            ( )
                                       t+3
                                             }
                                                 =
                                                     ( )
                                                     j     +
                                                               ( )
                                                               jF R
                                                                      BF
                                                                      @ t         t+3
                                                                                                  ( )
                                                                                                Ft 1           t+3
                                                                                                                         C + B ( )0 Zjt + jt+h :
                                                                                                                         A    jZ
                                                                                                                                                   The sample is 1995:Q1-2018:Q2.
                                                                       |                   {z                        }
                 Fo r e c a s t E r r o r                                     Fo r e c a s t R e v is io n s
The solid red line shows the estimated in-sample coe¢ cient over the CG sample 1969:Q1-2014:Q4. The dashed
blue line shows the estimated in-sample coe¢ cient over the full sample 1969:Q1-2018:Q2. The dotted black line
shows the estimated in-sample coe¢ cient over the evaluation sample 1995:Q1-2018:Q2.

                                                                                                        (i)
measured as the PC of ination biases bias                                                                 ;t+h            across all surveys and all percentiles i of
                                                                                                                                                                          y
each survey, and analogously for distortions about future GDP growth, denoted biast . We
                                         y
normalize the signs of biast and biast so that they are positively correlated with the average
(across surveys) median bias for and y , respectively. Thus a positive innovation in biast
corresponds to greater pessimism about in       ation by the average median respondent, while
                     y
an increase in biast corresponds to greater optimism about economic growth by the average
median respondent.
    A question arises as to which economic variables to include in the VARs. Given the rela-
tively short evaluation samples over which we have measured biases, we cannot entertain too
many variables or too many lags. We therefore use a one lag VARs but include a range of
macro variables. The variables in the VAR are real GDP, the GDP de              ator, real investment,
                                                                                                  x
the real wage, the S&P 500 stock market index, the federal funds rate (FFR), and a bias biast+h ;
           x                  y
where biast+h is either biast+h or biast+h . The ...rst ...ve variables are transformed with logs. To
study impulse responses and variance decompositions with respect to a shock in the bias in-
dex, the covariance matrix of VAR residuals is orthogonalized using a Cholesky decomposition
with variables ordered as listed above, i.e., with the bias index ordered last. This placement

                                                                                                        29
                       Figure 7: Responses to An Ination Bias Shock
                    Real GDP                        GDP deflator                    Real Investment
       0.15                               0.02                                0.5

        0.1
                                             0
       0.05
                                          -0.02                                0
          0
                                          -0.04
      -0.05

       -0.1                               -0.06                              -0.5
                5      10     15     20            5     10     15     20            5      10     15     20


                    Real Wage                          S&P 500                             FFR
        0.1                                                                 0.15
                                             1

       0.08                                                                   0.1
                                            0.5                             0.05
       0.06

       0.04                                                                    0
                                             0
       0.02                                                                 -0.05

          0                                -0.5                              -0.1
                5      10     15     20            5     10     15     20            5      10     15     20
                               SPF, BC and SOC-Med             SPF and BC             68% bands

Impulse responses to a positive in       ation bias shock. The ...gure plots responses to one standard deviation
positive innovations in an in ation bias index biast , corresponding to greater upward bias. The blue line shows
the responses when the bias index is constructed using biases across all percentiles of the SPF and BC surveys and
the median SOC survey. The red dotted line shows responses when the index is constructed using biases across
all percentiles of the SPF and BC surveys. Units are in percentage points. The sample is 1995:Q1-2018:Q2.

is conservative for assessing the role of systematic expectational errors to macroeconomic       uc-
tuations, since it attributes all the contemporaneous comovement between the bias index and
                                                                                 x
the macro indicators to shocks in the macro variables. A "shock" to biast is a movement in
belief distortions that is contemporaneously uncorrelated with the aggregate economic state,
as measured by the above macro variables. The VAR is estimated with standard Bayesian
methods under       at priors.
    Figure 7 reports the dynamic responses to innovations in biast when this index is constructed
as the ...rst principle component of in     ation biases across all percentiles in the SPF and BC
surveys and the median of the SOC. In this case, a positive innovation to biast (indicating
more pessimism about in        ation) operates like a cost-push shock, driving up the real wage, but
driving down prices, real investment, and real GDP. The e¤ects on the real wage are large and
persist for over ...ve years, while the e¤ects on real GDP are smaller and more transitory. These
results are virtually identical when biast is constructed using only the percentiles of SPF and
BC surveys (shown in dotted lines). As shown in Appendix Figure A.1, the results change
when biast is constructed over all percentiles of the SOC only. In this case the error bands
are much wider and the results inconclusive, implying that biases in household-level in        ation
expectations exhibit little reliable relation to aggregate economic activity, in contrast to those


                                                       30
for professional and corporate executives. Evidently, household-level belief distortions are more
"noise"than "news"for macroeconomic          uctuations.
                                                                               y
    Figure 8 reports dynamic responses to positive innovations in biast . The ...rst row shows
two sets of impulse response functions. The blue lines show that a one standard deviation
                         y
positive shock to biast (indicating more optimism about economic growth) leads to a sizable
and protracted increase in real activity, in the price level, in the real wage, and in the stock
market. Importantly, these results are speci...c to innovations in the systematic expectational
errors survey respondents make about future GDP growth, and not to their expectations per
se. The second row of Figure 8 shows that a positive innovation in an index of GDP growth
expectations has very di¤erent e¤ects from those of a positive innovation in GDP growth biases
      y
biast . For the results reported in the second row, we create an index of survey expectations,
             y
denoted Ft , exactly as we do for biases but this time using all surveys and all percentiles of
GDP growth survey forecasts rather than measured biases. In contrast to the responses using
      y                             y
biast , positive innovations in Ft (indicating higher expected economic growth by the average
median respondent) are associated with a decrease rather than an increase in real GDP, in the
stock market, and real investment.
    To investigate this further, the red dotted lines in the ...rst row of Figure 8 report the impulse
                                              y                                   y
responses from a VAR that replaces biast with the component of biast that is contempo-
                              y                 y;?
raneously orthogonal to Ft , denoted biast , computed as the residual from a regression of
      y        y                                                         y;?            y
biast on Ft . The responses to a positive innovation in biast                and biast are virtually
                                                                   y
identical. This implies that a positive innovation in biast happens not because survey ex-
pectations over-react to some positive economic news embedded in the innovation, but instead
because the innovation causes the machine to lower its forecast of economic growth, while the
survey forecast is mostly unchanged. This fact is inconsistent with simple reverse causality
stories in which positive economic shocks cause over-optimism by pushing up growth expecta-
tions too much. Keeping in mind that an impulse response shows the dynamic consequences
                                                                                       y
of a counterfactual event, this result implies that positive innovations in biast trace out the
e¤ects of instances where survey respondents maintain their forecasts even as objective eco-
nomic evidence points toward a deterioration in economic growth. Evidently, such moments of
serendipitous inattention act like positive economic shocks, leaving growth higher than it would
otherwise be.
    To study the quantitative importance of the bias shocks for macroeconomic              uctuations,
Table 4 reports variance decompositions of the VAR variables, over several VAR forecast hori-
zons. The table reports the fraction of forecast error variance that is explained by shocks to
      y
biast+h or biast+h with the variables again ordered as above, where k denotes the VAR forecast
horizon and "max k " denotes the forecast horizon k for which a shock explains the maximum
fraction of forecast error variance. For comparison, the table also reports the fraction of forecast
error variance explained by shocks to the federal funds rate.


                                                 31
                                        Figure 8: Responses to GDP Growth Bias and Expectation Shocks


                                                               Responses to GDP Growth Bias Shock
              Real GDP                  GDP deflator                 Real Investment              Real Wage                    S&P 500                       FFR
     0.15                       0.06                           0.6                      0.06                            1                        0.1

                                                                                                                      0.8
                                0.04                           0.4                      0.04
      0.1                                                                                                             0.6                          0
                                0.02                           0.2                      0.02                          0.4
     0.05                                                                                                                                       -0.1
                                    0                           0                             0                       0.2

                                                                                                                        0
        0
                          -0.02                              -0.2                       -0.02                                                   -0.2
              5   10 15 20               5    10 15 20                 5   10 15 20               5   10 15 20                 5   10 15 20              5    10 15 20
                                                          Responses to GDP Growth Expectation Shock
32




                                0.04                           0.2                            0                       0.5                       0.05
        0
                                                                                                                                                   0
                                0.02                                                    -0.02
                                                                0                                                       0
     -0.05                                                                                                                                     -0.05
                                    0                                                   -0.04
                                                                                                                      -0.5                      -0.1
      -0.1                                                   -0.2
                               -0.02                                                    -0.06
                                                                                                                                               -0.15
                                                                                                                       -1
     -0.15                -0.04                              -0.4                       -0.08                                                   -0.2
              5   10 15 20               5    10 15 20                 5   10 15 20               5   10 15 20                 5   10 15 20              5    10 15 20
                                                  Bias shock          Orthogonal bias shock       Expectation shock          68% bands

        Impulse responses to a positive GDP growth bias shock and a positive GDP expectation shock. The blue line shows the responses to one
                                                                         y                                                                                      y;?
        standard deviation positive innovations in the bias index biast . The red line shows responses to innovations in the orthogonal bias index biast            ,
                                                                 y                                            y
        constructed as the residual from a regression of biast on a GDP growth expectation index F t . An increase in the bias corresponds to greater
                                                                                                                   y
        optimism, i.e., greater upward bias. The purple line in the second row plots responses to innovations in Ft , constructed as the ...rst principle component
        of GDP growth survey forecasts across all surveys and percentiles. Units are percentage points. The sample is 1995:Q1-2018:Q2.
    Table 4 shows that innovations to the GDP growth bias index account for up to 10%, 8% and
3.2% of the forecast error variance in GDP growth, in   ation, and the stock market, respectively,
depending on the VAR forecast horizon. Although these magnitudes are relatively modest in
absolute terms, it is worth forming a basis for comparison. Over the same sample, innovations
to the federal funds rate (a common proxy for unanticipated shifts in monetary policy) explain
(at most) 7%, 5.5%, and 1.4% of the forecast error variance in these same variables, despite the
federal funds rate being placed ahead of the bias index in the VAR. For the in  ation bias index,
contributions are in the same ballpark as those for the federal funds rate. That the e¤ects
for both indexes are comparable to or in some cases quantitatively more important than those
for the federal funds rate is consistent with the view that expectational errors have non-trivial
implications for aggregate economic activity.

5.2     Belief Distortions in Response to Business Cycle Shocks
In this section we investigate how our measured belief distortions vary in response to cyclical
shocks. To do so we follow Angeletos, Huo, and Sastry (2020) (AHS) and estimate the dynamic
responses of in  ation or real GDP growth to two cyclical shocks identi...ed in Angeletos, Collard,
and Dellas (2018a).9 These are the "in        ation-targeted" shock "t , and the "GDP-targeted
          GDP
shock," "t : By construction, these shocks account for most of the business cycle variation in
in  ation and GDP growth, respectively.10 Due to limitations of space, we restrict our reported
results in this section to belief distortions in the SPF median forecasts of four-quarter-ahead
in  ation or GDP growth. Results not reported show patterns for the 25th and 75th percentiles
of the SPF forecast distribution are similar to those for the median.
    Figure 9 reports dynamic responses of the machine forecast, the median SPF survey fore-
cast, and the relevant outcome variable, to innovations in "t and "GDPt     , estimated using local
                             11
projections (Jorda (2005)). The ...rst column, ...rst row, reports the responses of the machine
and survey forecasts of in    ation to an innovation in "t , while the ...rst column, second row,
reports the responses of the machine and survey forecasts of GDP growth to an innovation in
"GDP
 t    . The right column shows these same responses along with the response of the relevant
outcome variable, i.e., in   ation or real GDP growth, removing the error bands to eliminate
clutter. The plots in the right column "align"the forecast responses so that, at a given vertical
slice of the plot, the outcome and forecast responses are measured over the same time horizon
and the di¤erence between the two is the forecast error. For example, given a shock at time t,
   9
     We are grateful to the authors for providing us their data on these shocks.
  10
     These shocks are identi...ed using a 10 variable macro VAR as the structural shock that maximizes the
volatility of the outcome variable (i.e., ination, GDP growth) at frequencies corresponding to cycles between
6 and 32 quarters.
  11
     The Appendix gives the details of this estimation. We use a four-quarter forecast horizon, in contrast to
AHS who use a three-quarter horizon. Our sample is also shorter than that used in AHS. The Appendix shows
that we reproduce the results in AHS for the same forecast horizon and sample size that they use, and that the
results are similar using the shorter sample of this paper.


                                                     33
                                                                          Table 4: d

                                                 Table 4. Decomposition of Variance
                                    Fraction Variation in Real GDP (%)     Fraction Variation in Real Investment (%)
                                                         y                                         y
                   Explained by: bias t FFR       bias t        FFR        bias t FFR       bias t         FFR
                   k=3            1.21 0.10         0.45        0.04        4.68 1.42         0.62         1.60
                   k = 12         1.56 1.44         5.18        1.96       15.36 13.61        3.93         10.27
                   k=1            1.99 6.16         8.91        5.69       13.97 18.97        5.70         11.67
                   max k           25      32        34          32          11     1          1            163
                   k = max        3.94 9.04         9.97        6.95       15.39 18.97        5.70         11.67
                                 Fraction Variation in GDP De    ator (%):     Fraction Variation in S&P 500 (%)
                                                         y                                         y
                   Explained by: bias t FFR       bias t        FFR        bias t FFR       bias t         FFR
                   k=3            1.94 0.70         0.13        0.60        0.03 1.03         1.39         0.64
                   k = 12         6.50 2.09         0.29        1.18        2.45 1.51         2.61         1.04
                   k=1            0.79 3.90         7.66        5.22        2.73 2.03         3.17         1.22
34




                   max k           10      55       125         117          52     55         23            7
                   k = max        6.64 4.36         7.91        5.54        3.21 2.21         3.18         1.42
                                 Fraction of Variation in Real Wage (%):         Fraction Variation in FFR (%)
                                                         y                                         y
                   Explained by: bias t FFR       bias t        FFR        bias t FFR       bias t         FFR
                   k=3            2.92 0.16         0.22        0.21        0.12 70.80        3.25         66.55
                   k = 12         3.49 2.64         4.94        5.04        0.10 44.93        3.27         42.83
                   k=1            3.68 5.48         6.63        6.48        0.73 34.41        2.89         32.62
                   max k           6       25        25          23          71      1          6            1
                   k = max        5.02 6.13         7.34        7.59        0.73 75.93        4.26         72.54

     Forecast error variance decomposition. Forecast error variances are computed from a VAR using a Cholesky factorization with the following
     variables in the order: log(real GDP), log(GDP deator), log(real wage), log(real investment), log(S&P 500 Index), federal funds rate (FFR), and bias t ,
                                                                                               y
     where bias t is either the in  ation bias index bias t or the GDP growth bias index bias t . Each panel shows the fraction of forecast-error variance of
     the variable named in the panel title at VAR forecast horizon k that is explained by bias t or the FFR for that VAR. The row denoted "max k " gives
     the horizon k for which the variable named in the column explains the maximum fraction of forecast error variance. The row denoted "k = max" gives
     the fraction of forecast error variance explained at max k . The data are quarterly and span the period 1995:Q1 -2018:Q2.
                        Figure 9: Dynamic Responses to Cyclical Shocks

                 IRF to Inflation Targeted Shock                             IRF to Inflation Targeted Shock
       0.2                                                        0.4
                                Machine infl forecast                                       Machine infl forecast
                                Survey infl forecast                                        Survey infl forecast
                                                                  0.3
                                                                                            Inflation outcome
       0.1
                                                                  0.2

         0                                                        0.1

                                                                    0
      -0.1
                                                                  -0.1

      -0.2                                                        -0.2
             5            10           15               20               0        5        10        15             20
                            Quarters                                                    Quarters

                  IRF to GDP Targeted Shock                                   IRF to GDP Targeted Shock
       0.4
                               Machine GDP forecast                 1                      Machine GDP forecast
                               Survey GDP forecast                                         Survey GDP forecast
       0.2                                                                                 GDP outcome

                                                                  0.5
         0


                                                                    0
      -0.2



      -0.4                                                        -0.5
             5            10           15               20               0        5        10        15             20
                            Quarters                                                    Quarters
Dynamic responses of beliefs to cyclical shocks. The ...gure plots dynamic responses of the machine and
                (50)         (50)
survey beliefs Ft [ ] and Et [ ] for the median respondent of the SPF to cyclical shocks from Angeletos,
Collard, and Dellas (2018a) (AHS). The AHS in       ation and GDP growth "targeted" cyclical shocks are those
from a 10-variable VAR that maximize the volatility in in   ation and GDP growth at business cycle frequencies,
respectively. The right column aligns the forecast responses such that, at a given vertical slice, the outcome and
forecast responses are measured over the same horizon, and the di¤erence between the two is the forecast error.
"MSEE /MSEF " is the ratio of the machine to survey mean-squared-forecast error averaged over the response
time periods in the plot. The vintage of observations on the outcome variable is the one available four quarters
after the period being forecast. Shaded areas are 68% con...dence intervals based on HAC standard errors with
a Bartlett kernel using four quarterly lags. The sample is 1995:Q1-2018:Q2.

                                                                     (50)
the ...rst response plotted for the survey forecast is Ft [yt+4 ] ; which is aligned vertically with
the response of y at time t + 4. Following AHS, we set H = 20 quarters as the maximum period
for tracing out impulse responses. Several ...ndings from Figure 9 are worthy of emphasis.
    First, survey respondents initially under-react to a shock but later over-react. Dynamic
under- and over-reaction of the survey respondent'     s belief is measured vis-a-vis the machine
belief­  this is what is shown in the left column of the ...gure. From the left-hand subplots we
                                      (50)
observe that the survey forecast Ft [yt+4 ] reacts less initially to an increase in both "t and
                                     (50)
"GDP
 t      than the machine forecast Et [yt+4 ] does, but eventually it reacts more. Qualitatively,

                                                             35
these results are consistent with the dynamic patterns of initial under-reaction but delayed
over-reaction emphasized by AHS.
    Second, GDP growth expectations exhibit greater and more protracted under -reaction than
do expectations about in       ation. Conversely, in   ation expectations exhibit greater and more
protracted delayed over -reaction than do expectations about economic growth. In fact, for
in  ation expectations, the eventual over-reaction appears to be more important than the initial
under-reaction, while GDP growth expectations appear to be more subject overall to under-
reaction and only exhibit statistically signi...cant over-reaction starting about 18 quarters after
the shock.
    Third, comparing the survey forecast to the realized value of the outcome variable greatly
overstates the degree of over- or under-reaction that can be attributed to belief distortions.
This can be observed in the right column of Figure 9 by noting that the ...rst survey forecasts
recorded after the shock under-shoot the realized outcome by much more than they under-shoot
the machine forecasts. Likewise, the survey forecasts subsequently over-shoot the realized out-
come by more than they over-shoot the machine forecast. AHS have interpreted the di¤erence
between the survey forecast and the realized value of the outcome variable as a measure of
non-rational expectations. By contrast, we interpret the di¤erence between the survey and
machine forecasts as a measure of systematic expectational error, and the di¤erence between
the machine forecast and the outcome variable as pure random forecast error, rather than bias.
The discrepancy between the two suggests that the cyclical shocks "t and "GDP   t    are unlikely to
be well observed in real time, even by a machine with a high degree of information processing
capacity. This may be because "t and "GDP   t    are constructed from an in-sample estimation using
fully revised, ...nal release historical data, while both the survey and machine forecasts use only
information that we know could have been observed in real time including the information on
the outcome variables, which are subject to signi...cant processing and estimation delays.12
    Fourth, in the wake of both cyclical shocks, the machine produces more accurate forecasts
than the median SPF survey respondent. The right column of Figure 9 reports the ratio of
the machine-to-survey MSE over the H periods for which the dynamic responses are tallied.
The gains in forecast accuracy are especially large for in     ation where the ratio M SEE =M SEF
is 0.6, but even for GDP growth the ratio M SEE =M SEF is 0.87. That the machine improves
forecasts in this context is noteworthy because it was not trained to optimize out-of-sample
prediction at the speci...c business cycle frequencies that, by construction, dominate variation
in the outcome variables in Figure 9.
  12
    The SPF collects survey responses in February on the outlook for GDP in the second quarter of the year, but
the advance estimate of Q2 GDP is not released until the end of July. The ...nal release data used to construct
the shocks are both subject to subsequent revision. Some information pointing toward a large business cycle
shock may be available at t, such as that contained in ...nancial markets, but those are already accounted for by
the machine.




                                                       36
6   Conclusion
This paper provides new measures of belief distortions in survey responses and relates them
to macroeconomic activity. Our measures are based on a novel dynamic machine learning
algorithm designed to detect demonstrable, ex ante errors in macroeconomic expectations. For
the median respondent from all surveys, expectations about both in      ation and GDP growth are
biased upward on average, with over-optimism about GDP growth especially prevalent among
professional forecasters post-Great Recession to 2018:Q2. These averages mask large variation
over time in the median respondent'     s bias, as well across respondents at any given point in
time. A pervasive ...nding across all surveys is that respondents place too much weight on their
own belief and too little weight on other publicly available information.
    These measures of belief distortions exhibit dynamic relations with the macroeconomy. A
positive innovation to an index of in    ation bias (indicating greater upward bias) is associated
with an increase in the real wage, and a decrease in real investment, real GDP, and the price
level. By contrast, a positive innovation to a GDP growth bias index is associated with a sizable
and more protracted increase in real activity, the price level, and also the stock market, while
the real wage declines. In response to cyclical shocks, we ...nd that under -reaction preponderates
in survey expectations of economic growth, while in       ation expectations show greater delayed
over -reaction. The estimates of belief distortions provide a benchmark to evaluate theories
in which information capacity constraints, extrapolation, sentiments, ambiguity aversion, and
other departures from full information rational expectations play a role in business cycles.

References
Adam, K., A. Marcet, and J. Beutel (2017): "Stock price booms and expected capital gains,"
 American Economic Review, 107(8), 2352­2408.
Afrouzi, H., and L. Veldkamp (2019): "Biased Ination Forecasts," in 2019 Meeting Papers, no.
  894. Society for Economic Dynamics.
Amromin, G., and S. A. Sharpe (2014): "From the horse'       s mouth: Economic conditions and
 investor expectations of risk and return," Management Science, 60(4), 845­866.
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev, P. F. Christoffersen, and F. X. Diebold (2011): "Forecast
 Combinations," in Oxford Handbook of Economic Forecasting, ed. by M. P. Clements, and D. F.
 Hendry, pp. 355­389. Oxford University Press, 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016.
Andreou, E., E. Ghysels, and A. Kourtellos (2013): "Should macroeconomic forecasters use
 daily ...nancial data and how?," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 31(2), 240­251.
Ang, A., G. Bekaert, and M. Wei (2007): "Do macro variables, asset markets, or surveys forecast
 in ation better?," Journal of monetary Economics, 54(4), 1163­1212.
Angeletos, G.-M., F. Collard, and H. Dellas (2018a): "Business cycle anatomy," Discussion
 paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
         (2018b): "Quantifying Con...dence," Econometrica, 86(5), 1689­1726.
Angeletos, G.-M., Z. Huo, and K. A. Sastry (2020): "Imperfect Macroeconomic Expectations:
 Evidence and Theory," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                37
Angeletos, G.-M., and J. La'O (2013): "Sentiments," Econometrica, 81(2), 739­779.
Bacchetta, P., E. Mertens, and E. Van Wincoop (2009): "Predictability in ...nancial markets:
  What do survey expectations tell us?," Journal of International Money and Finance, 28(3), 406­426.
Bai, J., and S. Ng (2002): "Determining the Number of Factors in Approximate Factor Models,"
  Econometrica, 70(1), 191­221.
        (2006): "Con...dence Intervals for Di¤usion Index Forecasts and Inference for Factor-
  Augmented Regressions," Econometrica, 74(4), 1133­50.
Barber, B. M., and T. Odean (2000): "Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock
  investment performance of individual investors," The journal of Finance, 55(2), 773­806.
Barberis, N., R. Greenwood, L. Jin, and A. Shleifer (2015): "X-CAPM: An extrapolative
  capital asset pricing model," Journal of ...nancial economics, 115(1), 1­24.
Barberis, N., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1998): "A Model of Investor Sentiment," Journal
  of Financial Economics, 49(3), 307­43.
Ben-David, I., J. R. Graham, and C. R. Harvey (2013): "Managerial miscalibration," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(4), 1547­1584.
Bhandari, A., J. Borovicka, and P. Ho (2019): "Survey data and subjective beliefs in business
  cycle models," FRB Richmond Working Paper.
Bianchi, F., C. Ilut, and M. Schneider (2017): "Uncertainty Shocks, Asset Supply and Pricing
  Over the Business Cycle," The Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, Y. Ma, and A. Shleifer (2018): "Over-reaction in macroeconomic
  expectations," Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, R. L. Porta, and A. Shleifer (2019): "Diagnostic expectations
  and stock returns," The Journal of Finance, 74(6), 2839­2874.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2018): "Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles,"
  The Journal of Finance, 73(1), 199­227.
Bouchaud, J.-P., P. Krueger, A. Landier, and D. Thesmar (2019): "Sticky expectations and
  the pro...tability anomaly," The Journal of Finance, 74(2), 639­674.
Chauvet, M., and S. Potter (2013): "Forecasting output,"in Handbook of Economic Forecasting,
 vol. 2, pp. 141­194. Elsevier.
Coibion, O., and Y. Gorodnichenko (2012): "What can survey forecasts tell us about information
 rigidities?," Journal of Political Economy, 120(1), 116­159.
        (2015): "Information rigidity and the expectations formation process: A simple framework
  and new facts," American Economic Review, 105(8), 2644­  78.
Curtin, R. T. (2019): Consumer Expectations: Micro Foundations and Macro Impact. Cambridge
 University Press.
Daniel, K., and D. Hirshleifer (2015): "Overcon...dent investors, predictable returns, and exces-
 sive trading," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(4), 61­88.
Daniel, K., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam (1998): "Investor psychology and security
 market under-and overreactions," the Journal of Finance, 53(6), 1839­1885.
Daniel, K. D., D. Hirshleifer, and A. Subrahmanyam (2001): "Overcon...dence, arbitrage, and
 equilibrium asset pricing," The Journal of Finance, 56(3), 921­965.


                                                38
De Bondt, W. F., and R. H. Thaler (1990): "Do security analysts overreact?," The American
 Economic Review, pp. 52­57.
De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann (1990): "Positive feedback
 investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation," the Journal of Finance, 45(2), 379­
 395.
Del Negro, M., and S. Eusepi (2011): "Fitting observed ination expectations," Journal of Eco-
 nomic Dynamics and control, 35(12), 2105­2131.
Epstein, L. G., and M. Schneider (2010): "Ambiguity and asset markets," Annual Review of
  Financial Economics, 2, 315­346.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French (1992): "The Cross-Section of Expected Returns," Journal of
  Finance, 47(2), 427­65.
       (1993): "Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds," Journal of Financial
  Economics, 33, 3­56.
Faust, J., and J. H. Wright (2013): "Forecasting ination,"in Handbook of economic forecasting,
  vol. 2, pp. 2­56. Elsevier.
Fuhrer, J. C. (2018): "Intrinsic expectations persistence: Evidence from professional and household
  survey expectations," FRB of Boston Working Paper.
Gabaix, X. (2014): "A sparsity-based model of bounded rationality," The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 129(4), 1661­1710.
          (2020): "A behavioral New Keynesian model," American Economic Review, 110(8), 2271­
  2327.
Gennaioli, N., Y. Ma, and A. Shleifer (2016): "Expectations and investment," NBER Macro-
 economics Annual, 30(1), 379­431.
Gennaioli, N., and A. Shleifer (2018): A crisis of beliefs: Investor psychology and ...nancial
 fragility. Princeton University Press.
Genre, V., G. Kenny, A. Meyler, and A. Timmermann (2013): "Combining expert forecasts:
 Can anything beat the simple average?," International Journal of Forecasting, 29(1), 108­121.
Ghysels, E., A. Sinko, and R. Valkanov (2007): "MIDAS regressions: Further results and new
 directions," Econometric Reviews, 26(1), 53­90.
Greenwood, R., and S. G. Hanson (2015): "Waves in ship prices and investment," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 130(1), 55­109.
Greenwood, R., and A. Shleifer (2014): "Expectations of returns and expected returns," The
 Review of Financial Studies, 27(3), 714­746.
Hamilton, J. D. (2018): "Why you should never use the Hodrick-Prescott ...lter," Review of Eco-
 nomics and Statistics, 100(5), 831­843.
Hansen, L. P., and T. J. Sargent (2008): Robustness. Princeton university press.
Huang, D., F. Jiang, and G. Tong (2017): "Real time macro factors in bond risk premium,"
 Unpublished paper, Lee kong Chian School of Business.
Ilut, C. L., and H. Saijo (2020): "Learning, con...dence, and business cycles," Journal of Monetary
  Economics.
Ilut, C. L., and M. Schneider (2015): "Ambiguous Business Cycles," American Economic Review,
  forthcoming.

                                                39
Jorda, O. (2005): "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections," American
  Economic Review, 95, 161­182.
Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng (2015): "Measuring Uncertainty," The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 105(3), 117­1216.
Khaw, M. W., L. Stevens, and M. Woodford (2017): "Discrete adjustment to a changing
 environment: Experimental evidence," Journal of Monetary Economics, 91, 88­103.
Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ma, and S. Ng (2019): "Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous Impulse
  or Endogenous Response?," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcoming.
Ludvigson, S. C., and S. Ng (2007): "The Empirical Risk-Return Relation: A Factor Analysis
  Approach," Journal of Financial Economics, 83(1), 171­222.
        (2009): "Macro Factors in Bond Risk Premia," The Review of Financial Studies, 22(12),
  5027­67.
Malmendier, U., and S. Nagel (2011): "Depression babies: do macroeconomic experiences a¤ect
 risk taking?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1), 373­416.
           (2015): "Learning from ination experiences," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(1),
  53­87.
Mankiw, N. G., and R. Reis (2002): "Sticky information versus sticky prices: a proposal to replace
 the New Keynesian Phillips curve," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1295­ 1328.
Martin, I., and S. Nagel (2019): "Market E¢ ciency in the Age of Big Data,"Unpublished manu-
 script, University of Chicago Booth.
Masolo, R. M., and F. Monti (2015): "Ambiguity, Monetary Policy, and Trend Ination," Journal
 of the European Economic Association.
Milani, F. (2011): "Expectation shocks and learning as drivers of the business cycle," The Economic
 Journal, 121(552), 379­401.
        (2017): "Sentiment and the U.S. business cycle," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
  82, 289­311.
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West (1987): "A Simple, Positive Semide...nite, Heteroskedasticity and
 Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix," Econometrica, 55, 703­708.
Odean, T. (1998): "Volume, volatility, price, and pro...t when all traders are above average," The
 journal of ...nance, 53(6), 1887­1934.
Reis, R. (2006a): "Inattentive consumers," Journal of monetary Economics, 53(8), 1761­1800.
           (2006b): "Inattentive producers," The Review of Economic Studies, 73(3), 793­821.
Sims, C. A. (2003): "Implications of rational inattention," Journal of monetary Economics, 50(3),
  665­690.
Woodford, M. (2002): "Imperfect Common Knowledge and the E¤ects of Monetary Policy," in
 In Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S.
 Phelps, ed. by P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, pp. 25­58. Princeton University
 Press, Cambridge MA.
        (2013): "Macroeconomic analysis without the rational expectations hypothesis," Annu. Rev.
  Econ., 5(1), 303­346.




                                                 40
Online Appendix

Data
This appendix describes our data.

VAR Data

Real GDP: The real Gross Domestic Product is obtained from the US Bureau of Economic
Analysis. It is in billions of chained 2012 dollars, quarterly frequency, seasonally adjusted,
and at annual rate. We take the log of this variable. The source is from Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA code: A191RX). The sample spans 1960:Q1 to 2019:Q3.

Real personal consumption expenditures: The real Personal Consumption Expenditures
is obtained from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis. It is in billions of chained 2012 dollars,
quarterly frequency, seasonally adjusted, and at annual rate. We take the log of this variable.
The source is from Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA code: DPCERX). The sample spans
1960:Q1 to 2019:Q3.

GDP price de     ator: The Gross Domestic Product: implicit price de   ator is obtained from
the US Bureau of Economic Analysis. Index base is 2012=100, quarterly frequency, and sea-
sonally adjusted. We take the log of this variable. The source is from Bureau of Economic
Analysis (BEA code: A191RD). The sample spans 1960:Q1 to 2019:Q3.

Real investment: The real Gross Private Domestic Investment is obtained from the US
Bureau of Economic Analysis. It is in billions of chained 2012 dollars, quarterly frequency,
seasonally adjusted, and at annual rate. We take the log of this variable. The source is from
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA code: A006RX). The sample spans 1960:Q1 to 2019:Q3.

Real wage: We obtain real wages by dividing the Average Hourly Earnings of Production
and Nonsupervisory Employees: Manufacturing over the Personal Consumption Expenditures
(implicit price de ator). Average Hourly Earnings of Production and Nonsupervisory Employ-
ees: Manufacturing is obtained from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics; it is in dollars per hour,
quarterly frequency (average), and seasonally adjusted. BLS Account Code: CES3000000008.
Personal Consumption Expenditures (implicit price de      ator) is obtained from the US Bureau
of Economic Analysis. Index base is 2012=100, quarterly frequency, and seasonally adjusted.
We take the log of the ratio of these variables. The source is from Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA code: DPCERD). The sample spans 1960:Q1 to 2019:Q3.




                                               1
                       Figure A.1: Responses to Ination Bias Shock: SOC Only



             Real GDP                                GDP deflator                            Real Investment
0.05
                                       0.02                                         0.2

                                       0.01
   0                                                                                   0
                                           0

-0.05                                  -0.01                                       -0.2
         5       10       15      20                5       10       15      20                5       10       15       20

             Real Wage                                  S&P 500                                        FFR
                                                                                    0.1
                                         0.2
0.02
                                                                                  0.05
                                           0
   0
                                        -0.2                                           0

-0.02                                   -0.4                                      -0.05
         5       10       15      20                5       10       15      20                5       10       15       20

         Inflation Bias


   2

   1

   0
         5       10       15      20

                                                  Median           68% bands

        Impulse responses to a one standard deviation in            ation bias index shock. Estimates from quarterly
        VAR with one lag. The bias index biast is constructed as the ...rst principle component of in     ation biases
        across all percentiles of SOC. An increase in the bias corresponds to greater pessimism, i.e., upwardly biased
        forecasts, about future in  ation. Units are in percentage points. The sample is 1995:Q1-2018:Q2.




                                                              2
S&P 500 stock market index: The S&P 500 is obtained from the S&P Dow Jones Indices
LLC. It is the quarterly average of the daily index value at market close. We take the log of
this variable. The sample spans 1960:Q1 to 2019:Q3.

Federal funds rate (FFR): The E¤ective Federal Funds Rate is obtained from the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. It is in percentage points, quarterly frequency
(average), and not seasonally adjusted. The sample spans 1960:Q1 to 2019:Q3.

Survey Data

All details on survey data and survey forecast construction here, with links to data sources.

Survey of Professional Forecasters The SPF is conducted each quarter by sending out
surveys to professional forecasters, de...ned as forecasters. The number of surveys sent varies
over time, but recent waves sent around 50 surveys each quarter according to o¢ cials at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Only forecasters with su¢ cient academic training and
experience as macroeconomic forecasters are eligible to participate. Over the course of our
sample, the number of respondents ranges from a minimum of 9, to a maximum of 83, and the
mean number of respondents is 37. The surveys are sent out at the end of the ...rst month of
each quarter, and they are collected in the second or third week of the middle month of each
quarter. Each survey asks respondents to provide nowcasts and quarterly forecasts from one
to four quarters ahead for a variety of variables. Speci...cally, we use the SPF micro data on
individual forecasts of the price level, long-run in  ation, and real GDP.13 Below we provide
the exact de...nitions of these variables as well as our method for constructing nowcasts and
forecasts of quarterly and annual in  ation and GDP growth for each respondent.14
    The following variables are used on either the right- or left-hand-sides of forecasting models:

   1. Quarterly and annual in ation (1968:Q4 - present): We use survey responses for the level
      of the GDP price index (PGDP), de...ned as
      "Forecasts for the quarterly and annual level of the chain-weighted GDP price index.
      Seasonally adjusted, index, base year varies. 1992-1995, GDP implicit deator. Prior to
      1992, GNP implicit deator. Annual forecasts are for the annual average of the quarterly
      levels."
      Since advance BEA estimates of these variables for the current quarter are unavailable at
      the time SPF respondents turn in their forecasts, four quarter-ahead in  ation and GDP
  13
     Individual forecasts for all variables can be downloaded at https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-
data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/historical-data/individual-forecasts.
  14
     The SPF documentation ...le can be found at https://www.philadelphiafed.org/-/media/research-and-
data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/spf-documentation.pdf?la=en.




                                                      3
  growth forecasts are constructed by dividing the forecasted level by the survey respondent-
                         ( i)
  type' s nowcast. Let Ft [Pt+h ] be forecaster i'  s prediction of PGDP h quarters ahead and
    (i)
  Nt [Pt ] be forecaster i'  s nowcast of PGDP for the current quarter. Annualized in   ation
  forecasts for forecaster i are
                                                                      !
                                                             (i)
                               (i)                         Ft [Pt+h ]
                              Ft [ t+h;t ] = (400=h) ln        (i)
                                                                        ;              (A.10)
                                                            Nt [Pt ]

  where h = 1 for quarterly in   ation and h = 4 for annual in ation. Similarly, we construct
  quarterly and annual nowcasts of in    ation as
                                                                  !
                                                          ( i)
                             (i)                         Nt [Pt ]
                           Nt [ t;t h ] = (400=h) ln                ;
                                                          Pt h

  where h = 1 for quarterly in   ation and h = 4 for annual in  ation, and where Pt 1 is the
  BEA'  s advance estimate of PGDP in the previous quarter observed by the respondent
  in time t, and Pt 4 is the BEA'   s most accurate estimate of PGDP four quarters back.
  After computing in   ation for each survey respondent, we calculate the 5th through the
  95th percentiles as well as the average, variance, and skewness of in ation forecasts across
  respondents.

2. Long-run ination (1991:Q4 - present): We use survey responses for 10-year-ahead CPI
   ination (CPI10), which is de...ned as
  "Forecasts for the annual average rate of headline CPI ination over the next 10 years.
  Seasonally adjusted, annualized percentage points. The "next 10 years" includes the year
  in which we conducted the survey and the following nine years. Conceptually, the calcu-
  lation of ination is one that runs from the fourth quarter of the year before the survey
  to the fourth quarter of the year that is ten years beyond the survey year, representing a
  total of 40 quarters or 10 years. The fourth-quarter level is the quarterly average of the
  underlying monthly levels."
  Only the median response is provided for CPI10, and it is already reported as an ina-
  tion rate, so we do not make any adjustments and cannot compute other moments or
  percentiles.

3. Real GDP growth (1968:Q4 - present): We use the level of real GDP (RGDP), which is
   de...ned as
  "Forecasts for the quarterly and annual level of chain-weighted real GDP. Seasonally ad-
  justed, annual rate, base year varies. 1992-1995, ...xed-weighted real GDP. Prior to 1992,
  ...xed-weighted real GNP. Annual forecasts are for the annual average of the quarterly
  levels. Prior to 1981:Q3, RGDP is computed by using the formula NGDP / PGDP *
  100."

                                            4
      Quarterly and annual growth rates are constructed the same way as for ination, except
      RGDP replaces PGDP.

     In order to generate OOS forecasts that could have been made in real time, it is necessary
to take a stand on the information set of the forecasters when each forecast was made. We
assume that forecasters could have used all data released before the survey deadlines. Table
A.1 lists the survey deadlines that are available, beginning with the 1990:Q3 survey. Before
1990:Q3, we make the conservative assumption that respondents only had data released by the
...rst day of the second month of each quarter.

                                  Table A.1: SPF Survey Deadlines15
                Survey   Deadline Date     Survey   Deadline Date    Survey   Deadline Date
               1990:Q1   Unknown          1991:Q1   2/16/91         1992:Q1   2/22/92
                    Q2   Unknown               Q2   5/18/91              Q2   5/15/92
                    Q3   8/23/90               Q3   8/18/91              Q3   8/21/92
                    Q4   11/22/90              Q4   11/16/91             Q4   11/20/92

               1993:Q1   2/19/93          1994:Q1   2/21/94         1995:Q1   2/21/95
                    Q2   5/20/93               Q2   5/18/94              Q2   5/22/95
                    Q3   8/19/93               Q3   8/18/94              Q3   8/22/95
                    Q4   11/23/93              Q4   11/18/94             Q4   11/20/95

               1996:Q1   3/2/96           1997:Q1   2/19/97         1998:Q1   2/18/98
                    Q2   5/18/96               Q2   5/17/97              Q2   5/16/98
                    Q3   8/21/96               Q3   8/16/97              Q3   8/15/98
                    Q4   11/18/96              Q4   11/19/97             Q4   11/14/98

               1999:Q1   2/16/99          2000:Q1   2/12/00         2001:Q1   2/14/01
                    Q2   5/15/99               Q2   5/13/00              Q2   5/12/01
                    Q3   8/14/99               Q3   8/12/00              Q3   8/15/01
                    Q4   11/13/99              Q4   11/11/00             Q4   11/14/01

               2002:Q1   2/12/02          2003:Q1   2/14/03         2004:Q1   2/14/04
                    Q2   5/13/02               Q2   5/12/03              Q2   5/14/04
                    Q3   8/14/02               Q3   8/16/03              Q3   8/13/04
                    Q4   11/13/02              Q4   11/14/03             Q4   11/13/04

               2005:Q1   2/9/05           2006:Q1   2/8/06          2007:Q1   2/8/07
                    Q2   5/12/05               Q2   5/10/06              Q2   5/9/07
                    Q3   8/11/05               Q3   8/9/06               Q3   8/8/07
                    Q4   11/8/05               Q4   11/8/06              Q4   11/7/07

               2008:Q1   2/7/08           2009:Q1   2/10/09         2010:Q1   2/9/10
                    Q2   5/8/08                Q2   5/12/09              Q2   5/11/10
                    Q3   8/7/08                Q3   8/11/09              Q3   8/10/10
                    Q4   11/10/08              Q4   11/10/09             Q4   11/9/10

               2011:Q1   2/8/11           2012:Q1   2/7/12          2013:Q1   2/11/13
                    Q2   5/10/11               Q2   5/8/12               Q2   5/7/13
                    Q3   8/8/11                Q3   8/7/12               Q3   8/12/13
                    Q4   11/8/11               Q4   11/6/12              Q4   11/18/13

               2014:Q1   2/10/14          2015:Q1   2/10/15         2016:Q1   2/9/16
                    Q2   5/11/14               Q2   5/12/15              Q2   5/10/16
                    Q3   8/11/14               Q3   8/11/15              Q3   8/9/16
                    Q4   11/10/14              Q4   11/10/15             Q4   11/8/16

               2017:Q1   2/7/17           2018:Q1   2/6/18

 15
    SPF survey deadlines are posted online at https://www.philadelphiafed.org/-/media/research-and-
data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/spf-release-dates.txt?la=en.


                                                    5
                                        Table A.1 (Cont'
                                                       d)
               Survey   Deadline Date     Survey   Deadline Date   Survey   Deadline Date
                  Q2    5/9/17               Q2    5/8/18
                  Q3    8/8/17               Q3    8/7/18
                  Q4    11/7/17              Q4    11/6/18



Michigan Survey of Consumers (SOC) We construct MS forecasts of annual in            ation and
GDP growth of respondents answering at time t. Each month, the SOC contains approximately
50 core questions, and a minimum of 500 interviews are conducted by telephone over the course
of the entire month, each month. We use two questions from the monthly survey for which the
time series begins in January 1978, and convert to quarterly observations as explained below.

  1. Annual CPI in   ation: To get a point forecast, we combine the information in the survey
     responses to questions A12 and A12b.

          Question A12 asks (emphasis in original): During the next 12 months, do you think
          that prices in general will go up, or go down, or stay where they are now?
          A12b asks (emphasis in original): By about what percent do you expect prices to go
          (up/down) on the average, during the next 12 months?

  2. Annual real GDP growth: We use survey responses to question A7, which asks (emphasis
     in original):
     And how about a year from now, do you expect that in the country as a whole business
     conditions will be better, or worse than they are at present, or just about the same?
     Respondents select one of three options: "better a year from now," "about the same,"
     or "worse a year from now." There is a long history of using survey data as a proxy for
     spending and output (see, for example, Ludvigson - "Consumer Con...dence and Consumer
     Spending" - Journal of Economic Perspectives - 2004). Using a companion question
     in the SOC that asks about contemporaneous business conditions, Curtin (2019) and
     the SOC survey documentation suggest constructing a "balance score" to generate a
     contemporaneous measure of real GDP growth. The balance score equals the percentage
     of respondents who expected that the economy to improve minus the percentage that
     expected it to worsen + 100. Applying this methodology to question A7.
     The balance score is obtained monthly and we use the observation for the middle month of
     each quarter as our quarterly observation. We convert the score to a quantitative survey-
     based measure of real GDP growth using a simple linear regression. Speci...cally, at time s,
     we assume that GDP growth, yj;s+4 , is related to the contemporaneous Michigan Survey
     balance sore, Ms , by:
                                     yj;s+4 = 0 + 1 Ms + s :



                                                   6
      This equation is estimated using OLS and the real-time vintage data, and then the forecast
      is constructed as Fj;t [yj;t+4 ] = ^ 0 + ^ 1 Mt
      Speci...cally, we ...rst estimate the coe¢ cients of this regression over the sample 1978:Q1-
      1994:Q1. Using the estimated coe¢ cients and the balance score from 1995:Q1 gives us
      the point forecast of in     ation for 1995:Q1-1996:Q1. We then re-estimate this equation,
      recursively, adding one observation to the end of the sample at a time, and storing the
      ...tted values. This results in a time series of forecasts Fj;t [yj;t+4 ] .

    As with the SPF, we take a stand on the information set of consumers when each forecast was
made, and we assume that consumers could have used all data released before they completed
the survey. For the SOC interviews are conducted monthly over the course of an entire month.
We set the interview response deadline for each survey as the ...rst day of the survey month. For
example, we set the deadline to February 1st, 2019, for the February 2019 Survey of Consumers,
while in reality, the interview period was from February 2 to February 29, 2019. In other months,
the true interview start period may be near the end of the previous month, such as in February
2019, when it was January 31st, 2019. To align the SOC more closely with the SPF deadline
for survey completion (end of the second or third week of the middle month of the quarter), we
use the middle month of each quarter as our quarterly observation for the SOC.

Bluechip Data We obtain Blue Chip expectation data from Blue Chip Financial Forecasts.
The surveys are conducted each month by sending out surveys to forecasters in around 50
...nancial ...rms such as Bank of America, Goldman Sachs & Co., Swiss Re, Loomis, Sayles &
Company, and J.P. Morgan Chase. The participants are surveyed around the 25th of each month
and the results published a few days later on the 1st of the following month. The forecasters
are asked to forecast the average of the level of U.S. interest rates over a particular calendar
quarter, e.g. the federal funds rate and the set of H.15 Constant Maturity Treasuries (CMT) of
the following maturities: 3-month, 6-month, 1-year, 2-year, 5-year and 10-year, and the quarter
over quarter percentage changes in Real GDP, the GDP Price Index and the Consumer Price
Index, beginning with the current quarter and extending 4 to 5 quarters into the future.
     In this study, we look at a subset of the forecasted variables. Speci...cally, we use the Blue
Chip micro data on individual forecasts of the quarter-over-quarter (Q/Q) percentage change
in the Real GDP, the GDP Price Index and the CPI, and convert to quarterly observations as
explained below.

  1. Quarterly and annual PGDP in    ation (1986:Q1 - 2018:Q3): We use survey responses for
     the quarter-over-quarter percentage change in the GDP price index, de...ned as:
      "Forecasts for the quarter-over-quarter percentage change in the GDP Chained Price In-
      dex. Seasonally adjusted annual rate (SAAR). 1992 Jan. to 1996 June, Q/Q % change
      (SAAR) in GDP implicit deator. 1986 Jan. to 1991 Dec., Q/Q % change (SAAR) in
      GNP implicit deator."

                                                7
                                                                                   h         i
                                                                                       (Q=Q)                     (i)
  Quarterly and annual ination forecasts are constructed as follows. Let Ft         gPt+h       be
                                                                                  h         i
                                                                              (i)     (Q=Q)
  forecaster i'
              s prediction of Q/Q % change in PGDP h quarters ahead. Ft gPt+h                  are
  reported at annual rates in percentage points, so we convert to quarterly raw units before
  compounding. Annualized in     ation forecasts for forecaster i in the next quarter are:

                                                                0                  h         i141
                                                                            ( i)       (Q=Q)
                                                                           Ft       gPt+1
                              ( i)
                             Ft [    t+1;t ]   = 400       ln@1 +                             A
                                                                                     100

  Annual Ination forecasts are:

                                                          0          0                    h              i11 1
                                                                                (i)             (Q=Q)      4

                                                           B   Y
                                                               4            Ft                gPt+h
                       (i)
                     Ft [      t+4;t ]   = 100           ln@         @1 +                                A C
                                                                                                           A
                                                               h=1
                                                                                              100

  Quarterly nowcasts of ination are constructed as:
                                                                0                   h                   i11
                                                                            (i)            (Q=Q)          4
                                                                           Nt           gPt
                              ( i)
                             Nt [    t;t 1 ]   = 400       ln@1 +                                       A
                                                                                          100

              h       i
          (i)   (Q=Q)
  where Nt gPt          is forecaster i'
                                       s nowcast of Q/Q % change in PGDP for the current
  quarter. Annual nowcasts of in    ation for forecaster i are:
                                                                                                !
                                                                                   ( i)
                                         (i)                                Nt [Pt ]
                                     Nt [      t;t 4 ]   = 100        ln                            ;
                                                                             Pt 4

                                                                                                                       (i)
  where Pt 4 is the BEA' s most accurate estimate of PGDP four quarters back and Nt [Pt ] is
                                                                                   (i)
  forecaster i'
              s nowcast of PGDP for the current quarter which is constructed as: Nt [Pt ] =
         ( i)
  exp Nt [ t;t 1 ] =400 + lnPt 1 . Similarly, we also calculate the 5th through the 95th
  percentiles as well as the average, variance, and skewness of in   ation forecasts across
  respondents.

2. Real GDP growth (1984:Q3 - 2018:Q3): We use quarter-over-quarter percentage change
   in the Real GDP, which is de...ned as
  "Forecasts for the quarter-over-quarter percentage change in the level of chain-weighted
  real GDP. Seasonally adjusted, annual rate. Prior to 1992, Q/Q % change (SAAR) in
  real GNP."
  Quarterly and annual growth rates are constructed the same way as for ination, except
  RGDP replaces PGDP.

                                                           8
   3. CPI ination (1984:Q3 - 2018:Q3): We use quarter-over-quarter percentage change in the
      consumer price index, which is de...ned as
       "Forecasts for the quarter-over-quarter percentage change in the CPI (consumer prices
       for all urban consumers). Seasonally adjusted, annual rate."
       Quarterly and annual CPI ination are constructed the same way as for PGDP ination,
       except CPI replaces PGDP.

    The surveys are conducted right before the publication of the newsletter. Each issue is
always dated the 1st of the month and the actual survey conducted over a two-day period
almost always between 24th and 28th of the month. The major exception is the January issue
when the survey is conducted a few days earlier to avoid con  ict with the Christmas holiday.
Therefore, we assume that the end of the last month (equivalently beginning of current month)
is when the forecast is made. For example, for the report in 2008 Feb, we assume that the
forecast is made on Feb 1, 2008. To convert monthly forecasts to quarterly forecasts, we use
the forecasts in the middle month of each quarter as the quarterly forecasts. This is to align
the Blue Chip more closely with the SPF deadline for survey completion, similar to what we
do for the SOC.

Real-Time Macro Data

At each forecast date in the sample, we construct a dataset of macro variables that could have
been observed on or before the day of the survey deadline. We use the Philadelphia Fed'            s
                                                                 16
Real-Time Data Set to obtain vintages of macro variables. These vintages capture changes
to historical data due to periodic revisions made by government statistical agencies. The
vintages for a particular series can be available at the monthly and/or quarterly frequencies,
and the series have monthly and/or quarterly observations. In cases where a variable has
both frequencies available for its vintages and/or its observations, we choose one format of
the variable. For instance, nominal personal consumption expenditures on goods is quarterly
data with both monthly and quarterly vintages available; in this case, we use the version with
monthly vintages.
      Following Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015), to construct forecasts and forecast errors,
we use the vintage of in     ation and GDP growth data that is available four quarters after the
period being forecast. For example, the forecast error for a survey forecast of P in 2017:Q2
that is made based on data as t = 2016:Q2 is computed by comparing the survey forecast
 ( i)
F2016:Q2 [P2017:Q2 ] with the actual value of P2017:Q2 given in the 2018:Q2 vintage of the real time
dataset.
  16
    The real-time data sets are available at https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-
center/real-time-data/data-...les.




                                                   9
Real Time Regressands Following CG, all regressions are run and forecast errors computed
using forecasts of real-time ination and GDP data available four quarters after the period being
forecast. Following Faust and Wright (2013), we use continuous time compounding of in      ation
and GDP growth. For example, four quarter in    ation is computed as
                                                              Pt+h
                                      t+4;t   = (100)    ln          ;
                                                               Pt
where Pt is the time t price level.

Real Time Regressors For the regressors we need to combine all of the data observed at
the time of a forecast date, and know the speci...c day that the data in each vintage are released.
It is not su¢ cient to align vintage dates with forecast dates because the time t vintage might
include data released after the time t forecast was made. The series-speci...c documentation on
the Philadelphia Fed'   s website provides details on the timing of the vintages for each series.
For some series, exact release dates are known, and thus the vintages re    ect the data available
at the time of the data release. When this is the case, we download the release dates from the
relevant statistical agency and compare each vintage release date to the corresponding survey
deadline to determine whether a particular vintage can be included in a survey respondent'        s
information set.
    For other variables, we only know that vintages contain data available in the middle of a
month or quarter, but not the exact day. A subset of these variables come from the BEA
National Income and Product Accounts, which are released at the end of each month. Since
NIPA series are released at the end of each month, and vintages re       ect data available in the
middle of each month, a survey respondent making a forecast in the middle of a month includes
the current month'   s vintage of NIPA data in her information set. However, there is another
subset of variables with unknown release dates, for which we must make the conservative
assumption that a forecaster at time t observes at most the time t 1 vintage of data. An
Excel Workbook containing the known release dates and timing assumptions is available on the
authors'websites.
    In addition to the macro variables with di¤erent vintages that we obtain from the Philadel-
phia Fed, we include a measure of residential real estate prices from the Case-Shiller/S&P index
de  ated by the Consumer Price Index, and energy prices from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Sta-
tistics (BLS). Energy prices do not get revised, so they do not have multiple vintages. Instead
there is just one historical version of the data.
    After combining all of the series that are known by the forecasters at each date, we convert
monthly data to quarterly by using either the beginning-of-quarter or end-of-quarter values.
The decision to use beginning-of-quarter or end-of-quarter depends on the survey deadline of
a particular forecast date. If the survey deadline is known to be in the middle of the second
month of quarter t, then it is conceivable that the forecasters would have information about
the ...rst month of quarter t. Therefore, we use the ...rst month of that quarter' s values. A few

                                                    10
anomalous observations have unknown survey deadlines (e.g., the SPF deadlines for 1990:Q1).
In such cases, we allow only information up to quarter t 1 to enter the model. Thus, we use
the last month of the previous quarter'  s values in these cases.
     Table A.2 gives the complete list of real time macro variables. Included in the table is the
...rst available vintages for each variable that has multiple vintages. We do not include the
last vintage because most variables have vintages through the present.17 Table A.2 also lists
the transformation applied to each variable to make them stationary before generating factors.
                                                                         A
Let Xit denote variable i at time t after the transformation, and let Xit  be the untransformed
series. Let = (1 L) with LXit = Xit 1 . There are seven possible transformations with the
following codes:

                                               A
                            1 Code lv : Xit = Xit
                                                   A           A
                            2 Code     lv : Xit = Xit         Xit   1
                                       2                2    A
                            3 Code         lv : Xit =       Xit
                                                 A
                            4 Code ln: Xit = ln(Xit )
                                                     A                  A
                            5 Code     ln: Xit = ln(Xit )           ln(Xit 1)
                                       2                2       A
                            6 Code         ln: Xit =        ln(Xit )
                                                       A             A       A
                            7 Code     lv=lv : Xit = (Xit           Xit 1 )=Xit   1


                         Table A.2: List of Macro Dataset Variables
 No.   Short Name        Source      Tran   Description                                          First Vintage
                             Group 1: Output
                                           and Income
 1     IPMMVMD           Philly Fed     ln  Ind. production index - Manufacturing                1962:M11
 2     IPTMVMD           Philly Fed     ln  Ind. production index - Total                        1962:M11
 3     CUMMVMD           Philly Fed  lv     Capacity utilization - Manufacturing                 1979:M8
 4     CUTMVMD           Philly Fed  lv     Capacity utilization - Total                         1983:M7
 5     NCPROFATMVQD      Philly Fed     ln  Nom. corp. pro...ts after tax without IVA/CCAdj      1965:Q4
 6     NCPROFATWMVQD     Philly Fed     ln  Nom. corp. pro...ts after tax with IVA/CCAdj         1981:Q1
 7     OPHMVQD           Philly Fed     ln  Output per hour - Business sector                    1998:Q4
 8     NDPIQVQD          Philly Fed     ln  Nom. disposable personal income                      1965:Q4
 9     NOUTPUTQVQD       Philly Fed     ln  Nom. GNP/GDP                                         1965:Q4
 10    NPIQVQD           Philly Fed     ln  Nom. personal income                                 1965:Q4
 11    NPSAVQVQD         Philly Fed     lv  Nom. personal saving                                 1965:Q4
 12    OLIQVQD           Philly Fed     ln  Other labor income                                   1965:Q4
 13    PINTIQVQD         Philly Fed     ln  Personal interest income                             1965:Q4
 14    PINTPAIDQVQD      Philly Fed     ln  Interest paid by consumers                           1965:Q4
 15    PROPIQVQD         Philly Fed     ln  Proprietors'income                                   1965:Q4
 16    PTAXQVQD          Philly Fed     ln  Personal tax and nontax payments                     1965:Q4
 17    RATESAVQVQD       Philly Fed     lv  Personal saving rate                                 1965:Q4
 18    RENTIQVQD         Philly Fed     lv  Rental income of persons                             1965:Q4
 19    ROUTPUTQVQD       Philly Fed     ln  Real GNP/GDP                                         1965:Q4
 20    SSCONTRIBQVQD     Philly Fed     ln  Personal contributions for social insurance          1965:Q4
 21    TRANPFQVQD        Philly Fed     ln  Personal transfer payments to foreigners             1965:Q4
 22    TRANRQVQD         Philly Fed     ln  Transfer payments                                    1965:Q4
 23    CUUR0000SA0E      BLS            2 lnEnergy in U.S. city avg., all urban consumers, not
                                            seasonally adj
                               Group 2: Employment


 17
    For variables BASEBASAQVMD, NBRBASAQVMD, NBRECBASAQVMD, and TRBASAQVMD, the last
available vintage is 2013:Q2.


                                                   11
                                     Table A.2 (Cont'
                                                    d)
No.   Short Name       Source       Tran     Description                                         First Vintage
24    EMPLOYMVMD       Philly Fed      ln    Nonfarm payroll                                     1946:M12
25    HMVMD            Philly Fed   lv       Aggregate weekly hours - Total                      1971:M9
26    HGMVMD           Philly Fed   lv       Agg. weekly hours - Goods-producing                 1971:M9
27    HSMVMD           Philly Fed   lv       Agg. weekly hours - Service-producing               1971:M9
28    LFCMVMD          Philly Fed      ln    Civilian labor force                                1998:M11
29    LFPARTMVMD       Philly Fed   lv       Civilian participation rate                         1998:M11
30    POPMVMD          Philly Fed      ln    Civilian noninstitutional population                1998:M11
31    ULCMVQD          Philly Fed      ln    Unit labor costs - Business sector                  1998:Q4
32    RUCQVMD          Philly Fed      lv    Unemployment rate                                   1965:Q4
33    WSDQVQD          Philly Fed      ln    Wage and salary disbursements                       1965:Q4
                      Group 3: Orders, Investment, Housing
34    HSTARTSMVMD      Philly Fed      ln    Housing starts                                      1968:M2
35    RINVBFMVQD       Philly Fed      ln    Real gross private domestic inv. - Nonresidential   1965:Q4
36    RINVCHIMVQD      Philly Fed      lv    Real gross private domestic inv. - Change in pri-   1965:Q4
                                             vate inventories
37    RINVRESIDMVQD    Philly Fed      ln    Real gross private domestic inv. - Residential      1965:Q4
38    CASESHILLER      S&P             ln    Case-Shiller US National Home Price index/CPI       1987:M1
                               Group 4: Consumption
39    NCONGMMVMD       Philly Fed      ln    Nom. personal cons. exp. - Goods                    2009:M8
40    NCONHHMMVMD      Philly Fed      ln    Nom. hh. cons. exp.                                 2009:M8
41    NCONSHHMMVMD     Philly Fed      ln    Nom. hh. cons. exp. - Services                      2009:M8
42    NCONSNPMMVMD     Philly Fed      ln    Nom. ...nal cons. exp. of NPISH                     2009:M8
43    RCONDMMVMD       Philly Fed      ln    Real personal cons. exp. - Durables                 1998:M11
44    RCONGMMVMD       Philly Fed      ln    Real personal cons. exp. - Goods                    2009:M8
45    RCONHHMMVMD      Philly Fed      ln    Real hh. cons. exp.                                 2009:M8
46    RCONMMVMD        Philly Fed      ln    Real personal cons. exp. - Total                    1998:M11
47    RCONNDMVMD       Philly Fed      ln    Real personal cons. exp. - Nondurables              1998:M11
48    RCONSHHMMVMD     Philly Fed      ln    Real hh. cons. exp. - Services                      2009:M8
49    RCONSMMVMD       Philly Fed      ln    Real personal cons. exp. - Services                 1998:M11
50    RCONSNPMMVMD     Philly Fed      ln    Real ...nal cons. exp. of NPISH                     2009:M8
51    NCONGMVQD        Philly Fed      ln    Nom. personal cons. exp. - Goods                    2009:Q3
52    NCONHHMVQD       Philly Fed      ln    Nom. hh. cons. exp.                                 0209:Q3
53    NCONSHHMVQD      Philly Fed      ln    Nom. hh. cons. exp. - Services                      2009:Q3
54    NCONSNPMVQD      Philly Fed      ln    Nom. ...nal cons. exp. of NPISH                     2009:Q3
55    RCONDMVQD        Philly Fed      ln    Real personal cons. exp. - Durable goods            1965:Q4
56    RCONGMVQD        Philly Fed      ln    Real personal cons. exp. - Goods                    2009:Q3
57    RCONHHMVQD       Philly Fed      ln    Real hh. cons. exp.                                 2009:Q3
58    RCONMVQD         Philly Fed      ln    Real personal cons. exp. - Total                    1965:Q4
59    RCONNDMVQD       Philly Fed      ln    Real pesonal cons. exp. - Nondurable goods          1965:Q4
60    RCONSHHMVQD      Philly Fed      ln    Real hh. cons. exp. - Services                      2009:Q3
61    RCONSMVQD        Philly Fed      ln    Real personal cons. exp. - Services                 1965:Q4
62    RCONSNPMVQD      Philly Fed      ln    Real ...nal cons. exp. of NPISH                     2009:Q3
63    NCONQVQD         Philly Fed      ln    Nom. personal cons. exp.                            1965:Q4
                                  Group 5: Prices
64    PCONGMMVMD       Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for personal cons. exp. - Goods         2009:M8
65    PCONHHMMVMD      Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for hh. cons. exp.                      2009:M8
66    PCONSHHMMVMD     Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for hh. cons. exp. - Services           2009:M8
67    PCONSNPMMVMD     Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for ...nal cons. exp. of NPISH          2009:M8
68    PCPIMVMD         Philly Fed      2 ln  Consumer price index                                1998:M11
69    PCPIXMVMD        Philly Fed      2 ln  Core consumer price index                           1998:M11
70    PPPIMVMD         Philly Fed      2 ln  Producer price index                                1998:M11
71    PPPIXMVMD        Philly Fed      2 ln  Core producer price index                           1998:M11
72    PCONGMVQD        Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for personal. cons. exp. - Goods        2009:Q3
73    PCONHHMVQD       Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for hh. cons. exp.                      2009:Q3
74    PCONSHHMVQD      Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for hh. cons. exp. - Services           2009:Q3
75    PCONSNPMVQD      Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for ...nal cons. exp. of NPISH          2009:Q3
76    PCONXMVQD        Philly Fed      2 ln  Core price index for personal cons. exp.            1996:Q1
77    CPIQVMD          Philly Fed      2 ln  Consumer price index                                1994:Q3
78    PQVQD            Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for GNP/GDP                             1965:Q4
79    PCONQVQD         Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for personal cons. exp.                 1965:Q4
80    PIMPQVQD         Philly Fed      2 ln  Price index for imports of goods and services       1965:Q4
                         Group 6: Trade and Government
81    REXMVQD          Philly Fed      ln    Real exports of goods and services                  1965:Q4
82    RGMVQD           Philly Fed      ln    Real government cons. and gross inv. - Total        1965:Q4
83    RGFMVQD          Philly Fed      ln    Real government cons. and gross inv. - Federal      1965:Q4




                                                  12
                                       Table A.2 (Cont'
                                                      d)
 No.   Short Name        Source       Tran    Description                                         First Vintage
 84    RGSLMVQD          Philly Fed     ln    Real government cons. and gross. inv. - State and   1965:Q4
                                              local
 85    RIMPMVQD          Philly Fed    ln     Real imports of goods and services                  1965:Q4
 86    RNXMVQD           Philly Fed    lv     Real net exports of goods and services              1965:Q4
                              Group 7: Money and Credit
 87    BASEBASAQVMD      Philly Fed    2 ln   Monetary base                                       1980:Q2
 88    M1QVMD            Philly Fed    2 ln   M1 money stock                                      1965:Q4
 89    M2QVMD            Philly Fed    2 ln   M2 money stock                                      1971:Q2
 90    NBRBASAQVMD       Philly Fed    lv=lv  Nonborrowed reserves                                1967:Q3
 91    NBRECBASAQVMD     Philly Fed    lv=lv  Nonborrowed reserves plus extended credit           1984:Q2
 92    TRBASAQVMD        Philly Fed    2 ln   Total reserves                                      1967:Q3
 93    DIVQVQD           Philly Fed    ln     Dividends                                           1965:Q4



Monthly Financial Factor Data

The 147 ...nancial series in this data set are versions of the ...nancial dataset used in Jurado,
Ludvigson, and Ng (2015) and Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2019). It consists of a number of indica-
tors measuring the behavior of a broad cross-section of asset returns, as well as some aggregate
...nancial indicators not included in the macro dataset. These data include valuation ratios
such as the dividend-price ratio and earnings-price ratio, growth rates of aggregate dividends
and prices, default and term spreads, yields on corporate bonds of di¤erent ratings grades,
yields on Treasuries and yield spreads, and a broad cross-section of industry equity returns.
Following Fama and French (1992), returns on 100 portfolios of equities sorted into 10 size and
10 book-market categories. The dataset X f also includes a group of variables we call "risk-
factors,"since they have been used in cross-sectional or time-series studies to uncover variation
in the market risk-premium. These risk-factors include the three Fama and French (1993) risk
factors, namely the excess return on the market M KTt , the "small-minus-big" (SM Bt ) and
"high-minus-low"(HM Lt ) portfolio returns, the momentum factor U M Dt , and the small stock
value spread R15 R11.
     The raw data used to form factors are always transformed to achieve stationarity. In addi-
tion, when forming forecasting factors from the large macro and ...nancial datasets, the raw data
(which are in di¤erent units) are standardized before performing PCA. When forming common
uncertainty from estimates of individual uncertainty, the raw data (which are in this case in
the same units) are demeaned, but we do not divide by the observation'       s standard deviation
before performing PCA.
     Throughout, the factors are estimated by the method of static principal components (PCA).
                                          p
Speci...cally, the T rF matrix F     ^t is T times the rF eigenvectors corresponding to the rF
largest eigenvalues of the T T matrix xx0 =(T N ) in decreasing order. In large samples (when
p
    T =N ! 1), Bai and Ng (2006) show that the estimates F     ^t can be treated as though they
were observed in the subsequent forecasting regression.
     All returns and spreads are expressed in logs (i.e. the log of the gross return or spread),
are displayed in percent (i.e. multiplied by 100), and are annualized by multiplying by 12,
i.e., if x is the original return or spread, we transform to 1200ln (1 + x=100). Federal Reserve

                                                   13
data are annualized by default and are therefore not "re-annualized."Note: this annualization
means that the annualized standard deviation (volatility) is equal to the data standard deviation
            p
divided by 12. The data series used in this dataset are listed below by data source. Additional
details on data transformations are given below the table.
    We convert monthly data to quarterly by using either the beginning-of-quarter or end-of-
quarter values. The decision to use beginning-of-quarter or end-of-quarter depends on the
survey deadline of a particular forecast date. If the survey deadline is known to be in the
middle of the second month of quarter t, then it is conceivable that the forecasters would have
information about the ...rst month of quarter t. Therefore, we use the ...rst month of that
quarter' s values. Alternatively, a few anomalous observations have unknown survey deadlines
(e.g., the SPF deadlines for 1990:Q1). In such cases, we allow only information up to quarter
t 1 to enter the model. Thus, we use the last month of the previous quarter'      s values in these
cases.
    Let Xit denote variable i observed at time t after e.g., logarithm and di¤erencing transfor-
                   A
mation, and let Xit  be the actual (untransformed) series. Let = (1 L) with LXit = Xit 1 .
There are six possible transformations with the following codes:

                      A
   1 Code lv : Xit = Xit .
                           A            A
   2 Code      lv : Xit = Xit          Xit 1.

               2                2    A
   3 Code          lv : Xit =       Xit .
                        A
   4 Code ln: Xit = ln(Xit ).
                             A                      A
   5 Code      ln: Xit = ln(Xit )               ln(Xit 1 ).

               2                2      A
   6 Code          ln: Xit =        lnXit .
                        A            A            A
   7 Code      lv=lv : Xit          Xit     1   =Xit   1



                            Table A.3: List of Financial Dataset Variables
    No.   Short Name       Source             Tran    Description
                                           Group 1: Prices, Yield, Dividends
    1     D_log(DIV)       CRSP                  ln     log Dt see additional details below
    2     D_log(P)         CRSP                  ln     log Pt see additional details below
                                                              re;
    3     D_DIVreinvest    CRSP                  ln     log Dt     see additional details below
                                                             re;
    4     D_Preinvest      CRSP                  ln     log Pt    see additional details below
    5     d-p              CRSP               ln      log(Dt ) log Pt see additional details below
                                             Group 2: Equity Risk Factors
    6     R15-R11          Kenneth    French  lv      (Small, High) minus (Small, Low) sorted on (size, book-to-market)
    7     Mkt-RF           Kenneth    French  lv      Market excess return
    8     SMB              Kenneth    French  lv      Small Minus Big, sorted on size
    9     HML              Kenneth    French  lv      High Minus Low, sorted on book-to-market
    10    UMD              Kenneth    French  lv      Up Minus Down, sorted on momentum
                                                   Group 3: Industries




                                                              14
                                      Table A.3 (Cont'
                                                     d)
No.   Short Name   Source             Tran  Description
11    Agric        Kenneth   French   lv    Agric industry portfolio
12    Food         Kenneth   French   lv    Food industry portfolio
13    Beer         Kenneth   French   lv    Beer industry portfolio
14    Smoke        Kenneth   French   lv    Smoke industry portfolio
15    Toys         Kenneth   French   lv    Toys industry portfolio
16    Fun          Kenneth   French   lv    Fun industry portfolio
17    Books        Kenneth   French   lv    Books industry portfolio
18    Hshld        Kenneth   French   lv    Hshld industry portfolio
19    Clths        Kenneth   French   lv    Clths industry portfolio
20    MedEq        Kenneth   French   lv    MedEq industry portfolio
21    Drugs        Kenneth   French   lv    Drugs industry portfolio
22    Chems        Kenneth   French   lv    Chems industry portfolio
23    Rubbr        Kenneth   French   lv    Rubbr industry portfolio
24    Txtls        Kenneth   French   lv    Txtls industry portfolio
25    BldMt        Kenneth   French   lv    BldMt industry portfolio
26    Cnstr        Kenneth   French   lv    Cnstr industry portfolio
27    Steel        Kenneth   French   lv    Steel industry portfolio
28    Mach         Kenneth   French   lv    Mach industry portfolio
29    ElcEq        Kenneth   French   lv    ElcEq industry portfolio
30    Autos        Kenneth   French   lv    Autos industry portfolio
31    Aero         Kenneth   French   lv    Aero industry portfolio
32    Ships        Kenneth   French   lv    Ships industry portfolio
33    Mines        Kenneth   French   lv    Mines industry portfolio
34    Coal         Kenneth   French   lv    Coal industry portfolio
35    Oil          Kenneth   French   lv    Oil industry portfolio
36    Util         Kenneth   French   lv    Util industry portfolio
37    Telcm        Kenneth   French   lv    Telcm industry portfolio
38    PerSv        Kenneth   French   lv    PerSv industry portfolio
39    BusSv        Kenneth   French   lv    BusSv industry portfolio
40    Hardw        Kenneth   French   lv    Hardw industry portfolio
41    Chips        Kenneth   French   lv    Chips industry portfolio
42    LabEq        Kenneth   French   lv    LabEq industry portfolio
43    Paper        Kenneth   French   lv    Paper industry portfolio
44    Boxes        Kenneth   French   lv    Boxes industry portfolio
45    Trans        Kenneth   French   lv    Trans industry portfolio
46    Whlsl        Kenneth   French   lv    Whlsl industry portfolio
47    Rtail        Kenneth   French   lv    Rtail industry portfolio
48    Meals        Kenneth   French   lv    Meals industry portfolio
49    Banks        Kenneth   French   lv    Banks industry portfolio
50    Insur        Kenneth   French   lv    Insur industry portfolio
51    RlEst        Kenneth   French   lv    RlEst industry portfolio
52    Fin          Kenneth   French   lv    Fin industry portfolio
53    Other        Kenneth   French   lv    Other industry portfolio
                                          Group 4: Size/BM
54    1_2          Kenneth   French   lv    (1, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
55    1_4          Kenneth   French   lv    (1, 4) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
56    1_5          Kenneth   French   lv    (1, 5) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
57    1_6          Kenneth   French   lv    (1, 6) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
58    1_7          Kenneth   French   lv    (1, 7) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
59    1_8          Kenneth   French   lv    (1, 8) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
60    1_9          Kenneth   French   lv    (1, 9) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
61    1_high       Kenneth   French   lv    (1, high) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
62    2_low        Kenneth   French   lv    (2, low) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
63    2_2          Kenneth   French   lv    (2, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
64    2_3          Kenneth   French   lv    (2, 3) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
65    2_4          Kenneth   French   lv    (2, 4) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
66    2_5          Kenneth   French   lv    (2, 5) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
67    2_6          Kenneth   French   lv    (2, 6) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
68    2_7          Kenneth   French   lv    (2, 7) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
69    2_8          Kenneth   French   lv    (2, 8) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
70    2_9          Kenneth   French   lv    (2, 9) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
71    2_high       Kenneth   French   lv    (2, high) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
72    3_low        Kenneth   French   lv    (3, low) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
73    3_2          Kenneth   French   lv    (3, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
74    3_3          Kenneth   French   lv    (3, 3) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
75    3_4          Kenneth   French   lv    (3, 4) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)



                                                   15
                                      Table A.3 (Cont'
                                                     d)
No.   Short Name   Source             Tran   Description
76    3_5          Kenneth   French   lv     (3, 5) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
77    3_6          Kenneth   French   lv     (3, 6) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
78    3_7          Kenneth   French   lv     (3, 7) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
79    3_8          Kenneth   French   lv     (3, 8) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
80    3_9          Kenneth   French   lv     (3, 9) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
81    3_high       Kenneth   French   lv     (3, high) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
82    4_low        Kenneth   French   lv     (4, low) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
83    4_2          Kenneth   French   lv     (4, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
84    4_3          Kenneth   French   lv     (4, 3) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
85    4_4          Kenneth   French   lv     (4, 4) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
86    4_5          Kenneth   French   lv     (4, 5) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
87    4_6          Kenneth   French   lv     (4, 6) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
88    4_7          Kenneth   French   lv     (4, 7) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
89    4_8          Kenneth   French   lv     (4, 8) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
90    4_9          Kenneth   French   lv     (4, 9) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
91    4_high       Kenneth   French   lv     (4, high) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
92    5_low        Kenneth   French   lv     (5, low) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
93    5_2          Kenneth   French   lv     (5, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
94    5_3          Kenneth   French   lv     (5, 3) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
95    5_4          Kenneth   French   lv     (5, 4) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
96    5_5          Kenneth   French   lv     (5, 5) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
97    5_6          Kenneth   French   lv     (5, 6) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
98    5_7          Kenneth   French   lv     (5, 7) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
99    5_8          Kenneth   French   lv     (5, 8) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
100   5_9          Kenneth   French   lv     (5, 9) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
101   5_high       Kenneth   French   lv     (5, high) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
102   6_low        Kenneth   French   lv     (6, low) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
103   6_2          Kenneth   French   lv     (6, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
104   6_3          Kenneth   French   lv     (6, 3) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
105   6_4          Kenneth   French   lv     (6, 4) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
106   6_5          Kenneth   French   lv     (6, 5) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
107   6_6          Kenneth   French   lv     (6, 6) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
108   6_7          Kenneth   French   lv     (6, 7) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
109   6_8          Kenneth   French   lv     (6, 8) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
110   6_9          Kenneth   French   lv     (6, 9) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
111   6_high       Kenneth   French   lv     (6, high) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
112   7_low        Kenneth   French   lv     (7, low) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
113   7_2          Kenneth   French   lv     (7, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
114   7_3          Kenneth   French   lv     (7, 3) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
115   7_4          Kenneth   French   lv     (7, 4) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
116   7_5          Kenneth   French   lv     (7, 5) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
117   7_6          Kenneth   French   lv     (7, 6) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
118   7_7          Kenneth   French   lv     (7, 7) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
119   7_8          Kenneth   French   lv     (7, 8) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
120   7_9          Kenneth   French   lv     (7, 9) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
121   8_low        Kenneth   French   lv     (8, low) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
122   8_2          Kenneth   French   lv     (8, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
123   8_3          Kenneth   French   lv     (8, 3) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
124   8_4          Kenneth   French   lv     (8, 4) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
125   8_5          Kenneth   French   lv     (8, 5) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
126   8_6          Kenneth   French   lv     (8, 6) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
127   8_7          Kenneth   French   lv     (8, 7) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
128   8_8          Kenneth   French   lv     (8, 8) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
129   8_9          Kenneth   French   lv     (8, 9) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
130   8_high       Kenneth   French   lv     (8, high) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
131   9_low        Kenneth   French   lv     (9, low) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
132   9_2          Kenneth   French   lv     (9, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
133   9_3          Kenneth   French   lv     (9, 3) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
134   9_4          Kenneth   French   lv     (9, 4) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
135   9_5          Kenneth   French   lv     (9, 5) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
136   9_6          Kenneth   French   lv     (9, 6) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
137   9_7          Kenneth   French   lv     (9, 7) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
138   9_8          Kenneth   French   lv     (9, 8) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
139   9_high       Kenneth   French   lv     (9, high) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
140   10_low       Kenneth   French   lv     (10, low) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)
141   10_2         Kenneth   French   lv     (10, 2) portfolio sorted on (size, book-to-market)



                                                  16
                                         Table A.3 (Cont'
                                                        d)
    No.   Short Name   Source            Tran    Description
    142   10_3         Kenneth French    lv      (10, 3) portfolio    sorted   on   (size,   book-to-market)
    143   10_4         Kenneth French    lv      (10, 4) portfolio    sorted   on   (size,   book-to-market)
    144   10_5         Kenneth French    lv      (10, 5) portfolio    sorted   on   (size,   book-to-market)
    145   10_6         Kenneth French    lv      (10, 6) portfolio    sorted   on   (size,   book-to-market)
    146   10_7         Kenneth French    lv      (10, 7) portfolio    sorted   on   (size,   book-to-market)
    147   VXO          Fred MD           lv      VXOCLSx



   CRSP Data Details Value-weighted price and dividend data were obtained from the
Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). From the Annual Update data, we obtain
monthly value-weighted returns series vwretd (with dividends) and vwretx (excluding divi-
dends). These series have the interpretation
                                                   Pt+1 + Dt+1
                                    V W RET Dt =
                                                        Pt
                                                   Pt+1
                                 V W RET Xt =
                                                    Pt
From these series, a normalized price series P , can be constructed using the recursion
                                        P0 = 1
                                        Pt = Pt     1       V W RET Xt :
A dividend series can then be constructed using
                             Dt = Pt 1 (V W RET Dt                    V W RET Xt ):
In order to remove seasonality of dividend payments from the data, instead of Dt we use the
series
                                            1 X
                                                11
                                      Dt =          Dt j
                                            12 j =0
i.e., the moving average over the entire year. For the price and dividend series under "reinvest-
ment," we calculate the price under reinvestment, Ptre , as the normalized value of the market
portfolio under reinvestment of dividends, using the recursion
                                         re
                                        P0  =1
                                        Ptre = Pt       1    V W RET Dt
                                                         re
Similarly, we can de...ne dividends under reinvestment, Dt  , as the total dividend payments on
this portfolio (the number of "shares"of which have increased over time) using
                             re
                            Dt  = Ptre1 (V W RET Dt                   V W RET Xt ):
As before, we can remove seasonality by using
                                                            1 X re
                                                                 11
                                           re;
                                          Dt   =                  D :
                                                            2 j =0 t j
Five data series are constructed from the CRSP data as follows:

                                                            17
      D_log(DIV):        log Dt .

      D_log(P):       log Pt .
                                  re;
      D_DIVreinvest:         log Dt

      D_Preinvest:        log Ptre;

      d-p: log(Dt )     log(Pt )

   Kenneth French Data Details The following data are obtained from the data library of
Kenneth French'
              s Dartmouth website (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_libra

      Fama/French Factors: From this dataset we obtain the data series RF, Mkt-RF, SMB,
      HML.

      25 Portfolios formed on Size and Book-to-Market (5 x 5): From this dataset we obtain
      the series R15-R11, which is the spread between the (small, high book-to-market) and
      (small, low book-to-market) portfolios.

      Momentum Factor (Mom): From this dataset we obtain the series UMD, which is equal
      to the momentum factor.

      49 Industry Portfolios: From this dataset we use all value-weighted series, excluding any
      series that have missing observations from Jan. 1960 on, from which we obtain the series
      Agric through Other. The omitted series are: Soda, Hlth, FabPr, Guns, Gold, Softw.

      100 Portfolios formed in Size and Book-to-Market: From this dataset we use all value-
      weighted series, excluding any series that have missing observations from Jan. 1960 on.
      This yields variables with the name X_Y where X stands for the index of the size variable
      (1, 2, ..., 10) and Y stands for the index of the book-to-market variable (Low, 2, 3, ..., 8,
      9, High). The omitted series are 1_low, 1_3, 7_high, 9_9, 10_8, 10_9, 10_high.

Daily Financial Data

Daily Data and construction of daily factors The daily ...nancial series in this data set
are from the daily ...nancial dataset used in Andreou, Ghysels, and Kourtellos (2013). We create
a smaller daily database which is a subset of the large cross-section of 991 daily series in their
dataset. Our dataset covers ...ve classes of ...nancial assets: (i) the Commodities class; (ii) the
Corporate Risk category; (iii) the Equities class; (iv) the Foreign Exchange Rates class and (v)
the Government Securities.
    The dataset includes up to 87 daily predictors in a daily frequency from 23-Oct-1959 to
24-Oct-2018 (14852 trading days) from the above ...ve categories of ...nancial assets. We remove
series with fewer than ten years of data and time periods with no variables observed, which

                                                18
occurs for some series in the early part of the sample. For those years, we have less than 87
series. There are 39 commodity variables which include commodity indices, prices and futures,
16 corporate risk series, 9 equity series which include major US stock market indices and the 500
Implied Volatility, 16 government securities which include the federal funds rate, government
treasury bills of securities from three months to ten years, and 7 foreign exchange variables
which include the individual foreign exchange rates of major ...ve US trading partners and two
e¤ective exchange rate. We choose these daily predictors because they are proposed in the
literature as good predictors of economic growth.
    We construct daily ...nancial factors in a quarterly frequency in two steps. First, we use
these daily ...nancial time series to form factors at a daily frequency. The raw data used to form
factors are always transformed to achieve stationarity. The raw daily data are also standardized
before performing factor estimation (see generic description below). We estimate factors at each
daily date in the sample using the entire history (from 23-Oct-1959) of variables observed in
real time.
    In the second step, we convert these daily ...nancial indicators to quarterly weighted variables
to form quarterly factors using the optimal weighting scheme according to the method described
below (see the optimal weighting scheme section).
    The data series used in this dataset are listed below in Table A.4 by data source. The tables
also list the transformation applied to each variable to make them stationary before generating
factors. The transformations used to stationarize a time series are the same as those explained
in the section "Monthly ...nancial factor data"   .

                     Table A.4: List of Daily Financial Dataset Variables
  No.   Short Name    Source             Tran     Description
                                       Group 1: Commodities
  1     GSIZSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Zinc Spot - PRICE INDEX
  2     GSSBSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Sugar Spot - PRICE INDEX
  3     GSSOSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Soybeans Spot - PRICE INDEX
  4     GSSISPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Silver Spot - PRICE INDEX
  5     GSIKSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Nickel Spot - PRICE INDEX
  6     GSLCSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Live Cattle Spot - PRICE INDEX
  7     GSLHSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Lean Hogs Index Spot - PRICE INDEX
  8     GSILSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Lead Spot - PRICE INDEX
  9     GSGCSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Gold Spot - PRICE INDEX
  10    GSCTSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Cotton Spot - PRICE INDEX
  11    GSKCSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Co¤ee Spot - PRICE INDEX
  12    GSCCSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Cocoa Index Spot - PRICE INDEX
  13    GSIASPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI Aluminum Spot - PRICE INDEX
  14    SGWTSPT       Data   Stream       ln      S&P GSCI All Wheat Spot - PRICE INDEX
  15    EIAEBRT       Data   Stream       ln      Europe Brent Spot FOB U$/BBL Daily
  16    CRUDOIL       Data   Stream       ln      Crude Oil-WTI Spot Cushing U$/BBL - MID PRICE
  17    LTICASH       Data   Stream       ln      LME-Tin 99.85% Cash U$/MT
  18    CWFCS00       Data   Stream       ln      CBT-WHEAT COMPOSITE FUTURES CONT. - SETT.
                                                  PRICE
  19    CCFCS00       Data   Stream       ln      CBT-CORN COMP. CONTINUOUS - SETT. PRICE
  20    CSYCS00       Data   Stream       ln      CBT-SOYBEANS COMP. CONT. - SETT. PRICE
  21    NCTCS20       Data   Stream       ln      CSCE-COTTON #2 CONT.2ND FUT - SETT. PRICE
  22    NSBCS00       Data   Stream       ln      CSCE-SUGAR #11 CONTINUOUS - SETT. PRICE
  23    NKCCS00       Data   Stream       ln      CSCE-COFFEE C CONTINUOUS - SETT. PRICE
  24    NCCCS00       Data   Stream       ln      CSCE-COCOA CONTINUOUS - SETT. PRICE
  25    CZLCS00       Data   Stream       ln      ECBOT-SOYBEAN OIL CONTINUOUS - SETT. PRICE



                                                19
                                        Table A.4 (Cont'
                                                       d)
No.   Short Name    Source                   Tran   Description
26    COFC01        Data Stream               ln    CBT-OATS COMP. TRc1 - SETT. PRICE
27    CLDCS00       Data Stream               ln    CME-LIVE CATTLE COMP. CONTINUOUS - SETT.
                                                    PRICE
28    CLGC01        Data Stream               ln    CME-LEAN HOGS COMP. TRc1 - SETT. PRICE
29    NGCCS00       Data Stream               ln    CMX-GOLD 100 OZ CONTINUOUS - SETT. PRICE
30    LAH3MTH       Data Stream               ln    LME-Aluminium 99.7% 3 Months U$/MT
31    LED3MTH       Data Stream               ln    LME-Lead 3 Months U$/MT
32    LNI3MTH       Data Stream               ln    LME-Nickel 3 Months U$/MT
33    LTI3MTH       Data Stream               ln    LME-Tin 99.85% 3 Months U$/MT
34    PLNYD         www.macrotrends.net       ln    Platinum Cash Price (U$ per troy ounce)
35    XPDD          www.macrotrends.net       ln    Palladium (U$ per troy ounce)
36    CUS2D         www.macrotrends.net       ln    Corn Spot Price (U$/Bushel)
37    SoybOil       www.macrotrends.net       ln    Soybean Oil Price (U$/Pound)
38    OATSD         www.macrotrends.net       ln    Oat Spot Price (US$/Bushel)
39    WTIOilFut     US EIA                    ln    Light Sweet Crude Oil Futures Price: 1St Expiring Contract
                                                    Settlement ($/Bbl)
                                           Group 2: Equities
40    S&PCOMP       Data Stream               ln    S&P 500 COMPOSITE - PRICE INDEX
41    ISPCS00       Data Stream               ln    CME-S&P 500 INDEX CONTINUOUS - SETT. PRICE
42    SP5EIND       Data Stream               ln    S&P500 ES INDUSTRIALS - PRICE INDEX
43    DJINDUS       Data Stream               ln    DOW JONES INDUSTRIALS - PRICE INDEX
44    CYMCS00       Data Stream               ln    CBT-MINI DOW JONES CONTINUOUS - SETT. PRICE
45    NASCOMP       Data Stream               ln    NASDAQ COMPOSITE - PRICE INDEX
46    NASA100       Data Stream               ln    NASDAQ 100 - PRICE INDEX
47    CBOEVIX       Data Stream            lv       CBOE SPX VOLATILITY VIX (NEW) - PRICE INDEX
48    S&P500toVIX   Data Stream               ln    S&P500/VIX
                                        Group 3: Corporate Risk
49    LIBOR         FRED                      lv    Overnight London Interbank O¤ered Rate (%)
50    1MLIBOR       FRED                      lv    1-Month London Interbank O¤ered Rate (%)
51    3MLIBOR       FRED                      lv    3-Month London Interbank O¤ered Rate (%)
52    6MLIBOR       FRED                      lv    6-Month London Interbank O¤ered Rate (%)
53    1YLIBOR       FRED                      lv    One-Year London Interbank O¤ered Rate (%)
54    1MEuro-FF     FRED                   lv       1-Month Eurodollar Deposits (London Bid) (% P.A.) minus
                                                    Fed Funds
55    3MEuro-FF     FRED                   lv       3-Month Eurodollar Deposits (London Bid) (% P.A.) minus
                                                    Fed Funds
56    6MEuro-FF     FRED                   lv       6-Month Eurodollar Deposits (London Bid) (% P.A.) minus
                                                    Fed Funds
57    APFNF-        Data Stream            lv       1-Month A2/P2/F2 Non...nancial Commercial Paper (NCP)
      AANF                                          (% P. A.) minus 1-Month Aa NCP (% P.A.)
58    APFNF-AAF     Data Stream            lv       1-Month A2/P2/F2 NCP (% P.A.) minus 1-Month Aa Finan-
                                                    cial Commercial Paper (% P.A.)
59    TED           Data Stream, FRED      lv       3Month Tbill minus 3-Month London Interbank O¤ered Rate
                                                    (%)
60    MAaa-10YTB    Data Stream            lv       Moody Seasoned Aaa Corporate Bond Yield (% P.A.) minus
                                                    Y10-Tbond
61    MBaa-10YTB    Data Stream            lv       Moody Seasoned Baa Corporate Bond Yield (% P.A.) minus
                                                    Y10-Tbond
62    MLA-10YTB     Data Stream, FRED      lv       Merrill Lynch Corporate Bonds: A Rated: E¤ective Yield (%)
                                                    minus Y10-Tbond
63    MLAA-10YTB    Data Stream, FRED      lv       Merrill Lynch Corporate Bonds: Aa Rated: E¤ective Yield
                                                    (%) minus Y10-Tbond
64    MLAAA-        Data Stream, FRED      lv       Merrill Lynch Corporate Bonds: Aaa Rated: E¤ective Yield
      10YTB                                         (%) minus Y10-Tbond
                                          Group 4: Treasuries
65    FRFEDFD       Data Stream               lv    US FED FUNDS EFF RATE (D) - MIDDLE RATE
66    FRTBS3M       Data Stream               lv    US T-BILL SEC MARKET 3 MONTH (D) - MIDDLE RATE
67    FRTBS6M       Data Stream               lv    US T-BILL SEC MARKET 6 MONTH (D) - MIDDLE RATE
68    FRTCM1Y       Data Stream               lv    US TREASURY CONST MAT 1 YEAR (D) - MIDDLE
                                                    RATE
69    FRTCM10       Data Stream               lv    US TREASURY CONST MAT 10 YEAR (D) - MIDDLE
                                                    RATE
70    6MTB-FF       Data Stream            lv       6-month treasury bill market bid yield at constant maturity
                                                    (%) minus Fed Funds
71    1YTB-FF       Data Stream            lv       1-year treasury bill yield at constant maturity (% P.A.) minus
                                                    Fed Funds



                                                     20
                                         Table A.4 (Cont'
                                                        d)
  No.   Short Name    Source                  Tran    Description
  72    10YTB-FF      Data Stream             lv      10-year treasury bond yield at constant maturity (% P.A.)
                                                      minus Fed Funds
  73    6MTB-3MTB     Data Stream            lv       6-month treasury bill yield at constant maturity (% P.A.) mi-
                                                      nus 3M-Tbills
  74    1YTB-3MTB     Data Stream            lv       1-year treasury bill yield at constant maturity (% P.A.) minus
                                                      3M-Tbills
  75    10YTB-3MTB    Data Stream            lv       10-year treasury bond yield at constant maturity (% P.A.)
                                                      minus 3M-Tbills
  76    BKEVEN05      FRB                    lv       US Ination compensation: continuously compounded zero-
                                                      coupon yield: 5-year (%)
  77    BKEVEN10      FRB                    lv       US Ination compensation: continuously compounded zero-
                                                      coupon yield: 10-year (%)
  78    BKEVEN1F4     FRB                    lv       BKEVEN1F4
  79    BKEVEN1F9     FRB                    lv       BKEVEN1F9
  80    BKEVEN5F5     FRB                    lv       US Ination compensation: coupon equivalent forward rate:
                                                      5-10 years (%)
                                      Group 5: Foreign Exchange (FX)
  81    US_CWBN       Data Stream               ln    US NOMINAL DOLLAR BROAD INDEX - EXCHANGE IN-
                                                      DEX
  82    US_CWMN       Data Stream               ln    US NOMINAL DOLLAR MAJOR CURR INDEX - EX-
                                                      CHANGE INDEX
  83    US_CSFR2      Data   Stream             ln    CANADIAN $ TO US $ NOON NY - EXCHANGE RATE
  84    EU_USFR2      Data   Stream             ln    EURO TO US$ NOON NY - EXCHANGE RATE
  85    US_YFR2       Data   Stream             ln    JAPANESE YEN TO US $ NOON NY - EXCHANGE RATE
  86    US_SFFR2      Data   Stream             ln    SWISS FRANC TO US $ NOON NY - EXCHANGE RATE
  87    US_UKFR2      Data   Stream             ln    UK POUND TO US $ NOON NY - EXCHANGE RATE



From Daily to Quarterly Factors: Weighting Schemes After we obtain daily ...nancial
factors GD;t , we use some weighting schemes proposed in the literature about Mixed Data
Sampling (MIDAS) regressions to form quarterly factors, GQ                              D
                                                                      D;t . Denote by Gt a factor in a
daily frequency formed from the daily ...nancial dataset and denote by GQ       t a quarterly aggregate
of the corresponding daily factor time series. Let GD    ND j;dt ;t denote the value of a daily factor
          th
in the j day counting backwards from the survey deadline dt in quarter t: Hence, the day dt
of quarter t corresponds with j = 0 and is therefore GD     ND ;dt ;t . For simplicity, we suppress the
                     D            D
subscript dt thus GND j;dt ;t GND j;t .
    We compute the quarterly aggregate of a daily ...nancial factor as a weighted average of
observations over the ND business days before the survey deadline. This means that the fore-
casters' s information set includes daily ...nancial data up to the previous ND business days. GQ     t
is de...ned as:
                                                  ND
                                                  X
                                        Q
                                     Gt (w)           wi GD
                                                          ND i;t
                                                      i=1

where w is a vector of weights. We consider the following three types of weighting schemes to
convert daily factor observations to quarterly. Each weighting scheme weights information by
some function of the number of days prior to the survey deadline.
    1. wi = 1 for i = 1 and wi = 0 otherwise. This weighting scheme places all weight on data
in the last business day before the survey deadline for that quarter and zero weight on any data
prior to that day.
                 j
    2. wi = PND j where we consider a range of j for j = (0:1; 0:2; 0:3; 0:7; 0:8; 0:9; 1)0 . The
               j =1



                                                      21
smaller is j , the more rapidly information prior to the survey deadline day is downweighted.
This down-weighting is progressive but not nonmonotone. j = 1 is a simple average of the
observations across all days in the quarter.
   3. The third parameterization has two parameters, or D = ( 1 ; 2 )0 and allows for non-
monotone weighting of past information:
                                                                      i
                                                           f         ND
                                                                        ; 1; 2
                               w (i;   1; 2)    =P
                                                  ND                      j
                                                         j =1    f       ND
                                                                            ; 1; 2

where:
                                                xa 1 (1               x)b 1 (a + b)
                               f (x; a; b) =
                                                                     (a) (b)
                                                Z    1
                                       ( a) =            e x xa 1 dx
                                                 0
The weights w (i; 1 ; 2 ) are the Beta polynomial MIDAS weights of Ghysels, Sinko, and Valka-
nov (2007), which are based on the Beta function. This weighting scheme is   exible enough to
generate a range of possible shapes with only two parameters.
    We consider these possible weighting schemes and choose the optimal weighting scheme w
from 24 weighting schemes for a daily ...nancial factor GD
                                                         t by minimizing the sum of square
                                        Q
residuals in a regression of yj;t+h on Gt (w):

                                                     ND
                                                     X
                             yj;t+h = a + b                wi GD
                                                               ND          i;t   + ut+h :
                                                     i=1
                                                     |           {z         }
                                                           GQ
                                                            t (w )

This is done in real time using recursive regressions and an initial in-sample estimation window
that matches the timing described below for the data-dependent choice of tuning parameter in
the machine learning estimation (see the section on Estimation and Machine Learning).
    We assume that ND = 14 which implies that forecasters use daily information in at most
the past two weeks before the survey deadline. The process is repeated for each daily ...nancial
factor in GD;t to form quarterly factors GQ D;t .


Estimation and Machine Learning
The model to be estimated is
                                                               (i)
                                       yj;t+h = Xt0            j     +   jt+h :

It should be noted that the most recent observation on the left-hand-side is generally available
in real time only with a one-period lag, thus the forecasting estimations can only be run with
data over a sample that stops one period later than today in real time. Xt always denotes the
most recent data that would have been in real time prior to the date on which the forecast
                                  ( i)
was submitted. The coe¢ cients j;t are estimated using the Elastic Net (EN) estimator, which

                                                         22
                                                                                            0
                                                                ( i)           (i)   (i)
depend on regularization parameter parameters t = 1t ; 2t (See the next section for a
description of EN). The procedure involves iterating on the steps given in the main text.
    We allow the machine to additionally learn about whether the coe¢ cient on the survey
forecast should be shrunk toward zero or toward unity. Recall that the machine forecast for
the ith percentile is
                          ( i)         ( i)   (i) (i)
                                                                ^ (i)0 Zjt :
                        Et (yj;t+h ) ^ j + ^ j F Ft [yj;t+h ] + B jZ

If the machine model is implemented as an estimation with using forecast errors as the depen-
dent variable, i.e.,
                               (i)               (i)       (i) (i)                     (i)0
                  yj;t+h      Ft [yj;t+h ] =     j     +   j F Ft    [yj;t+h ] + Bj Z Zt +           jt+h ;   (A.11)
                                                                       ( i)                ( i)        (i)
the machine e¢ cient benchmark is characterized by j F = 0; Bj Z = 0; j = 0: Because EN
                                                                        ( i)
shrinks estimated coe¢ cients toward zero, this results in shrinkage of j F toward unity. In this
case the machine forecast is given by
                       ( i)                ( i)  ( i)     ( i)
                      Et (yj;t+h )                                      ^ (i)0 Zjt :
                                         ^ j + ^ j F + 1 Ft [yj;t+h ] + B jZ


By contrast, if the machine forecast is implemented by running the speci...cation
                                       (i)       (i) (i)                      (i)0
                           yj;t+h =    j     +   j F Ft    [yj;t+h ] + Bj Z Zt +            jt+h ;

       (i)
then j F is shrunk toward zero and the algorithm will typically place less weight on the sur-
vey forecast than the speci...cation (A.11). In the implementation, we allow the machine to
choose which speci...cation to run over time by having it pick the one that that minimizes the
                                  (i)
mean-square loss function L t ,TIS ; TT S over psuedo out-of-sample forecast errors in every
training sample.
     To capture extreme non-linearities associated with recessions, the machine forecasts follow a
simple switching model. In most periods, the forecast is based on the "normal-times"statistical
model just described. To cope with rapid economic change, as in a recession, the machine
forecast is permitted to switch to a simpler speci...cation based on a recession indicator. As
the recession indicator, we use the term spread, de...ned as the di¤erence between the 10-year
Treasury bond rate and the 3-month Treasury bill rate. When the term spread at time t is at
or below the real time sample 10th percentile value, the machine forecast of t + h is switched
to a recession-model forecast based solely on a dummy indicator It h , which takes the value
1 when the term spread at t h is below a threshold. The precise threshold used is the one
that minimizes mean square loss in the relevant training sample prior to the actual forecast.
The machine chooses among thresholds that represent the real time sample 10th, 5th, or 1st
percentile values for the term spread. The recession speci...cation forecast for t + h is then the
...tted value from a regression of real time real GDP growth at time t on the resulting It h .



                                                           23
Elastic Net Estimator

We use the Elastic Net (EN) estimator, which combines Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection
Operator (LASSO) and ridge type penalties. LASSO. Suppose our goal is to estimate the
coe¢ cients in the linear model:

                                                               (i)
                               yj;t+h =         j   +     j F Ft     [yj;t+h ] + Bj Z Zjt +                  jt+h
                                                                                 |{z}
                                                                                        qr qr

  Collecting all the independent variables and coe¢ cients into a single matrix and vector, the
model can be written as:

                                                                0
                                                     yj;t+h = Xtj          j    +       jt+h

                                                                                                                                             (i)
where Xt = (1; X1t;:::; XKt )0 collects all the independent variable observations Ft [yj;t+h ] ; Zjt
                                                                                0
into a vector with "1"and j = j ; j F ; vec (Bj Z )    ( 0 ; 1 ; ::: K )0 collects all the coe¢ cient.
It is customary to standardize the elements of Xt such that sample means are zero and sample
standard deviations are unity. The coe¢ cient estimates are then put back in their original scale
by multiplying the slope coe¢ cients by their respective standard deviations, and adding back
the mean (scaled by slope coe¢ cient over standard deviation.)
    The EN estimator incorporates both an L1 and L2 penalty:
                                      8                                                                                                      9
                                      >
                                      >                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                             >
                                      >
                                      >                                                                                                      >
                                                                                                                                             >
                                      <XT
                                                                                    2                 X
                                                                                                      k                        X
                                                                                                                               k             =
              ^ EN = argmin                         yj;   +h    X
                                                                     0   ( i)
                                                                                        +
                                                                                                (i)
                                                                                                             j   +
                                                                                                                         (i)            2
                                                                         j                      1                        2              j
                       0 ; 1 ;:::;
                                       >
                                     k >
                                                                                                                                         >
                                                                                                                                         >
                                       >
                                       >   =1                                                         j =1                      j =1     >
                                       :                                                    |          {z    }       |          {z      }>
                                                                                                                                         ;
                                                                                                  LASSO                        ridge
                                                                                                                                       (i)
   By minimizing the MSE over the training samples, we choose the optimal                                                              1     and /(i)
                                                                                                                                                  2 values
simultaneously.

Dynamic Factor Estimation

Let xC      C             C 0
      t = (x1t ; : : : ; xN t ) generically denote a dataset of economic information in some category
C that is available for real-time analysis. It is assumed that xC     t has been suitably transformed
(such as by taking logs and di¤erencing) so as to render the series stationary. We assume that
xC
 it has an approximate factor structure taking the form


                                                        xC
                                                         it =
                                                                     C0 C
                                                                     i Gt       + eX
                                                                                   it ;


where GCt is an rG  1 vector of latent common factors ("di¤usion indexes"       ), C  i is a corre-
sponding rC 1 vector of latent factor loadings, and eit is a vector of idiosyncratic errors.18 The
                                                     X

  18
   In an approximate dynamic factor structure, the idiosyncratic errors eX
                                                                         it are permitted to have a limited
amount of cross-sectional correlation.


                                                                     24
number of factors rG is typically signi...cantly smaller than the number of series, N , which facil-
itates the use of very large datasets. Additional factors to account for nonlinearities are formed
by including polynomial functions of GC    t , and by including factors formed from polynomials of
the raw data.
    We re-estimate factors at each date in the sample using the entire history of variables
observed in real time. Let xit denote the ith variable in a large dataset. The following steps
are taken in forming the macro, ...nancial, and daily factors:

   1. Remove outlier values from a series, de...ned as values whose distance from the median is
      greater than ten times the interquartile range.

   2. Scale each series according to the procedure proposed by Huang, Jiang, and Tong (2017).
      We run the following regression for each variable xit :

                                         yjt+h =       j;i;0   +     j;i;x xit   +    j;i;t+h :


       Then, we form a new dataset of variables ^ j;i;x xit where ^ j;i;x denotes the OLS estimate
       of j;i;x . These "scaled"variables are standardized and denoted x    eit .

   3. Throughout, the factors are estimated over xeit by the method of static principal compo-
      nents (PCA). The approach we consider is to posit that xeit has a factor structure taking
      the form
                                         eit = 0i Gt + eit ;
                                         x                                               (A.12)
       where Gt is a r 1 vector of latent common factors, i is a corresponding r 1 vector of
       latent factor loadings, and eit is a vector of idiosyncratic errors.19 Speci...cally, the T r
                      p
       matrix g  ^t is T times the r eigenvectors corresponding to the r largest eigenvalues of the
       T T matrix x    ex e0 =(T Nxe ) in decreasing order, where T is the number of time periods and Nx   e
       is the number of variables in the large dataset. The optimal number of common factors,
       r is determined by the panel information criteria developed in Bai and Ng (2002). To
       handle missing values in any series, we use an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm
       by ...lling with an initial guess and forming factors, using (A.12) to update the guess with
       E(xeit ) = E ( 0i g                                                      eit ) are arbitrarily close.
                         ^t ) ; and iterating until the successive values for E(x

   4. Collect the common factors into the matrix Graw , where each principle component is a
      column.
  19
    We consider an approximate dynamic factor structure, in which the idiosyncratic errors eit are permitted to
have a limited amount of cross-sectional correlation. The approximate factor speci...cation limits the contribution
of the idiosyncratic covariances to the total variance of x as N gets large:
                                                  N X
                                                  X N
                                              1
                                          N                  jE (eit ejt )j      M;
                                                  i=1 j =1

where M is a constant.

                                                              25
   5. Square the raw variables and repeat steps 2 through 5. Collect the common factors from
      squared data into a matrix Gsqr , where component is a column.

   6. Square the ...rst factor in Graw , and call this G2
                                                        raw1 .

   7. Our matrix of factors is [Graw ; Gsqr1 ; G2
                                                raw1 ]; where Gsqr1 is the ...rst column of Gsqr .

    For macro factors, we use all of the variables listed in Table A.2. After step 1 above, an
additional step of removing missing variables and observations is needed for the macro variables.
We remove series with fewer than seven years of data and time periods with less than ...fty-
percent of variables observed, which occur in the early part of the sample. Furthermore, we
lag variables with missing data in the ...nal observation whenever more than twenty-percent of
variables are missing data in the last observation.20
    For the ...nancial factors, we use all of the variables listed in Table A.3, and no additional
steps are performed beyond those described above.

Economic Names of Factors

Any labeling of the factors is imperfect because each is in   uenced to some degree by all the vari-
ables in the large dataset and the orthogonalization means that no one of them will correspond
exactly to a precise economic concept like output or unemployment. Following Ludvigson and
Ng (2009), we relate the factors to the underlying variables in the large dataset. For each time
period in our evaluation sample, we compute the marginal R2 from regressions of each of the
individual series in the panel dataset onto each factor, one at a time. Each series xeit is assigned
the group name in the data appendix tables naming all series, e.g., non-farm payrolls are part
of the Employment group (EMP). If series x       eit has the highest average marginal R2 over all
evaluation periods for factor Gkt ; we label Gkt according to the group to which xeit belongs, e.g.,
Gkt is an Employment factor. We further normalize the sign of each factor so that an increase
in the factor indicates an increase in xeit . Thus, in the example above, an increase in Gkt would
indicate a rise in non-farm payrolls. Table A.5 reports the series with largest average marginal
R2 for each factor of each large dataset.

Predictor Variables
                                             0
The vector Zjt                ^ 0t ; Wjt
                       yj;t ; G       0
                                                 is an r = 1 + rG + rW vector which collects the data at
                                                                                        0
time t with Zjt       yj;t ; :::; yj;t        ^0        ^0
                                         py ; Gt ; :::; Gt
                                                                   0          0
                                                                          a vector of contemporaneous
                                                             pG ; Wjt ; :::; Wjt   pW

and lagged values of Zjt , where py ; pG ; pW denote the total number of lags of yj;t ; G    ^ 0t , Wjt
                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                        ,
respectively. Superscript (i) refers to the ith forecaster, where i denotes either the mean "mean"
or an ith percentile value of the forecast distribution, i.e., "65" is the 65th percentile. The
predictors below are listed as elements of yj;t ; G^ 0jt ; or Wjt
                                                               0
                                                                  for di¤erent surveys and variables.
  20
    Even though the EM algorithm is designed to estimate missing observations, it does not perform well when
there are too many missing observations at a single point in time.


                                                               26
                                    Table A.5: Economic Interpretation of the Factors
                                Series with Largest R2
                                Macro Factors                           Label
                  G1;M;t        Nonfarm Payrolls                        Macro   Factor:   Employment
                  G2;M;t        Interest paid by consumers              Macro   Factor:   Money and Credit
                  G3;M;t        Agg. Weekly hours - Service-producing   Macro   Factor:   Employment.
                  G4;M;t        Agg. Weekly hours - Good-producing      Macro   Factor:   Employment
                  G5;M;t        Nonborrowed Reserves                    Macro   Factor:   Money and Credit
                  G6;M;t        Housing Starts                          Macro   Factor:   Housing
                  G7;M;t        Change in private inventories           Macro   Factor:   Orders and Investment
                  G8;M;t        PCE: Service                            Macro   Factor:   Consumption
                                Financial Factors
                  G1;F;t        D_log(P)                                Financial   Factor:   Prices, Yield, Dividends
                  G2;F;t        SMB                                     Financial   Factor:   Equity Risk Factors
                  G3;F;t        HML                                     Financial   Factor:   Equity Risk Factors
                  G4;F;t        R15_R11                                 Financial   Factor:   Equity Risk Factors
                  G5;F;t        D_DIVreinvest                           Financial   Factor:   Prices, Yield, Dividends
                  G6;F;t        Smoke                                   Financial   Factor:   Industries
                  G7;F;t        UMD                                     Financial   Factor:   Equity Risk Factors
                  G8;F;t        Telcm                                   Financial   Factor:   Industries
                                Daily Factors
                  G1;D;t        ECBOT-SOYBEAN OIL                       Daily   Factor:   Commodities
                  G2;D;t        A Rated minus Y10 Tbond                 Daily   Factor:   Corporate Risk
                  G3;D;t        6-month US T-bill                       Daily   Factor:   Treasuries
                  G4;D;t        6-month treasury bill minus 3M-Tbills   Daily   Factor:   Treasuries
                  G5;D;t        CBT-MINI DOW JONES                      Daily   Factor:   Equities
                  G6;D;t        Corn                                    Daily   Factor:   Commodities
                  G7;Dt         APFNF-AAF                               Daily   Factor:   Corporate Risk
                  G8;D;t        US nominal dollar broad index           Daily   Factor:   FX

Note: This table reports the series with largest marginal R2 for the factor speci...ed in the ...rst column. The
marginal R2 is computed from regressions of each of the individual series onto the factor, one at a time, for the
time period that the factor shows up as relevant for the median bias.


SPF In   ation For yj equal to ination the forecasting model considers the following vari-
ables.
       0
   In Wjt :
        (i)
   1. Fjt     k   [yjt+h k ], where k = 1; : : : ; 2
        (s6=i)
   2. Fjt   1      [yjt+h 1 ], where s = mean, 50, 25, 75 for all s 6= i
                      ()
   3. varN Ft              1   [yjt+h 1 ] ; where varN ( ) denotes the cross-sectional variance of lagged survey
      forecasts
                           ()
   4. skewN Ft 1 [yjt+h 1 ] ; where skewN ( ) denotes the cross-sectional skewness of lagged
      survey forecasts
                                                + (1   ) t 1 ; = 0:95 if t <1991:Q4
                                                                t 2
   5. Trend ination measured as                     t 1   =                           Trend
                                          CPI10t 1                      if t 1991:Q4
      ination is intended to capture long-run trends. When long-run forecasts of ination are

                                                                 27
     not available, as is the case pre-1991:Q4, we us a moving average of past ination.

     ^t 1 = detrended gross domestic product, de...ned as the residual from a regression
  6. GDP
     of GDPt 1 on a constant and the four most recent values of GDP as of date t 8. See
     Hamilton (2018).

     ^
  7. EM  P t 1 = detrended employment, de...ned as the residual from a regression of EM Pt 1
     on a constant and the four most recent values of EM P as of date t 8. See Hamilton
     (2018).
       (i)
  8. Nt [    t;t h ]   = Nowcast as of time t of the ith percentile of ination over the period t   h
     to t.

   Lags of the dependent variable:

  1. yt   1;t h 1   one quarter lagged annual ination.

                  ^ 0jt include factors formed from three large datasets separately:
   The factors in G

  1. GM;t k , for k = 0; 1 are factors formed from a real time macro dataset DM with 92
     real time macro series; includes both monthly and quarterly series, with monthly series
     converted to quarterly according to the method described in the data appendix.

  2. GF;t k , for k = 0; 1 are factors formed from a ...nancial data set DF with 147 monthly
     ...nancial series.

  3. GQ                                                                     D
       D;t ; are quarterly factors formed from a daily ...nancial dataset D of 87 daily ...nancial
     indicators. The raw daily series are ...rst converted to daily factors GD;t (w) and the daily
     factors are aggregated up to quarterly observations GQ   D;t (w) using a weighted average of
     daily factors, with the weights w dependent on two free parameters that are chosen to
     minimize the sum of squared residuals in a regression of yj;t+h on GD;t (w).

      The 92 macro series in DM are selected to represent broad categories of macroeconomic time
series. The majority of these are real activity measures: real output and income, employment
and hours, consumer spending, housing starts, orders and un...lled orders, compensation and
labor costs, and capacity utilization measures. The dataset also includes commodity and price
indexes and a handful of bond and stock market indexes, and foreign exchange measures. The
...nancial dataset Df is an updated monthly version of the of 147 variables comprised solely
of ...nancial market time series used in Ludvigson and Ng (2007). These data include valua-
tion ratios such as the dividend-price ratio and earnings-price ratio, growth rates of aggregate
dividends and prices, default and term spreads, yields on corporate bonds of di¤erent ratings



                                                   28
grades, yields on Treasuries and yield spreads, and a broad cross-section of industry, size, book-
market, and momentum portfolio equity returns.21 The 87 daily ...nancial indicators in DD
include daily time series on commodities spot prices and futures prices, aggregate stock market
indexes, volatility indexes, credit spreads and yield spreads, and exchange rates.

SPF GDP Growth For yj equal to GDP growth the forecasting model considers the follow-
ing variables.
         0
   In Wjt
        ( i)
   1. Fjt      k   [yjt+h k ], where k = 1; 2
        (s6=i)
   2. Fjt   1      [yjt+h 1 ], where s = mean, 50, 25, 75 for all s 6= i
                     ()
   3. varN Ft             1   [yjt+h 1 ] ; where varN ( ) denotes the cross-sectional variance of forecasts

                       ()
   4. skewN Ft                1   [yjt+h 1 ] ; where skewN ( ) denotes the cross-sectional skewness of forecasts

      ^t 1 = detrended gross domestic product, de...ned as the residual from a regression
   5. GDP
      of GDPt 1 on a constant and the four most recent values of GDP as of date t 8. See
      Hamilton (2018).

      ^
   6. EM  P t 1 = detrended employment, de...ned as the residual from a regression of EM Pt 1
      on a constant and the four most recent values of EM P as of date t 8. See Hamilton
      (2018).
        (i)
   7. Nt [yt;t h ] = Nowcast as of time t of the ith percentile of GDP growth over the period
      t h to t.

   8. V XOt , de...ned as CBOE S&P 100 volatility index. We also include its squared and cubic
                    2           3
      terms, V XOt    , and V XOt .

   Lags of the dependent variable:

   1. yj;t     1;t h 1 ; yj;t 2;t h 2       one and two quarter lagged annual GDP growth.

                  ^ 0jt include factors formed from three large datasets separately:
   The factors in G

   1. GM;t k , for k = 0; 1 are factors formed from a real time macro dataset DM with 92
      real time macro series; includes both monthly and quarterly series, with monthly series
      converted to quarterly according to the method described in the data appendix.
 21
    A detailed description of the series is given in the Data Appendix of the online supplementary ...le at
www.sydneyludvigson.com/s/ucc_data_appendix.pdf



                                                              29
   2. GF;t k , for k = 0; 1 are factors formed from a ...nancial data set DF with 147 monthly
      ...nancial series.

   3. GQ                                                                     D
        D;t ; are quarterly factors formed from a daily ...nancial dataset D of 87 daily ...nancial
      indicators. The raw daily series are ...rst converted to daily factors GD;t (w) and the daily
      factors are aggregated up to quarterly observations GQ   D;t (w) using a weighted average of
      daily factors, with the weights w dependent on two free parameters that are chosen to
      minimize the sum of squared residuals in a regression of yj;t+h on GD;t (w).

      The 92 macro series in DM are selected to represent broad categories of macroeconomic time
series. The majority of these are real activity measures: real output and income, employment
and hours, consumer spending, housing starts, orders and un...lled orders, compensation and
labor costs, and capacity utilization measures. The dataset also includes commodity and price
indexes and a handful of bond and stock market indexes, and foreign exchange measures. The
...nancial dataset Df is an updated monthly version of the of 147 variables comprised solely
of ...nancial market time series used in Ludvigson and Ng (2007). These data include valua-
tion ratios such as the dividend-price ratio and earnings-price ratio, growth rates of aggregate
dividends and prices, default and term spreads, yields on corporate bonds of di¤erent ratings
grades, yields on Treasuries and yield spreads, and a broad cross-section of industry, size, book-
market, and momentum portfolio equity returns.22 The 87 daily ...nancial indicators in DD
include daily time series on commodities spot prices and futures prices, aggregate stock market
indexes, volatility indexes, credit spreads and yield spreads, and exchange rates.

SOC In     ation For consistency, the predictors for the SOC in        ation forecasts are constructed
similarly to those of the SPF in  ation forecasts. Again, consider the following forecast regres-
sion,
                                          M S;(i)
                        yj;t+h = j + j F Fj;t     [yj;t+h ] + Bj Z Zjt + jt+h ;
                                                              |{z}
                                                               1xq

where the variables are de...ned as above, and i is either the mean "mean"or an ith percentile
                                                                            SP F;(i)
value of the forecast distribution. We denote forecasts from the SPF using Fjs       [ ] and from
                              M S;(i)
the Michigan Survey using Fjs         [ ].
          0
   In Wjt :
       SP F;( )
   1. Fjt 1       [yjt+h 1 ], the mean SPF forecast for CPI.
       SP F;(50)
   2. Fjt 1        [yjt+h 1 ], the 50th percentile SPF forecast for CPI.
       SP F;(25)
   3. Fjt 1        [yjt+h 1 ], the 25th percentile SPF forecast for CPI.
  22
  A detailed description of the series is given in the Data Appendix of the online supplementary ...le at
www.sydneyludvigson.com/s/ucc_data_appendix.pdf



                                                   30
       SP F;(75)
  4. Fjt  1        [yjt+h 1 ], the 75th percentile SPF forecast for CPI.
                SP F;( )
  5. varN Ft      1        [yjt+h 1 ] , the cross-sectional variance of SPF forecasts of CPI.

                     SP F;( )
  6. skewN Ft          1        [yjt+h 1 ] , the cross-sectional skewness of SPF forecasts of CPI.

                                                 + (1    ) t 1 ; = 0:95 if t <1991:Q4
                                                        t 2
  7. Trend ination measured as               t 1   =                                    Trend
                                           CPI10t 1                       if t 1991:Q4
     in ation is intended to capture long-run trends. When long-run forecasts of in ation are
     not available, as is the case pre-1991:Q4, we us a moving average of past ination.

     ^t 1 = detrended gross domestic product, de...ned as the residual from a regression
  8. GDP
     of GDPt 1 on a constant and the four most recent values of GDP as of date t 8. See
     Hamilton (2018).

     ^
  9. EM  P t 1 = detrended employment, de...ned as the residual from a regression of EM Pt 1
     on a constant and the four most recent values of EM P as of date t 8. See Hamilton
     (2018).

   Lags of dependent variables:

  1. yt    1;t h 1   one quarter lagged annual CPI ination.

                  ^ 0jt include factors formed from three large datasets separately:
   The factors in G

  1. GM;t k , for k = 0; 1 are factors formed from a real time macro dataset DM with 92
     real time macro series; includes both monthly and quarterly series, with monthly series
     converted to quarterly according to the method described in the data appendix.

  2. GF;t k , for k = 0; 1 are factors formed from a ...nancial data set DF with 147 monthly
     ...nancial series.

  3. GQ                                                                     D
       D;t ; are quarterly factors formed from a daily ...nancial dataset D of 87 daily ...nancial
     indicators. The raw daily series are ...rst converted to daily factors GD;t (w) and the daily
     factors are aggregated up to quarterly observations GQ   D;t (w) using a weighted average of
     daily factors, with the weights w dependent on two free parameters that are chosen to
     minimize the sum of squared residuals in a regression of yj;t+h on GD;t (w).

    The 92 macro series in DM are selected to represent broad categories of macroeconomic time
series. The majority of these are real activity measures: real output and income, employment
and hours, consumer spending, housing starts, orders and un...lled orders, compensation and
labor costs, and capacity utilization measures. The dataset also includes commodity and price
indexes and a handful of bond and stock market indexes, and foreign exchange measures. The

                                                         31
...nancial dataset Df is an updated monthly version of the of 147 variables comprised solely
of ...nancial market time series used in Ludvigson and Ng (2007). These data include valua-
tion ratios such as the dividend-price ratio and earnings-price ratio, growth rates of aggregate
dividends and prices, default and term spreads, yields on corporate bonds of di¤erent ratings
grades, yields on Treasuries and yield spreads, and a broad cross-section of industry, size, book-
market, and momentum portfolio equity returns.23 The 87 daily ...nancial indicators in DD
include daily time series on commodities spot prices and futures prices, aggregate stock market
indexes, volatility indexes, credit spreads and yield spreads, and exchange rates.

SOC GDP Growth For yj equal to GDP growth the forecasting model considers the fol-
lowing variables
         0
   In Wjt  :
          SP F;( )
   1. Fjt    1       [yjt+h 1 ], the mean SPF forecast for GDP growth.
          SP F;(50)
   2. Fjt    1        [yjt+h 1 ], the 50th percentile SPF forecast for GDP growth.
          SP F;(25)
   3. Fjt    1        [yjt+h 1 ], the 25th percentile SPF forecast for GDP growth.
          SP F;(75)
   4. Fjt    1        [yjt+h 1 ], the 75th percentile SPF forecast for GDP growth.
                     SP F;( )
   5. varN Ft          1        [yjt+h 1 ] , the cross-sectional variance of SPF forecasts for GDP growth.

                       SP F;( )
   6. skewN Ft           1        [yjt+h 1 ] , the cross-sectional skewness of SPF forecasts for GDP growth.

      ^t 1 = detrended gross domestic product, de...ned as the residual from a regression
   7. GDP
      of GDPt 1 on a constant and the four most recent values of GDP as of date t 8. See
      Hamilton (2018).

      ^
   8. EM  P t 1 = detrended employment, de...ned as the residual from a regression of EM Pt 1
      on a constant and the four most recent values of EM P as of date t 8. See Hamilton
      (2018).

   9. V XOt , de...ned as CBOE S&P 100 volatility index. We also include its squared and cubic
                    2           3
      terms, V XOt    , and V XOt .

       Lags of dependent variables:

   1. yj;t   1;t h 1 ; yj;t 2;t h 2      one and two quarter lagged annual GDP growth.

                      ^ 0jt include factors formed from three large datasets separately:
       The factors in G
  23
  A detailed description of the series is given in the Data Appendix of the online supplementary ...le at
www.sydneyludvigson.com/s/ucc_data_appendix.pdf


                                                          32
   1. GM;t k , for k = 0; 1 are factors formed from a real time macro dataset DM with 92
      real time macro series; includes both monthly and quarterly series, with monthly series
      converted to quarterly according to the method described in the data appendix.

   2. GF;t k , for k = 0; 1 are factors formed from a ...nancial data set DF with 147 monthly
      ...nancial series.

   3. GQ                                                                     D
        D;t ; are quarterly factors formed from a daily ...nancial dataset D of 87 daily ...nancial
      indicators. The raw daily series are ...rst converted to daily factors GD;t (w) and the daily
      factors are aggregated up to quarterly observations GQ   D;t (w) using a weighted average of
      daily factors, with the weights w dependent on two free parameters that are chosen to
      minimize the sum of squared residuals in a regression of yj;t+h on GD;t (w).

      The 92 macro series in DM are selected to represent broad categories of macroeconomic time
series. The majority of these are real activity measures: real output and income, employment
and hours, consumer spending, housing starts, orders and un...lled orders, compensation and
labor costs, and capacity utilization measures. The dataset also includes commodity and price
indexes and a handful of bond and stock market indexes, and foreign exchange measures. The
...nancial dataset Df is an updated monthly version of the of 147 variables comprised solely
of ...nancial market time series used in Ludvigson and Ng (2007). These data include valua-
tion ratios such as the dividend-price ratio and earnings-price ratio, growth rates of aggregate
dividends and prices, default and term spreads, yields on corporate bonds of di¤erent ratings
grades, yields on Treasuries and yield spreads, and a broad cross-section of industry, size, book-
market, and momentum portfolio equity returns.24 The 87 daily ...nancial indicators in DD
include daily time series on commodities spot prices and futures prices, aggregate stock market
indexes, volatility indexes, credit spreads and yield spreads, and exchange rates.

Blue Chip In        ation For consistency, the predictors for the BC in    ation (PGDP in    ation
and CPI in    ation) forecasts are constructed analogously to those of the SPF in  ation forecasts.
The only di¤erences are that for own-survey forecasting variables (including nowcasts), e.g.
 (i)              0
Ft [yjt+h ] in Wjt   , we now use survey forecasts from Blue Chip, instead of SPF.

Blue Chip GDP Growth For yj equal to GDP growth the forecasting model considers the
same variables as in the SPF GDP growth forecasts with SPF forecasts replaced with Blue
Chip Forecasts.
 24
    A detailed description of the series is given in the Data Appendix of the online supplementary ...le at
www.sydneyludvigson.com/s/ucc_data_appendix.pdf




                                                    33
Coibion Gorodnichenko Regressions
To construct SPF forecasts of annual in     ation, forecasters at time t are presumed to use an
advance estimate of t 1 price level combined with their survey respondent forecast of that
price level at t + 3 to form a forecast of t+3 :
                                             0                        1
                                    ( )
                                                            + @Ft [
                                                                 ( )                         ( )               A+
                       t+3     Ft [         t+3 ]     =                       t+3 ]         Ft 1    [   t+3 ]        t+3       (A.13)
                   |           {z                 }            |                      {z                   }
                        Forecast Error                                      Forecast Revision

where the annual ination at time t + 3 is de...ned as,

                                                           Pt        Pt+1      Pt+2              Pt+3
                               t+3      = 100                                                               1 :                (A.14)
                                                          Pt 1        Pt       Pt+1              Pt+2

Following CG, regressions are run and forecast errors computed using forecasts of real-time
in ation data available four quarters after the period being forecast.
    The survey forecast is constructed as follows

                                                            Ptavg     Ptavg
                                                                        +1        Ptavg
                                                                                    +2              Ptavg
                                                                                                      +3
                        Ft [   t+3 ]      = 100                         avg         avg               avg       1 ;
                                                            Pt 1      Pt          Pt+1              Pt+2
                   PNt+h i
where Ptavg     1
         +h = Nt+h   i=1 Pt+h , for h = 0; : : : ; 3, i represents an individual forecaster, Nt+h is
the number of forecasters at time time t + h, and Pt 1 is the BEA'      s advance estimate at t for
prices in t 1.

Forecast Error

The forecast error on the LHS of the regressions (A.13) is constructed in the following way:

                                                                 "                                              !
                                                                                      ( )
                              ( )                                     t;t 1     Ft [             t;t 1 ]
                t+3;t        Ft     [   t+3;t ]       100                                                  +1                  (A.15)
                                                                                400
                                                                                                                !
                                                                                      ( )
                                                                      t+1;t     Ft [             t+1;t ]
                                                                                                           +1
                                                                                400
                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                        ( )
                                                                      t+2;t+1         Ft [          t+2;t+1 ]
                                                                                                                +1
                                                                                      400
                                                                                                                     !     #
                                                                                        ( )
                                                                      t+3;t+2         Ft [          t+3;t+2 ]
                                                                                                                +1         1
                                                                                      400

In brackets is the product of quarterly forecast errors from the nowcast to h = 3 quarters ahead.




                                                                     34
  Table A.6: CG In-Sample Regressions of Forecast Errors on Forecast Revisions (Survey)

  Regression:           t+3;t       Ft [        t+3;t ]
                                                  = + (Ft [                   t+3;t ]  Ft 1 [ t+3;t ]) + t 1;t 2 + t
                                              (1)                                 (2)                     (3)           (4)
                                            Panel A: Sample:                  1969:Q1 - 2014:Q4 Panel B: Sample: 1969:Q1 - 2018:Q2
  Constant                                   0.001                              -0.077                  -0.022        -0.116
    t-stat                                  (0.005)                            (-0.442)                (-0.167)      (-0.758)
  Ft [ t+3;t ]    Ft    1   [   t+3;t ]     1.194                              1.141                   1.186         1.116
    t-stat                                  (2.496)                            (2.560)                 (2.478)       (2.532)
    t 1;t 2                                                                      0.021                                0.027
    t-stat                                                                     (0.435)                               (0.574)
  R2                                            0.195                            0.197                   0.193         0.195
                                                         Pt+1   Pt+2     Pt+3
Notes: The annual in   ation is de...ned as t+3;t = PPt
                                                     t 1  Pt    Pt+1     Pt+2 , the covariate Ft [ t+3;t ] is the SPF
of annual in ation with information in period t and Ft 1 [ t+3;t ] is the SPF mean forecast of the same annual
in ation but with information in t 1. Panel A presents the sample in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) and
Panel B updates the sample to 2018:Q2. Regressions are run and model evaluated using real-time data with
observation on t+3;t available 4 quarters after the advance estimate of it. Newey-West corrected (t-statistics)
with lags = 4. Newey-West HAC: *sig. at 10%. **sig. at 5%. ***sig. at 1%.


In-sample analysis

Table A.6 presents the replication for CG, as well as results from extending the sample size to
2018:Q2. Panel A replicates the numbers from columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 Panel B of CG.
Panel B presents the results for the extended sample.
   Table A.7 presents the results from CG regressions when we replace the survey forecast with
our machine forecast for SPF mean in     ation. More speci...cally, we estimate is the following
regression:
                                       0                           1
                                          ( )
                                                                + @Et [
                                                                     ( )                                 ( )                 A+
                       t+3;t       Et+3jt             =                                 t+3;t ]        Et  1   [   t+3;t ]                  t 1   +       jt+3
                   |            {z     }                           |                              {z                    }
                 Machine Forecast Errors                                       Machine Forecast Revision

          ( )                                                                                                                         ( )
where Et [ t+3;t ] is the machine mean forecast made at time t and Et                                                                   1   [   t+3;t ]   is the machine
forecast made at time t 1.

Out-of-Sample Analysis

We seek to construct a series of real-time OOS forecasts using the model:
                                           ( )                      ( )         ( )         ( )                     ( )
                            t+3       Ft [           t+3 ]      =         +              Ft [          t+3 ]       Ft 1   [       t+3 ]     +     t+3


We estimate over an initial sample, forecast out one period, roll (or recurse) forward and repeat
estimation and forecast. The regression estimation uses the latest vintage of in     ation in real
time and, following CG, computes forecast errors real-time data available four quarters after
the period being forecast. The CG model forecast for t+3
                                                                              ( )
                                    bt+3 = b t + 1 + bt
                                      ( )                 ( )                            ( )
                                                                                      Ft [        t+3 ]
                                                                                                               b ( ) F(       )
                                                                                                                                  [   t+3 ]
                                                                                                                 t    t       1


                                                                                    35
        Table A.7: CG Regressions of Forecast Errors on Forecast Revisions (Machine)

               Regression:     t+3;t        Et [     t+3;t ]
                                                           = +           (Et [     t+3;t ]     Et    1  [ t+3;t ]) +   t 1;t 2   +   t
                                                         (1)                                             (2)
               Constant                                 -0.12                                          -0.13
                 t-stat                                ( 1:21)                                       ( 0:94)
               Et [ t+3;t ]   Et   1   [   t+3;t ]      -0.04                                          -0.04
                 t-stat                                ( 0:22)                                       ( 0:24)
                t 1;t 2                                                                                 0.00
                 t-stat                                                                               (0:08)
                 R2                                     0:0008                                        0:0008
                                                               Pt+1    Pt+2   Pt+3
Notes: The annual in     ation is de...ned as t+3;t = PP  t
                                                         t 1    Pt     Pt+1   Pt+2 , the covariate Et [ t+3;t ] is the
machine mean forecast of annual in       ation with information in period t and Et 1 [ t+3;t ] is the machine mean
forecast of the same annual in    ation but with information in t 1. Regressions are run and model evaluated
using real-time data with observation on t+3;t available 4 quarters after the advance estimate of it. Newey-West
corrected (t-statistics) with lags = 4. Newey-West HAC: *sig. at 10%. **sig. at 5%. ***sig. at 1%. The
sample is 1995:Q1 to 2018:Q2.


For the rolling procedure, we try windows of sizes w = 5, 10, and 20 years. For the recursive
procedure, we try initial window sizes of 5, 10, and 20 years as well.
   The survey and model errors are
                                                                                 ( )
                                                 survey errort = Ft [                       t+3 ]        t+3
                                                                                ( )
                                           CG model errort =                   bt+3            t+3


    We also compute rolling MSEs over di¤erent forecast samples of size P as

                                                               1 X
                                                                  P
                                                                                                         2
                                            MSEF =                   survey errort+s
                                                               P s=1

                                                               1 X
                                                                  P
                                           MSECG =                   (CG model errort+s )2
                                                               P s=1


Dynamic Responses to Cyclical Shocks­Local Projection
We follow Angeletos, Huo, and Sastry (2020) (AHS) and estimate the dynamic responses to
in ation or GDP growth shocks from Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2018a) via local projection
using a series of single equation regressions, one for each horizon 0 h H taking the form

                                                                                       0
                                               zt+h =           h   +   h "t   +           Wt + ut+h                                     (A.16)
                                                                                                                            (i)
where zt is either the outcome variable at t, the survey forecast made at t, Ft [yj;t+h ] ; or the
                                      ( i)
machine forecast made at time t; Et [yj;t+h ]. The dynamic responses plotted in the ...gures
of the main text and below are given by the sequence of coe¢ cients f gH    h=0 , where Wt is a
vector of control variables that are the same as those used in AHS and include one lag each of


                                                                        36
                   Table A.8: Mean Square Errors for the CG Model and SPF
                                                    ( )
       Forecast model: bt+3 = b t + 1 + bt
                             ( )     ( )                   ( )
                                                          Ft [   t+3 ]
                                                                         b ( ) F(   )
                                                                                        [   t+3 ]
                                                                           t    t   1
                                             MSECG =MSEF
            Method        Quarterly Compound Continuous Compound CG Sample
       Rolling 5 years            1.38               1.38          1:39
       Rolling 10 years           1.29               1.29          1:29
       Rolling 20 years           1.31               1.30          1:34
       Recursive 5 years          1.69               1.68          1:71
       Recursive 10 years         1.60               1.59          1:59
       Recursive 20 years         1.33               1.30          1:34
Notes: The table reports the ratio of MSEs of the CG model forecast over the survey forecast. The regression
estimation uses the latest vintage of ination in real time and, following CG, computes forecast errors real-time
data available four quarters after the period being forecast. The sample spans the period 1969:Q1 - 2018:Q2.
The CG sample refers to the sample in Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) that ends in 2014:Q4.



the outcome and survey forecast. We consider two outcome variables: in        ation and real GDP
growth. Following Angeletos, Huo, and Sastry (2020), we plot forecasts and outcome variables
          (50)
so that Ft [yj;t+h ] is lined up with yj;t+h along a vertical slice and the di¤erence between the
two is the forecast error. On the left-hand-side the forecasts are made at time t for period t + h,
while the shock occurs at t. We compute the heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation robust
(HAC) standard errors with a 4-quarter Bartlett kernel to calculate standard errors for the
impulse responses. The 1 standard error bands are reported.
    Top panel of Figure A.2 shows that we replicate the dynamic responses of in        ation to an
in  ation targeted shock over the same sample used in Angeletos, Huo, and Sastry (2020). The
bottom panel of Figure A.2 shows the dynamic responses are similar using the local projection
estimation over our evaluation sample 1995:1-2018:Q2.




                                                      37
                            Figure A.2: Dynamic Responses: Forecast and Outcome



                       Dynamic Responses of Inflation to Inflation Targeted Shock, Post 1969
0.8
                                                                                                     3Q Survey Forecast
0.6                                                                                                  Outcome

0.4

0.2

  0

-0.2

-0.4
       0          2           4           6          8         10            12          14          16          18          20
                                                             Quarters


                       Dynamic Responses of Inflation to Inflation Targeted Shock, Post 1995
0.6


0.4


0.2


  0


-0.2


-0.4
       0          2           4           6          8         10            12          14          16          18          20
                                                             Quarters


           Dynamic responses of GDP and in           ations.The shaded areas are 68% con...dence intervals based on HAC
           standard errors with a Bartlett kernel and 4 lags. The x-axis denotes quarters from the shock. The outcome
                                                                                                              (50)
           variable is in ation t and the shock is the in   ation-targeted shock. The survey forecast is Ft [yt+3 ]. The
           shock time series are from Angeletos, Collard, and Dellas (2018a). In the ...rst row, the impulse responses are
           estimated over sample 1969:Q1 to 2018:Q2. In the second row, the impulse responses are estimated over sample
           1995:Q1 to 2018:Q2. In both rows, we "align" the forecast responses such that, at a given vertical slice of the
           plot, the outcome and forecast responses are measured over the same horizon, and the di¤erence between the
           two is the forecast error. The vintage of observations on the outcome variable is ...nal-release data.

                                                                 38
