                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             SALIENCE AND TAXATION WITH IMPERFECT COMPETITION

                                         Kory Kroft
                                   Jean-William P. Laliberté
                                      René Leal-Vizcaíno
                                   Matthew J. Notowidigdo

                                      Working Paper 27409
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27409


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           June 2020, Revised November 2020


We thank Simon Anderson, Raj Chetty, Julie Cullen, Amy Finkelstein, Xavier Gabaix, Nathan
Hendren, Louis Kaplow, Henrik Kleven, Nicholas Li, Jesse Shapiro, Rob Porter, Aviv Nevo,
Stephen Coate, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. We thank Eileen
Driscoll, Robert French, Adam Miettinen, Boriana Miloucheva, Pinchuan Ong, Shahar Rotberg,
Marc-Antoine Schmidt, Stephen Tino, Jessica Wagner, Ting Wang, Haiyue Yu, and Ruizhi Zhu
for extremely valuable research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC). Any opinion, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the SSHRC. This research is based in part on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts
Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The
conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not reflect the views
of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and
preparing the results reported herein. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Kory Kroft, Jean-William P. Laliberté, René Leal-Vizcaíno, and Matthew J.
Notowidigdo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Salience and Taxation with Imperfect Competition
Kory Kroft, Jean-William P. Laliberté, René Leal-Vizcaíno, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo
NBER Working Paper No. 27409
June 2020, Revised November 2020
JEL No. D12,H2,H25,H71

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper studies commodity taxation in a model featuring heterogeneous consumers, imperfect
competition, and tax salience. We derive new formulas for the incidence and marginal excess
burden of commodity taxation, and we find that tax salience and market structure interact when
considering tax incidence but do not directly interact when considering the marginal excess
burden. We estimate the necessary inputs to the formulas by combining Nielsen Retail Scanner
data from grocery stores in the US with detailed sales tax data. We calibrate our new formulas
and conclude that the incidence of sales taxes on consumers is increasing in tax salience, and the
marginal excess burden of taxation is larger than standard formulas that ignore imperfect
competition and tax salience.

Kory Kroft                                      René Leal-Vizcaíno
Department of Economics                         Bank of Mexico
University of Toronto                           Avenida 5 de Mayo 2
150 St. George Street                           Colonia Centro
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7                             Código postal 06000
CANADA                                          Alcaldía Cuauhtémoc
and NBER                                        Ciudad de México
kory.kroft@utoronto.ca                          México
                                                rlealv@banxico.org.mx
Jean-William P. Laliberté
Department of Economics                         Matthew J. Notowidigdo
University of Calgary                           Northwestern University
2500 University Drive NW                        Department of Economics
Calgary, Alberta, T2N 1N4                       2001 Sheridan Road
CANADA                                          Evanston, IL 60208-2600
jeanwilliam.lalibert@ucalgary.ca                and NBER
                                                noto@northwestern.edu
1        Introduction

Standard welfare analysis of commodity taxation typically makes two key assumptions: (1) the

product market is perfectly competitive and (2) consumers respond to taxes in the same way they

respond to price changes. Several papers in public economics have relaxed the first assumption

(see Auerbach and Hines 2002 for a review of this literature), but these papers have maintained

the second assumption that taxes are fully salient. More recently, researchers have relaxed the

second assumption, developing new theoretical and empirical tools to analyze the welfare effects

of taxes when taxes are less salient than prices, but have maintained the assumption of perfect

competition (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft 2009; Taubinsky and Rees-Jones 2018; Farhi and Gabaix

2020; Morrison and Taubinsky 2020). If markets are characterized by imperfect competition and

consumers misperceive taxes, however, neither of these approaches is likely to provide a fully

accurate characterization of the welfare effects of commodity taxes.

        This paper contributes to the behavioral public finance literature in several ways. First, we

derive new formulas for the incidence and marginal excess burden of commodity taxes (both unit

taxes and ad valorem taxes) in a model featuring imperfect competition and tax salience with het-

erogeneous consumers. These formulas lead to the key novel insights of this paper. Tax salience

and market structure interact when considering tax incidence, but do not directly interact when

considering the marginal excess burden.

        For incidence, we show that greater attention to taxes can increase the incidence on consumers

under imperfect competition in contrast to the standard model of perfect competition which pre-

dicts the opposite pattern. Thus, the standard intuition of how tax salience affects the incidence of

taxation in perfectly competitive markets does not always carry over to imperfect competition. We

also derive new results about how heterogeneity in consumer inattention to taxes affects incidence

both under perfect competition and imperfect competition.1 We show that consumer heterogeneity

affects pass-through and incidence under all market structures including perfect competition.2 Of
    1
     While Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018) study how consumer heterogeneity affects the efficiency cost of taxation
under perfect competition, they do not consider incidence.
   2
     With imperfect competition, there is an additional effect of heterogeneity on pass-through. Intuitively, when the


                                                          2
particular relevance for firms with market power is how inattention correlates with the price elas-

ticity of demand. We show that firms bear less of the burden of taxes when elastic consumers are

more inattentive to taxes. Thus, the covariance between consumer inattention and price elasticity is

important for incidence analysis.

    Turning to welfare, we find that tax salience and market structure do not directly interact when

considering the efficiency cost of taxation, which means that tax salience affects the welfare cost of

taxation in similar ways under perfect and imperfect competition. We also find, similar to Taubinsky

and Rees-Jones (2018) and Farhi and Gabaix (2020), that heterogeneous inattention to taxes induces

misallocation, and we generalize these results by showing that this misallocation does not directly

interact with market structure. Specifically, we find that greater dispersion in inattention increases

the welfare cost of taxes in similar ways under perfect and imperfect competition.3

    Second, we provide new estimates of the necessary inputs to our tax formulas using Nielsen

Retail Scanner data covering grocery stores selling consumer goods in the U.S. combined with

county-level and state-level sales tax data. We estimate the effect of taxes on consumer prices and

quantity demanded using a regression model that leverages variation in sales taxes within states

and counties over time, and another regression model that focuses on differences between "border

pair" counties located on opposite sides of a state border (Holmes 1998; Dube, Lester and Reich

2010). We also estimate the price elasticity of demand based on an instrumental variable strategy

which exploits the "uniform pricing" across stores within retail chains (DellaVigna and Gentzkow

2019). Our estimates indicate nearly-complete pass-through of taxes onto consumer prices, and

a tax elasticity of demand that is smaller in magnitude than the price elasticity of demand. We

combine these estimates to provide a new estimate of tax salience, which is fairly similar to other

estimates reported in the literature.

    Lastly, we calibrate our new tax formulas using these empirical estimates. A novel feature of
consumer response to taxes is heterogeneous, this effectively changes the slope of the inverse demand curve facing the
firm and the firm takes this into account when choosing prices.
    3
      Of course, market structure and salience do interact indirectly through the sufficient statistics that determine the
efficiency cost of taxation; for example, tax salience affects the equilibrium price which affects the markup and hence
the excess burden under imperfect competition.




                                                            3
our approach is the use of the pass-through formula and the generalized Lerner index to calibrate

the average markup, which enters in the marginal excess burden formula. Our calibration results

show that accounting for imperfect competition and tax salience meaningfully changes the inci-

dence and marginal excess burden of sales taxes. We find a lower incidence of taxes on consumers

(as compared to perfect competition), and we find that increased attention to taxes leads to con-

sumers bearing a larger share of the burden of the tax. We examine the sensitivity to consumer

heterogeneity and find that accounting for heterogeneity in consumers' inattention to taxes further

lowers the incidence of taxes on consumers. Turning to welfare, Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009)

show that when consumers underreact to sales taxes, the standard formula (Harberger 1964) ex-

aggerates the true marginal excess burden of sales taxes. However, our new formula shows that

this may no longer be the case under imperfect competition, since there is a pre-existing distortion

coming from firms' market power. In fact, our calibration results suggest that even though con-

sumers underreact to taxes, the Harberger formula nevertheless understates ­ rather than overstates

­ the marginal excess burden of sales taxes. Intuitively, this is because the markup scales one-for-

one in the welfare formula, while the mean and variance of the tax salience parameter scales with

the tax rate, as in the case of perfect competition. Overall, we interpret these results as revealing

the importance of jointly accounting for tax salience and imperfect competition when analyzing

the incidence and efficiency costs of commodity taxation, and our general formulas show how to

incorporate these features in a unified framework.

      Our paper is related to several streams of research. First, our paper builds on and contributes

to the literature on taxation and imperfect competition (see, e.g., Seade 1987; Stern 1987; Deli-

palla and Keen 1992; Anderson, de Palma, and Kreider 2001a; Anderson, de Palma and Kreider

2001b; Auerbach and Hines 2001; Weyl and Fabinger 2013; Hackner and Herzing 2016; Adachi

and Fabinger 2019; Miravete, Seim, and Thurk 2018). Our paper innovates in several ways. First,

we consider a general model of imperfect competition and do not impose a functional form for

preferences or technology, similar to Weyl and Fabinger (2013).4 Second, we permit consumers to
  4
      Weyl and Fabinger (2013) only consider tax incidence. They do not consider the efficiency costs of taxation.



                                                           4
underreact to taxes and allow for heterogeneity in the degree of underreaction. Third, we derive

our new formulas for both ad valorem and unit taxes (allowing for tax salience) and compare these

formulas, which is important since existing theoretical work finds that these taxes are not equivalent

under imperfect competition (Delipalla and Keen 1992). Lastly, unlike most of the research in this

area, we provide an empirical application that allows us to calibrate our new formulas, which con-

tributes to the literature studying sales taxes empirically (see, e.g., Besley and Rosen 1999; Einav

et al. 2014; Baker, Johnson, and Kueng 2018).

   We also contribute to the literaure in behavioral public economics (Liebman and Zeckhauser

2004; Chetty, Looney and Kroft 2009; Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer 2013; Goldin and Hominoff

2013; Koszegi and Szeidl 2013; Allcott and Taubinsky 2015; Caplin and Dean 2015; Taubinsky

and Rees-Jones 2018; Allcott, Lockwood, and Taubinsky 2018; Bradley and Feldman 2019; Farhi

and Gabaix 202; Morrison and Taubsinky 2020). Most of the papers in this literature assume

perfect competition. Bradley and Feldman (2019), which examines tax incidence in a monopoly

setting with inattentive consumers, is an important exception. Relative to this paper, we allow

for heterogeneity in tax salience across consumers, allow for more general forms of imperfect

competition, and move beyond incidence to also study the efficiency cost of taxation. The joint

consideration of incidence and efficiency analysis is important for our calibration approach, which

combines both tax formulas to identify the markup which appears in the marginal excess burden

formula.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 begins with a model of per-

fect competition and considers the welfare effects of a unit tax. Section 3 extends the results to

monopoly and the general model of imperfect competition. Section 4 derives analagous formulas

for the case of an ad valorem tax and compares the incidence and efficiency costs of ad valorem and

unit taxes. Section 5 discusses the data and the empirical results. Section 6 presents the calibration

results. Section 7 concludes.




                                                  5
2        Perfect Competition

We are interested in characterizing the incidence and marginal excess burden effects of commodity

taxation allowing for salience effects. Following Weyl and Fabinger (2013), we define the incidence

of a unit tax t as I = dCS/dt
                       dP S/dt
                               and the marginal excess burden of the tax as           dW
                                                                                       dt
                                                                                            =   dCS dP S dR
                                                                                                 dt
                                                                                                    + dt + dt   where

CS denotes consumer surplus, P S denotes producer surplus, R denotes government revenue, and

W = CS + P S + R denotes social welfare.5

        Let p denote the producer price and p + t denote the price paid by consumers. We assume

that there is a mass 1 of consumers and we index each consumer by i. Consumer i has exogenous

income Zi and quasilinear utility given by Ui (q, y ) = ui (q ) + y , where q is consumption of the

taxed good and y is the numeraire good. We follow Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) by assuming

that 1) taxes affect utility only through their effects on the chosen consumption bundle and that 2)

in the absence of taxation, consumers perfectly optimize so that p = ui (q ) when t = 0. We define

willingness to pay for consumer i as wtpi (q )  ui (q ) and marginal willingness to pay for consumer

i as mwtpi (q )  ui (q ).

        Let Di (p, t) be the observed demand of individual i. Our specification for observed demand

permits prices and taxes to have different effects, following Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009). As-

sume that for t > 0, Di (p, 0) > Di (p, t) > Di (p + t, 0). By strict monotonicity and continuity, for

all p and t there exists a i (p, t)  (0, t) such that Di (p + i (p, t), 0) = Di (p, t). For fixed t and all

i, we assume that if Di (p + i , 0) = Di (p, t) for some price p, then Di (p + i , 0) = Di (p , t) for

any other price p . This implies that i (p, t) = i (t) does not depend on the producer price p. We

further assume that i (t) is linear and write it as i (t) = i t which is without loss of generality on
                                                                                                                   Di
the shape of the original inverse demand curve ui (q ) = wtpi (q ). This definition satisfies i =                  t
                                                                                                                   Di
                                                                                                                   p

which is how this parameter is defined in Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009), but we allow for con-

sumer heterogeneity following Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018) and Farhi and Gabaix (2020).

Total quantity demanded is given by D(p, t) =                  Di (p, t)di. We assume that D(p, t) is strictly
    5
     It is well known that unit taxes and ad valorem taxes are equivalent under perfect competition. Section 4 considers
the case of an ad valorem tax under imperfect competition.



                                                           6
decreasing in both arguments and continuous. Let                     D    - Dp
                                                                             (p,t) p+t
                                                                                    D
                                                                                       denote the price elasticity of

demand evaluated at the consumer price.

       We define production similar to Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) and Taubinsky and Rees-

Jones (2018). In particular, firms are price takers and use c(S ) units of the numeraire good to

produce S units of output. The marginal cost of production is c (S ) and we assume that firms

perfectly optimize so that firm supply is given by p = c (S (p)) where S (p) is strictly increasing
                                               S p
and continuous in p. Define           S        p S
                                                       as the price elasticity of supply.

       The equilibrium price, p, in the market for the taxed good is determined by the condition
                                          dq (t) p+t
D(p, t) = S (p). Let         Dt            dt q (t)
                                                       be the elasticity of equilibrium output, q (t)  D(p(t), t),
                                                                         D p+t
with respect to the tax t. Note that              Dt   need not equal    t q (t)
                                                                                 ;   the latter holds the pre-tax price, p,

fixed, while the former includes any indirect effect of taxes on the producer price. We denote the

pass-through rate by   1+ dp/dt.

       We begin by introducing a technical assumption which helps to simplify the analysis throughout

and connect our formulas to ones that exist in the literature.

Assumption 1. The demand function Di (p, t) can be represented by the linear approximation
^ i (p, t) = qi0 +
D                    D(p0 ,t0 )
                                  (p - p0 + i (t - t0 )) around (qi0 , p0 , t0 , i ) for qi0 = Di (p0 , t0 ) for each
                      p

individual i.6

       Assumption 1 is a formal statement of the approximation given in Bernheim and Taubinsky

(2018) that allows us to focus on heterogeneity in salience effects across consumers, holding the

price responses across consumers constant. The expression in Assumption 1 is a first-order approx-

imation rather than an exact expression because even assuming price responses are the same across

consumers at all quantity levels is not sufficient for Assumption 1 to hold exactly unless demand

curves are linear. We next introduce a lemma which turns out to be quite useful in deriving all of

the incidence formulas that we present in the paper.

Lemma 1. The following relationship holds between the demand elasticities, pass-through and
   6
   In case this assumption is violated, the model given by D^ i (p, t) is a linear approximation to the real model with a
common slope for all i. The corollaries that follow below apply to this linear approximation.


                                                                 7
inattention to taxes:
                                                         p+t           Di (p, t)
                        Dt   = -(E(i ) +  - 1)   D   +         Cov i ,
                                                         q (t)          p
Under Assumption 1, we obtain the following relationship:

                                      Dt   = -(E(i ) +  - 1)      D



Proof. See Appendix.

   Given the definitions and Lemma 1, we can derive the following proposition and corollary

for the incidence and efficiency costs of taxation. The corollary uses Assumption 1 to provide

expressions that ignore heterogeneity in price responses across consumers. We note that while the

results on efficiency already exist for perfect competition when consumers are heterogeneous (see

Taubinsky and Rees-Jones 2018), the results in this section on incidence are novel. For example,

Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) consider incidence under the assumptions of identical consumers

and no pre-existing taxes.

Proposition 1. Define qi (t)  Di (p(t), t) and q (t)  D(p(t), t). The incidence on consumers,

producers, government, the pass-through rate and the marginal excess burden of a unit tax, t,

under perfect competition may be expressed as:
              dCS                      dq           dqi
                   = - q - (1 - E(i ))t + tCov i ,
               dt                      dt           dt
              dP S
                   = - (1 - )q
               dt
               dR         dq
                   =q + t
                dt        dt                        
                                        Cov i , D
                                                p
                                                  i
                                                                                   1
                   =1 - (1 -  ) E(i ) +     D
                                                     , where  
                                                                                        p
                                                         p
                                                                              1+   D
                                                                                   S   p+t

                             1 - E(i ) t               t           dqi
                  I=      +                  Dt -          Cov i ,
                    1-         1- p+t             q (1 - )         dt
               dW         dq             dqi
                   =tE(i ) + tCov i ,
                dt        dt             dt

Proof. See Appendix.



                                                     8
Corollary 1. Under Assumption 1, the effect of the tax on consumer surplus, producer surplus,

pass-through, incidence and welfare can be expressed as:
                              dCS                       dq           D
                                   = - q - (1 - E(i ))t + tV ar (i )
                               dt                       dt           p
                              dP S
                                   = - (1 - )q
                               dt
                                                                 1
                                = 1 - (1 -  ) E(i ), where           p
                                                             1+ D S p+t



                                  1 t
                        I=      +      ((1 - E(i ))                     Dt   - V ar (i )   D)
                              1- 1-p+t
                                       dW          dq            D
                                           = tE(i ) + tV ar (i )
                                        dt         dt            p

       We highlight several features of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1. First, when t = 0, the formulas

for the effects of a tax on consumer surplus and producer surplus, and hence incidence, are identical

to Weyl and Fabinger (2013), except that the pass-through term, , is indirectly affected by salience

effects.7 Intuitively, on the consumer side, when there are no taxes in the baseline equilibrium,

consumers optimize and so the envelope theorem applies. Salience only affects consumers and

producers at the market level through changes in prices, as in Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009). In

particular, since  < 1 with perfect competition, an increase in E(i ) leads to a lower pass-through

and incidence on consumers. We also see that, in the presence of heterogeneous consumers, pass-

through depends on the new term Cov i , D
                                        p
                                         i
                                           . Intuitively, what matters for incidence is the initial

shift in demand in response to taxes and the price elasticities of demand and supply which determine

how much prices need to adjust to re-equilibrate the market. Since individual-level responses to
                            Di
taxes can be written as     t
                                 = i D
                                     p
                                       i
                                         , the market-level response to taxes depends on the covariance
                   Di
between i and      p
                        across i.

       Second, when t > 0, the effect of a change in the tax on consumer surplus depends on two

additional terms, -(1-E(i ))t dq
                              dt
                                 and tCov i , dq
                                              dt
                                                i
                                                  .8 In this case, one has to account for behavioral
   7
     It is analytically convenient to express the pass-through formula this way where  is the pass-through rate when
consumers fully optimize with respect to taxes, as it will facilitate a comparison between the different cases (perfect
competition, monopoly, and imperfect competition).
   8
     Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) fully characterized the effects of a tax on consumer surplus in terms of the pass-



                                                          9
responses to the tax since the envelope theorem does not apply when consumers misoptimize in the

baseline equilibrium. The first term, -(1 - E(i ))t dq
                                                    dt
                                                       , resembles the "self-control adjustment" term
                                                                      dCS                            dq
in equation (10) in Gruber and Koszegi (2004). It enters               dt
                                                                            positively whenever      dt
                                                                                                          < 0 and we

see that more inattention to taxes reduces the incidence on consumers, conditional on the pass-

through rate and the behavioral response to the tax. Intuitively, if consumers are overspending on

taxable goods at baseline (because E(i ) < 1), then a tax increase that causes them to reduce their

demand brings them closer to their optimal choice. The second term, tCov i , dq
                                                                             dt
                                                                               i
                                                                                 , represents

a misallocation term. When Assumption 1 holds, Corollary 1 shows that this term collapses to

tV ar (i ) D
           p
             which mirrors the expression in Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018) and Bernheim and
                                                                                                                  dCS
Taubinsky (2018). If consumers are fully attentive to the tax so that i = 1 for all i, we see that                 dt

and I are characterized purely by the price effect, even with a pre-existing tax.

    Third, independent of the baseline tax or the degree of inattention to the tax, when supply is

perfectly elastic (   S   = ),  = 1 and the full burden of the tax is on consumers so that I = .

    Lastly, the marginal excess burden of the tax is scaled by the degree of inattention to the tax,

E(i ), and includes an additional term reflecting the dispersion in inattention, as in Taubinsky

and Rees-Jones (2018). In the case where i = 0 for all i, taxes are not distortionary since with

quasilinear utility, the consumption allocation is the same as the consumption allocation with a

lump-sum tax, as shown in Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009).



3     Imperfect Competition

3.1     Monopoly

In this section, we depart from the benchmark case of perfect competition and consider a model of

imperfect competition. In order to develop intuition, we begin with the special case of monopoly.

We assume that the monopolist's cost of production is given by c(q ), with marginal cost mc(q ) 
through rate, . Our results show that pass-through is not sufficient for incidence when there are both salience effects
and pre-existing taxes in the market.




                                                          10
                                   c (q )
c (q ), and we define     S       c (q )q
                                            . When consumers are identical, the monopoly problem is partic-

ularly simple since in this case, (p, t) = t and D(p + t, 0) = D(p, t) and we may express the

inverse demand function facing the firm as P (q, t) = wtp(q ) - t, where wtp(q ) is the inverse of

D(·, 0). The monopolist's problem in this case can be stated as:

                                              max (wtp(q ) - t) q - c(q )
                                                q


       The first-order condition for the monopoly problem is wtp (q )q + wtp(q ) - t = mc(q ). In this

case, mr(q ) = wtp (q )q + wtp(q ) is shifted down by t. If the tax was fully non-salient so that

 = 0, then consumer demand is not affected by taxes.

       In the general case with consumer heterogeneity, we follow the setup from last section where

for each i, Di (p + i t, 0) = Di (p, t), and D(p, t)                      Di (p, t)di. As before, the market demand

elasticity is defined as      D    - Dp
                                      (p,t) p+t
                                             D
                                                . We now introduce several new definitions which are

relevant for characterizing incidence and efficiency under imperfect competition. First, we define

the representative agent's willingness to pay wtp(q ) as the inverse of D(·, 0).9 Next, define the

marginal willingness to pay as mwtp(q )  wtp (q ). Then ms(q )  -mwtp(q )q is marginal
                                                                                                ms(q )
consumer surplus and the elasticity of marginal surplus is given by                     ms      ms (q )q
                                                                                                         .   Furthermore,
                         q                            ms(q )
define M S (q, t) = - D (p (t),t)
                                  =           mwtp(q (t)) D  (p(t),t)
                                                                      .   Note that M S (q, 0) = ms(q ), and define
                              p                           p
           M S
M St       t
               .   Given these definitions, we can now characterize the incidence and marginal excess

burden of taxes for monopoly.

Proposition 2. The incidence on consumers, producers, government, the pass-through rate and the
   9
    Formally, there is no representative agent for the economy since even with quasilinear utility there is a problem of
aggregation given the misoptimization with respect to taxes. However, when t = 0 the economy admits a representative
agent (given that there are no income effects) and we use the inverse demand function of this representative agent to
characterize average and marginal consumer surplus.




                                                              11
marginal excess burden of a unit tax, t, under monopoly may be expressed as:
                         dCS                    dq          dqi
                             = -q - (1 - E(i ))t + tCov i ,
                          dt                    dt          dt
                                                                 
                         dP S              Cov i , D
                                                   p 
                                                     i

                              = -q E(i ) +
                                  
                                               D
                          dt                   p
                             dR      dq
                                =q+t
                             dt      dt
                                                    
                                      Cov i , D
                                              p
                                                i
                                                                                       1
       = 1 - (1 -  ) E(i ) +               D
                                                     + M St , where  =                p
                                                                                   D p+t -1       1
                                           p                                  1+      S
                                                                                              +   ms




                             D                            t           t        dqi
                I=   p+t
                                         + (1 - E(i ))          Dt   - Cov i ,
                         E    i D i                      p+t          q        dt
                      q         p

                        dW                          dq            dqi
                            = (p - mc(q ) + E(i )t)    + tCov i ,
                         dt                         dt            dt

Proof. See Appendix.

Corollary 2. Under Assumption 1, the effect of the tax on consumer surplus, producer surplus,

pass-through, incidence and welfare can be expressed as:
                        dCS                       dq             D
                              = - q - (1 - E(i ))t + tV ar (i )
                         dt                       dt             p
                          dP S
                                = -q E(i )
                            dt
                                                             1
                       = 1 - (1 -  ) E(i ), where  =       p
                                                        D p+t -1   1
                                                     1+    S
                                                                 + ms

                               1                    t            t
                      I=             + (1 - E(i ))         Dt   - V ar (i )   D
                             E (i )                p+t           p
                         dW                          dq              D
                             = (p - mc(q ) + E(i )t)    + tV ar (i )
                          dt                         dt              p

   Several interesting insights emerge from the analysis of salience and taxation under monopoly.

First, we note that the formula characterizing the effects of the tax on consumer surplus is identical

to the formula in the case of perfect competition. Note, however, that the inputs to the formula are

different under monopoly as we discuss below.



                                                    12
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                          Di
                                                                                                Cov i ,   p
       Next, we see that the effects of a tax on producer surplus is -q E(i ) +                       D
                                                                                                               . Con-
                                                                                                      p

sider first the case where i = 1 for all i. Since the monopolist sets the price (and level of output),

the effect of a small change in taxes is simply the mechanical effect of the tax change which is given

by output, q . Consumer inattention attenuates the effect of taxes on producers since instead of con-

sumer demand falling by the amount of the tax change, it falls by this amount scaled by the degree

of inattention E(i ). The covariance term Cov i , D
                                                  p
                                                    i
                                                      incorporates the correlation between i
       Di
and    p
            which determines the market-level demand response to the tax. When Cov i , D
                                                                                       p
                                                                                         i
                                                                                           > 0,

the incidence on the monopolist is attenuated.10 This can be easily seen in the binary case where

there are two types of consumers: those who optimize and those who are fully inattentive to taxes.

If those who optimize are price inelastic and those who are inattentive are price elastic, then the

monopolist earns higher profit compared to the case where inattention is uncorrelated with price

elasticity. In fact, it may be optimal for the monopolist to fully disclose taxes (e.g., post tax-

inclusive prices) if there are enough consumers who are both highly price elastic and overreact to

taxes (so that i > 1).11 This result on optimal disclosure of taxes relates to Veiga and Weyl (2016)

on how firms can optimally use nonprice product features to sort profitable from unprofitable con-

sumers. Finally, we note that the formula holds even when mc(q ) is constant so that                      S   = . This
                                                   dP S
contrasts with perfect competition where            dt
                                                          = 0 when    S   = .

       Third, there are interesting effects of salience on pass-through, , which operate through the

elasticity of marginal surplus, which is positive (negative) if demand is log convex (log concave).

In particular, unlike the case of perfect competition, the monopoly outcome may be associated with

 > 1 which implies that an increase in E(i ) raises incidence on consumers. To see this, con-
  10
      Since Dp < 0, this requires that consumers that are attentive to taxes are price inelastic; in other words, the
                i


absolute value of D  p is negatively correlated with i . Note that DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2019) find that high-
                        i


income stores face less price elastic consumers and Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018) find that i is higher for higher
income individuals. This evidence suggests that Cov i , D      p
                                                                 i
                                                                    > 0.
   11
      Morrison and Taubinsky (2020) find that some consumers overreact to taxes but do not investigate whether this is
correlated with their price elasticity of demand. To see why disclosure is never optimal when i < 1 for all consumers,
consider the case where the monopolist discloses taxes at some q  . If the monopolist then shrouds taxes, it could still
sell q  but at a higher price since the inverse demand curve with hidden taxes lies everywhere above the inverse demand
curve with salient taxes. Thus, there is a profitable deviation and so disclosure can never be optimal when all consumers
are inattentive to taxes.



                                                           13
sider the case of constant marginal cost and suppose demand has constant pass-through form so
                                                                                        
that    ms   = - (Bulow and Pfleiderer 1983) and i = . Under these assumptions,  = 1 - 1- so
        d       1                                                        d
that    d
            =   -1
                   ,   and so if demand is sufficiently elastic, then    d
                                                                             > 0 and increased attention to the

tax makes consumers worse off, in contrast to the logic in Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) under

perfect competition.12 We also see that the expression for  in the case of monopoly depends addi-
                                                                                            -q           2 Di
tionally on M St . Up to first order this term can be approximated by M St                  D 2
                                                                                                  Cov   p2
                                                                                                              , i
                                                                          ( )               p

(see Appendix). This new term captures that when taxes change and consumers vary in their degree

of inattention, this effectively changes the slope of the demand curve. Since the optimal price de-

pends on the slope of the demand curve, the monopolist exploits this change in market power when

re-optimizing prices. If more attentive consumers become more price elastic when taxes change,
                 2 Di
then Cov        p2
                      , i   < 0 and M St > 0. Intuitively, when the tax increases there is a reallocation

of demand, whereby the negative output response qi is bigger (in absolute value) for more attentive
                                                              2 Di
and price elastic consumers; in the case where Cov           p2
                                                                   , i   < 0, the average (or market) demand

becomes more inelastic as demand is reallocated to more inelastic and less attentive consumers.

Therefore, pass-through increases (M St > 0). Corollary 2 shows that this term vanishes under

Assumption 1.

       Finally, the effects of salience on the marginal excess burden of the tax operate in similar ways

under perfect competition and monopoly through the terms E(i )t and tCov i , dq
                                                                             dt
                                                                               i
                                                                                 ; however,

under monopoly the marginal excess burden depends additionally on the markup, p - mc(q ). We

note that changes in markup will have larger effects on excess burden than changes in E(i ) since

the latter are scaled by the tax rate t. In the simple case where mc(q ) is constant, a smaller value

of E(i ) leads to a higher equilibrium price and so all else equal, this will additionally affect the

marginal excess burden.

       To summarize, the analysis of the incidence and welfare consequences of a tax for the special

case of monopoly suggests that the standard intuition for the case of perfect competition does not

always apply when firms have market power. Instead, there are interesting interactions between tax
  12
     Note that even when S = , the full incidence is not on consumers, unlike the case of perfect competition,
although we note that this result holds independent of salience effects.


                                                        14
salience and market structure. This motivates our analysis of tax salience in a more general model

of imperfect competition.



3.2     Symmetric Imperfect Competition

We consider a differentiated product market (the "inside market") which is subject to a unit tax

t on each product in the market. Following Auerbach and Hines (2001) and Weyl and Fabinger

(2013), we assume that markets for other goods are perfectly competitive and are not subject to

taxation. There is a mass 1 of consumers each indexed by i with exogenous income Zi . For each i,

preferences are given by the quasilinear utility function ui (q1 , . . . , qJ )+ y , where qj is the quantity

consumed of product j = 1, . . . , J and y  R is the numeraire (representing consumption in all

the outside markets). We assume that the subutility function, ui , which represents preferences for

the differentiated products, is strictly quasi-concave, twice differentiable, and symmetric in all of

its arguments. The pre-tax (or producer) price for product j is given by pj and the after-tax (or

consumer) price is given by pj + t for all j = 1, ..., J . We define ui (Qi )  ui (Qi /J, . . . , Qi /J ) to
                                                                                                                              Qi
be the compact notation of utility for the symmetric case where the individual consumes qi =                                  J

units of each product j = 1, . . . , J , where Qi is the aggregate quantity consumed by the individual.

    Following Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009), consumer i demand for product j is given by
 i    i
qj = qj (p1 , . . . , pJ , t) which is a function of both pre-tax prices and the tax. In order to connect
                                                                                  i
our tax formulas to empirical objects, it is necessary to relate observed demand qj (p1 , . . . , pJ , t) to

consumer willingness to pay. We thus make the following assumptions which mirror assumptions

A1 and A2 in Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009).

Assumption 2. Taxes affect utility only through their effects on the chosen consumption bundle.

Indirect utility is given by:

V i (p1 , . . . , pJ , t, Zi ) = ui (q1
                                      i                                 i
                                        (p1 , . . . , pJ , t), . . . , qJ                                     i
                                                                          (p1 , . . . , pJ , t))+Zi -(p1 + t)q1                 i
                                                                                                                - ··· -(pJ + t)qJ

    Assumption 2 requires that taxes or salience have no impact on utility beyond their effects on

consumption.


                                                               15
Assumption 3. When tax-inclusive prices are fully salient, the agent chooses the same allocation

as a fully-optimizing agent.

  i            i
(q1 , . . . , qJ )(p1 + t, . . . , pJ + t, 0) = arg max ui (q1 , . . . , qJ )+ Zi - (p1 + t)q1 - ··· - (pJ + t)qJ
                                                            (q1 ,...,qJ )


    Assumption 3 implies that when tax-inclusive prices are fully salient, agents maximize utility.
                                                                                   i
As in Section 2 we allow for salience effects by considering the possibility that qj (p1 , ..., pJ , 0) >
 i                       i
qj (p1 , ..., pJ , t) > qj (p1 + t, ..., pJ + t, 0).
                                                         i
    In what follows, we assume that the demand function qj (·) is symmetric in all other prices

which we denote by (pk )-j and twice differentiable and denote by qi (p, t) demand corresponding to
                                          i
symmetric prices and J firms: qi (p, t)  qj (p, ..., p, t). Without loss of generality on the functional
                          (ui )-1 (·)
form of qi (·, 0) =            J
                                      ,    we assume qi (p, t) = qi (p + i t, 0) for some i > 0; therefore, the
                                                  q i
                                                   j
salience parameter satisfies i =                  t
                                                  q i
                                                        and is the same for all products j for individual i.
                                                   j
                                                  p
    We define individual i's market demand as Qi (p, t) = Jqi (p, t). Total market demand is

then given by Q(p, t) =                 Qi (p, t)di, from where we define the market demand elasticity                 D   

- Qp
   (p,t) p+t
          Q
             . Also, for an economy without taxes, we define the representative agent's willingness

to pay wtp(Q) as the inverse of Q(·, 0), and let mwtp(Q) = wtp (Q) be the marginal willing-

ness to pay. Then ms(Q) = -mwtp(Q)Q is the marginal consumer surplus and the elasticity
                                                            ms(Q)                                                 Q
of marginal surplus is given by                   ms       ms (Q)Q
                                                                   .        Furthermore, define M S (Q, t) = - Q (p (t),t)
                                                                                                                           =
                                                                                                                 p
      ms(Q)
mwtp(Q(t)) Q (p(t),t)
                      ,   then M S (Q, 0) = ms(Q), and let M St  M S .
           p
                                           i
    Let qj (p1 , ..., pJ , t) =           qj (p1 , ..., pJ , t)di. On the supply side, we allow for different forms of
                                                                                           pk
competition by introducing the market conduct parameter p =                                pj
                                                                                                (k = j ) following Weyl and

Fabinger (2013). Assume each firm produces a single product and has cost function cj (qj ) = c(qj ),

where c(·) is increasing and twice differentiable with c(0) = 0 and mc(qj )  c (qj ). Firm j chooses

pj to maximize profits j :

                                 max j = pj qj (p1 . . . , pJ , t) - c(qj (p1 . . . , pJ , t))
                                   pj

                                                 pk
                                          s.t.      = p for k = j
                                                 pj



                                                                       16
       The first-order condition for pj is given by:
                                                                                
                                                          qj         qj 
                                      qj +(pj - mc(qj ))     + p         = 0.
                                                          pj     k=j pk

       In a symmetric equilibrium, pj = p solves:
                                             qj (pj , p, . . . , p, t)           qj (pj , p, . . . , p, t)
qj (pj , p, . . . , p, t)+(pj - mc(qj ))                               +(J - 1)p                             = 0, k = j
                                                      pj                                 pk
                        j
We assume that          pj
                           (pj , p)   is strict single crossing (from above) in pj and decreasing in p so
                                                                                         1            1            1
that a unique symmetric equilibrium p(t) exists.13 By letting q =                      mwtp(Q)
                                                                                                 ×   dqj     =   mwtp(Q)
                                                                                                                           ×
                                                                                                     dpj
          1
qj                qj   we can rewrite the first-order condition as a generalized Lerner index:
pj
     +p       k=j pk


                                                  p - mc(q )    q
                                                             =                                                         (1)
                                                    p+t        J D
Setting q = J yields the monopoly (perfect collusion) outcome and setting q = 0 gives the perfect

competition (marginal cost pricing) solution. Setting q = 1 corresponds to Cournot competition

when goods are homogeneous and setting p = 0 yields the Bertrand-Nash equilibrium. The model

thus captures a wide range of market conduct.

       We assume that tax revenue R = tQ and profits J are redistributed to the consumers as a

lump-sum transfer. The consumer treats profits and tax revenue as fixed when choosing consump-

tion, failing to consider the external effects on the lump-sum transfer. Given the assumption of

quasilinear utility, the consumer will choose to allocate the lump-sum transfer to the outside market

y . Thus, total welfare, W , is given by the sum of consumer surplus (CS ), producer surplus (P S )

and government revenue (R).

                        W (p, t) =       ui (Qi (p, t))di - (p + t)Q(p, t) + pQ - Jc (q ) + tQ
                                                                                    PS           R
                                                       CS

       We can now state our main result. Consider a small increase in the tax t which applies to all

goods in the inside market.

Proposition 3. The incidence on consumers, producers, government, the pass-through rate and the
  13                                                  j
     The case of strategic complementarities, where pj  (pj , p) is increasing in p allows for the existence of multiple
symmetric equilibria. However, in that case if we assume there is a continuous and symmetric equilibrium selection
p(t) the same results follow.



                                                            17
marginal excess burden of a unit tax, t, under symmetric imperfect competition may be expressed

as:
                 dCS                     dQ(p(t), t)            dQi (p(t), t)
                     = -Q - (1 - E(i ))t             + tCov i ,
                  dt                        dt                       dt
                                                      Cov i , Q
                                                                                              
                                                                i
                 dP S       q             q                   p 
                      =- 1-   [Q(1 - )] -   Q E(i ) +     Q
                  dt        J             J               p
                   dR      dQ(p(t), t)
                      =Q+t
                   dt         dt
                                    Cov i , Q
                                                   
                                              i
                                            p                 q                                1
        = 1 - (1 -  ) E(i ) +             Q
                                                   +            M St where  =                 p   q        q
                                                              J                            D p+t - J
                                          p                                   1+               S
                                                                                                       +   J
                                                                                                           ms



                                               t
                                + (1 - E(i )) p+ t   Dt
                                                           t
                                                          -Q              p(t),t)
                                                             Cov i , dQi (dt
                          I=                                                Qi
                                                                      E i   p
                                                      q           q
                                        (1 - ) 1 -    J
                                                              +   J       Qi
                                                                      E   p


                  dW                          dQ(p(t), t)            dQi (p(t), t)
                      = (p - mc(q ) + E(i )t)             + tCov i ,
                   dt                            dt                       dt

Proof. See Appendix.

Corollary 3. Under Assumption 1, the effect of the tax on consumer surplus, producer surplus,

pass-through, incidence and welfare can be expressed as:
                       dCS                         dQ(p(t), t)              Q
                            = - Q - (1 - E(i ))t               + tV ar (i )
                        dt                            dt                    p
                       dP S              q             q
                            =-Q 1-            (1 - ) + E(i )
                        dt               J              J
                                                                    1
                         = 1 - (1 -  ) E(i ), where  =           p    q
                                                                     -J     q
                                                               D
                                                         1 + p+S   t
                                                                        + msJ




                                                  t              t
                                   + (1 - E(i )) p+ t     Dt   -p+t
                                                                    V ar (i ) D
                             I=                           q
                                         (1 - ) 1 -       J
                                                               + J
                                                                  q
                                                                    E(i )
                       dW                          dQ(p(t), t)              Q
                           = (p - mc(q ) + E(i )t)             + tV ar (i )
                        dt                            dt                    p
                                                                       dCS
      Proposition 3 leads to several additional insights. First,        dt
                                                                             has the same expression as perfect

competition and monopoly. Thus, the change in consumer surplus does not depend directly on


                                                     18
                                                                                          dP S
market conduct, except insofar as market conduct determines pass-through. Second           dt
                                                                                                 is a convex

combination of the monopoly and perfect competition cases with weights J
                                                                        q
                                                                          and 1- J
                                                                                  q
                                                                                    , respectively.

To understand this expression, note that when i = 1 for all i,        dP S
                                                                       dt
                                                                             = -Q (1 - )+  J
                                                                                            q
                                                                                              , similar

to Weyl and Fabinger (2013). When firms have market power, they internalize the change in their
                                        q
own output on the market (given by      J
                                          ),   and so we need to adjust the price effect by  J
                                                                                              q
                                                                                                . Under
                                        dP S
monopoly, this effect becomes  and       dt
                                               = -Q. Similar to monopoly, if firms have market power,

then salience directly attenuates the reduction in demand due to taxes and thus reduces the tax

burden on producers.

   We again see that in the general case, there are interesting effects of salience on pass-through

depending on the magnitudes of q and       ms .   As in the monopoly case, greater attention to taxes can

increase the burden on consumers if there is overshifting of taxes, again illustrating that salience

and the degree of competition interact in determining the relative incidence of taxes on consumers

and producers. In the simpler case of Corollary 3, the only role that salience plays is attenuating the

initial response of consumer demand to a change in taxes. The intuition for this result is that, condi-

tional on the demand response to taxes, salience does not directly affect the equilibrium response of

prices. Conditional on this response, the firm's equilibrium response to the tax is determined purely

by standard forces such as the marginal cost function, the shape of the demand curve and market

conduct. Mathematically, this is because  depends on supply and demand fundamentals and the

conduct parameter. Salience only affects the weighting on  in the expression for . Thus, condi-

tional on  , the role of salience in affecting pass-through will be similar whether firms have a lot

of market power (as in Monopoly) or only a little bit of market power (as in Bertrand or Cournot).

However, in Proposition 3 we see that the expression for  depends additionally on  J
                                                                                    q
                                                                                      M St . Like
                                                                -Q            2 Qi
in monopoly, this term can be approximated by M St              Q 2
                                                                      Cov    p2
                                                                                   , i
                                                                                 (see Appendix), but
                                                             ( )p
                        q
now it is weighted by   J
                            -- the relative distance of firm behavior to the monopoly benchmark. In

the previous section we explain how this term captures that when taxes change, because consumers

vary in their degree of inattention, there is a reallocation effect that effectively changes the elasticity

of the demand curve.


                                                      19
    Finally, we see that the marginal excess burden formula depends on the same set of sufficient

statistics as in the monopoly case. In particular, the conduct parameter does not appear in the for-

mula, and thus the intuition for welfare in the monopoly case carries over to the general model.

Intuitively, the marginal excess burden of taxes is the lost social surplus that accrues from discour-

aging transactions in which the value of the product exceeds the cost of production. The marginal

value of product with quasilinear utility is simply p + E(i )t. The marginal cost of production is

mc(q ). The discouraged transactions is represented by dQ(p(t), t)/dt and we have the misalloca-

tion term which depends on V ar(i ). Note that price effects do not show up in the formula since

they are transfers between consumers and firms. Of course, the inputs to the formula, such as p and

mc(q ), will depend on market conduct, but conditional on them, conduct does not independently

affect the marginal excess burden.



4    Ad Valorem versus Unit Taxes

It is well known that ad valorem and unit taxes are not equivalent in imperfectly competitive markets

(Delipalla and Keen 1992, Anderson, de Palma and Kreider 2001a, Adachi and Fabinger 2019).

This section extends our results on incidence and excess burden in Proposition 3 to ad valorem

taxes in the presence of salience effects. We consider the model of imperfect competition with both

unit taxes and ad valorem taxes. The purpose of the model is to compare the incidence and welfare

effects of these taxes and to forge a link with the empirical section which considers ad valorem

taxes. For ease of exposition, we assume identical consumers and present the general expressions

for ad valorem taxes in the presence of heterogeneous consumers that we calibrate in Section 6.

    Let p denote the producer price and let p(1 +  ) + t denote the price paid by consumers where

 is the ad valorem tax and t is the unit tax. Demand is given by D(p, t,  ) and assume that for

 > 0 and t > 0, D(p, 0, 0) > D(p, t,  ) > D(p(1 +  ) + t, 0, 0). For any triple (p, t,  ) there

exists  (p, t,  ) and t (p, t,  ) to be such that: D(p, t,  ) = D(p(1 +   ) + t t, 0, 0). However

following the literature and to simplify the setup assume  and t are independent of the level of



                                                 20
                                                                            D                     D
                                                                                    1
prices and tax rates. Equivalently we could define                          
                                                                            D   ×   p
                                                                                         and t    t
                                                                                                  D   and assume they are
                                                                            p                     p

constant with respect to prices and taxes.14 Following the prior section, we extend the definition of

willingness to pay to accommodate the ad valorem tax so that wtp(Q) = p(1 +   ) + t t.
                      p(1+ )+t
       Let   D    - Q
                    p    Q
                               ,           D
                                           
                                               =          p
                                                    D p(1+ )+t   and define the pass-through rates for ad valorem and
                                               1  (p(1+ )+t)              (p(1+ )+t)
unit taxes respectively, as                    p      
                                                               and t          t
                                                                                     .   The following lemma shows how

to identify  with commonly observable objects.

                                dQ p(1+ )+t
Lemma 2. Let          D         d     Q
                                            .       The following relationship holds:
                                                              p
                                       D       =-     D         ((1 +   )  +  - 1)
                                                             1+

       and
                                                          (1 -  ) p D - D (1 +  )
                                                 =
                                                               (1 +   ) p D

Proof. See Appendix.

       With Lemma 2 in hand, we can now state our main proposition for ad valorem taxes. Following

the literature, we compare the pass-through rates and the marginal cost of public funds. We begin

with the characterization of pass-through rates.

Proposition 4. In the symmetric model of imperfect competition, the pass-through rates for ad

valorem and unit taxes are given respectively as:
                                                             (1 +  )            mc(q )
                                                = 1 -                   1-
                                                              1 +                p
                                                                 (1 +  )t
                                                    t = 1 -               (1 -  )
                                                                  1 +  
                            1
where  =            (1+  )  -
                              q
                                       q
                                                .
                           D  J            1
                 1+                +   J
                         S                 ms
       This implies that the two pass-through rates can be ranked based on the following:
                                             mc
                                    - 1      p - 1                                q
                                         =         =                       1-
                                   t - 1   t  - 1    t                           -1J D

Proof. See Appendix.
  14
       Note that in the denominator of  and t , the derivative is with respect to the first argument of D.



                                                                   21
    A first observation is that when  = t , if mc < p then  < t which is consistent with the

literature (Delipalla and Keen 1992; Adachi and Fabinger 2019). Thus, if consumers underreact

to ad valorem and unit taxes similarly, the pass-through rate is lower for ad valorem taxes. A new

observation is that even under perfect competition starting from p = mc, ad valorem taxes imply

a higher pass-through than unit taxes t <  if and only if the consumers are more responsive to

ad valorem taxes than unit taxes  > t . Most of the available empirical evidence in the literature

applies to sales taxes and thus,  . Our results stress the need for additional evidence on t .

    Next, we derive the marginal cost of public funds for an ad valorem tax and a unit tax which are

defined as M C  - dW/d
                  dR/d
                       and M Ct  - dW/dt
                                   dR/dt
                                         , respectively.

                                                                                                 
Proposition 5. Denote wtp = p(1 +   ) + t t the perceived price by the consumer and              D   =
       p
 D p(1+ )+t .   The marginal cost of public funds for an ad valorem tax,  , and a unit tax, t, under

symmetric imperfect competition may be expressed as:
                                                        wtp-mc
                                                           p
                                M C =      D    1+                       t
                                             (1+  ) + -1
                                                            -     D (   +p )
                                                      wtp-mc
                                                          p
                                M Ct =     D    1+ t                     t
                                             (1+  )t +t -1
                                                            -    D (    +p )
    This implies the following:
                                               1+                       t
                                  M Ct      (1+  ) + -1
                                                            -    D (   +p )
                                       =       1+ t                     t
                                  M C       (1+  )t +t -1
                                                            -    D (   +p )
    In other words, the cost of ad-valorem taxes is lower than the cost of unit taxes (M C < M Ct )

if and only if
                         1 +  (1 +  - t )    mc                             1+
                  1 -                     1-                    < t 1 -          (1 -  )
                              1 +            p                             1 +  

Proof. See Appendix.

    It is instructive to consider the benchmark case where  = t . In this case, M C < M Ct if

and only if p > mc. Thus, as long as consumers respond symmetrically to ad valorem and unit

taxes, then salience does not affect the well-known result that ad valorem taxes are more efficient

than unit taxes under imperfect competition. Of course, if consumers are sufficiently more attentive


                                                   22
to ad valorem taxes than unit taxes, then this result shows that ad valorem taxes can be more

distortionary than unit tax.



5         Data and Estimation

5.1         Data Description

Nielsen Retail Scanner Data          We measure prices and quantity using the Nielsen Retail Scanner

(RMS) data from 2006 - 2014. This data set records sales and the number of units sold per week for

roughly 2.5 million products which are designated as Universal Product Codes (UPC) for 35,000

stores in the United States (excluding Hawaii and Alaska) that are part of roughly 90 retail chains.

         The UPCs are organized by Nielsen according to a hierarchical structure.15 At the lowest rung

are approximately 1,200 product-modules (e.g., fresh eggs, chocolate candy, olive oil, bleach, toilet

tissue). Each module is assigned to one of roughly 120 product-groups (e.g. candy, shortening

and oil, laundry supplies, paper products). These groups belong to one of 10 broader product-

departments (e.g., dry grocery, fresh produce, non-food grocery). Stores are assigned to one of five

possible store types: grocery, drug, mass merchandise, convenience, and liquor stores. Each store

has a "parent company" that corresponds to the company that owns the store, and the data also

indicates when multiple stores are part of the same retail chain.

         We limit our sample to grocery stores for two reasons. First, the distribution of store types

varies considerably across counties. By focusing on one store type, we ensure that compositional

differences across counties are not driving our results. Second, we use an instrumental variables

strategy which relies on uniform pricing within retail chains following DellaVigna and Gentzkow

(2019). There are too few retail chains for non-grocery stores, making this strategy infeasible these

store types. We follow DellaVigna and Gentzkow in further restricting our sample to (1) stores that

belong to the same retail chain throughout 2006 - 2014, (2) stores that are present in the data for at
    15
    Appendix Table OA.1 describes the hierarchy of the data using example UPCs. UPCs without a barcode such as
random weight meat, fruits, and vegetables are excluded from our sample.




                                                     23
least two years, and (3) stores that belong to retail chains that were associated with the same parent

company throughout the sample period. In terms of products, we keep all products in modules

that are sold in all 48 continental states and we restrict the sample to top-selling modules that rank

above the 80th percentile of total U.S. sales. These 198 modules account for almost 80 percent of

the total sales in grocery stores in the Nielsen data.16

       The key variables for our empirical analysis are price and quantity. We define these variables at

the level of module (m), store (r), and time (n), where a unit of time is a year-quarter. This requires

aggregating weekly revenue and quantities sold seperately for each product to the quarterly level. A

quarterly price is obtained by dividing quarterly revenue from the sales of product j by the number

of units sold in that quarter. To address the concern that there may be compositional differences

in price across stores due to different UPCs being offered, we follow Handbury and Weinstein

(2015) and regress log quarterly price on UPC fixed effects and module-by-store-by-time fixed

effects. The module-by-store-by-time fixed effects serve as the pre-tax price for the purpose of

estimation. To measure quantity, we create a price-weighted quantity index based on the national

price of products.17 Specifically, for each product (j ), store (r) and time (n), we multiply quantity

purchased by the average national price (across all stores in our sample) of product j at time n,

where the national price is an unweighted average. We then aggregate quantity across products

within a module-by-store-by-time cell to arrive at a quantity measure that varies at the same level

as the price index.


U.S. Sales Tax Exemptions and Rates                We collect data on local (county and state) sales tax

rates and tax exemptions from a variety of sources, including state laws, state regulations, and

online brochures.18 In general, tax exemptions are set by U.S. states and are module-specific. The

general rule of thumb is that states exempt food products from taxation and tax non-food products.
  16
     We limit to the top 20 percent of modules for computational reasons, and we have explored some of our main
specifications in the full sample of modules and found very similar results (results not reported).
  17
     This normalization by the national price allows us to more easily compare quantities across different goods and
modules.
  18
     All data sources used to determine the exemption status of products are listed in Appendix Table OA.2.




                                                        24
However, there are several important exceptions to this rule which are reported in Table 1. First,

several states tax food at the full rate or a reduced rate. Second, in a few states, food products are

exempt from the state-level portion of the total sales tax rate, but remain subject to the county-level

sales tax.19 Third, in some cases where food is tax-exempt, there is a tax that applies at the product-

module level. For example, prepared foods, soft drinks, and candy are subject to sales taxes in

many states. Finally, some states exempt some non-food products from sales taxes. As a result, the

effective sales tax rate varies by module (m), county (c), and time (n).20

       There are two potential sources of measurement error in our sales tax rates. First, we do not

incorporate county-level exemptions or county-specific sales surtaxes that apply to specific products

or modules, although our understanding is that these cases are uncommon. Second, in some cases,

there is some discretion in how we assign a taxability status to each module, based on interpreting

the text of a state's sales tax law. While the bulk of the variation in taxes occurs at the module level

or higher, there are some instances where taxability varies within module. For example, in New

York, fruit drinks are tax exempt as long as they contain at least 70% real fruit juice, but are subject

to the sales tax otherwise. Therefore, some products in Nielsen's module "Fruit Juice- Apple", may

or may not be taxed in New York, but we code these products as tax exempt since we cannot readily

identify the real fruit juice content. In cases where it is impossible to tell whether the majority of

products in a given module are subject to the tax or not, we code the statutory tax rate as missing.

This results in excluding less than 3 percent of the observations in our sample.

       Overall, we are confident that we have measured sales tax rates with a high degree of accuracy.

While sales tax exemptions are important for ensuring accurate measurement, the identifying vari-

ation in our emprical analysis comes primarily from changes in sales tax rates within counties over

time. Changes in exemptions are very rare during our sample period, and all of our main specifi-
  19
      Colorado, for example, allows each county to decide whether to subject food to the county-level portion of the
sales tax rate.
   20
      The Online Appendix shows the cross-sectional variation in sales tax rates and sales tax exemptions in our data.
Appendix Figure OA.1 reports the total (state + county) sales tax rate in September 2008 and shows tax rates ranging
from 0 in Montana, Oregon, New Hampshire and Delaware to a maximum rate of 9.75 percent in Tennessee. Appendix
Figure OA.2 reports the food tax exemptions across states and shows that many of the states that tax food are located
in either the South or the Midwest.




                                                         25
cations include module-by-state-by-time fixed effects, so any changes in state sales tax rates or tax

exemptions (regardless of the set of modules affected) are absorbed into these fixed effects and thus

not used for identification of the effects of sales taxes.


Matched Sample        As a last step in constructing our analysis sample, we merge the tax data onto

the Retail Scanner data. The stores in the Nielsen data are geolocated at the county level so we

conduct the merge at the level of module (m), county (c) and time (n). To measure the sales tax

rate by quarter of year, we use the tax rate effective at the mid-point of each quarter (February

for quarter 1, May for quarter 2, etc). We have also tried using the quarterly average of monthly

sales tax rates and found that our estimates were almost identical. Our final sample includes 8,652

grocery stores, and includes price, quantity and tax rates for 198 modules in 1,460 counties over 36

year-quarters.



5.2    Estimation Strategy

The Effect of Taxes on Prices and Quantity Our main specification is a "constant effects" model

which can be derived from the model above by assuming that consumers have identical demand

functions. We estimate the effect of sales taxes on consumer prices and quantity using two com-

plementary regression models. The first model uses the full set of counties from the Neilsen Retail

Scanner data using the following estimating equation:

                           log ymrn =  y log(1+ mcn )+ msn + mr + mrn                             (2)

where the outcome ymrn is either consumer prices (p(1 +  )) or quantity (Q) for module m, store r

and time n. The term mcn is the sales tax rate that applies to module m in county c at time n. The

terms msn and mr are module-by-state-by-time and module-by-store fixed effects, respectively.

The identifying assumption is that changes in sales taxes do not change within counties in ways

that are correlated with changes in consumer demand (conditional on the fixed effects). This model

allows for arbitrary trends across states and modules and thereby relies on within-county-over-time



                                                   26
variation in tax rates. The estimate  y can be interpreted as the elasticity of prices or quantity with

respect to taxes ( p(1+ ) and  Q , respectively).

       The second regression model uses a subsample of counties and a "county border pair" research

design, following Holmes (1998) and Dube, Lester and Reich (2010). For this analysis, we restrict

the sample to stores located in contiguous counties on opposite sides of a state border. Two con-

tiguous counties located in different states form a county-pair d, and counties are paired with as

many cross-state counties as they are contiguous with. The estimating equation is the following:

                              log ymrn =  y log(1+ mcn )+ mdn + mr + mrn .                                        (3)

where mdn and mr are module-by-border-pair-by-time and module-by-store fixed effects, respec-

tively. This specification includes flexible trends for each module in each border pair. To estimate

equation (3), the original dataset is rearranged by stacking all county pairs and weighting each

store by the inverse of the number of times it is included in a border pair. In this regression model,

the identifying assumption is that within a border pair, variation in tax rates for a given module

over time is not correlated with other unobserved determinants that differentially affect one of the

counties in the pair. One way this assumption could fail is if counties adjust their tax rates based

on economic conditions within the border pair. To address this concern, we also report results in

Appendix Table OA.3 in which we instrument the total tax rate with the state sales tax rate (and

find similar results).

       The main results from estimating equations (2) and (3) are reported in Panel A of Table 2. The

first column uses the full sample, and the second column uses the "border pair" subsample. The

first row reports results for log consumer prices. In column (1), the coefficient estimate  p(1+ ) =

0.961 (s.e. 0.045) indicates a large but incomplete amount of pass-through of taxes onto consumer

prices.21 The next row reports the estimate  Q = -0.668 (s.e. 0.185), indicating a meaningful

quantity response to tax changes. The results in column (2) show similar results using the county
  21
    Classical measurement error in effective tax rates biases our estimates of  p(1+ ) towards 1. Instrumental vari-
able estimates of the effect of sales taxes on prices presented in Appendix Table OA.1 are slightly smaller than their
corresponding border-sample OLS estimates, suggesting a small amount of attenuation bias.




                                                         27
border pair approach.


Tax salience parameter       Since the main specification is a "constant effects'" specification with

no heterogeneity across consumers in terms of demand responses, there is no heterogeneity in the

tax salience parameter,  . In this setup, to estimate the tax salience parameter  , the effect of

sales taxes on quantity needs to be scaled by the effect of price changes on quantity. To estimate

the price elasticity of demand, we follow the recent literature on uniform pricing by retail chains

and construct a store-level instrument based on the pricing of products of other stores in a given

retail chain (DellaVigna and Gentzkow 2019). This instrumental variables strategy relates to earlier

work by Hausman (1996) and Nevo (2001), and has been used in several recent papers (e.g., Atkin,

Faber and Gonzalez-Navarro 2018 and Allcott et al. 2019).

   Specifically, we construct an instrument zmrn that is equal to the average log pre-tax price across

all stores in the same retail chain excluding store r:

                                          xf   log(pmxn ) - log(pmrn )
                                zmrn =
                                                   Nf n - 1
where f denotes the retail chain to which store r belongs and Nf n is the number of stores in chain

f at time n. This is a valid instrument under the assumption that chain-level prices predict "own"

store prices, but are not correlated with unobserved store-level demand determinants. A threat to

the validity of this instrument is that there are correlated demand shocks across stores within retail

chains. To address this, we continue to include store-by-module fixed effects in all of our specifi-

cations. The inclusion of module fixed effects accounts for the fact that more expensive modules

may reflect chains responding to strong demand for these modules. Intuitively, our identification

is coming from differences in relative prices across modules and chains. To the extent that this

variation is driven by differences in product-specific marginal costs across chains, differences in

distribution costs across chains (such as supply-sourcing costs), or differences in bargaining power

across chains, we can consistently estimate our elasticity of interest, since these supply-side instru-

ments will identify the average price elasticity of demand. Intuitively, this approach requires that

chains select store locations based on overall demand factors (that are common across modules),


                                                  28
but not module-specific demand factors. In Appendix Table OA.4, we report the reduced-form re-

lationships between this instrument and price and quantity. To further verify that our results are not

contaminated by local module-specific demand shocks, we present corresponding estimates based

on an alternative instrument that is equal to the average log pre-tax price across stores in the same

chain excluding all stores located in county c, and we show that our estimates are insensitive to

using this alternative choice of instrument.

   Using the chain-level instrument, we estimate the price elasticity of demand using the following

Two Stage Least Squares (2SLS) regression model:

                  log(p(1 +  )mrn ) = zmrn + msn + mr + mrn

                          log Qmrn =  log(p(1 +  )mrn )+ msn + mr + mrn

where the log consumer price, log(p(1 +  )mrn ), is instrumented with zmrn . The  and  terms

correspond to the same set of fixed effects as in the regression models in the prior section. Panel

B of Table 2 reports the 2SLS estimates of . The price elasticity of demand estimate in the full

sample is  = -1.202 (s.e. 0.027), and for the border pair subsample the estimate is  = -1.223

(s.e. 0.027). Both of these values are larger in magnitude than the estimated tax elasticity in Panel

A, which suggests that consumers underreact to taxes relative to posted prices.

   We next estimate the tax salience parameter  directly by plugging in each of the estimates

in Panel A and Panel B of Table 2 using the formula in Lemma 2 evaluated at t = 0, which we

re-arrange slightly to more closely line up with the empirical estimates:
                                               (1 -  ) ~D + ~D
                                       =                                                                (4)
                                                  (1 +   ) ~D
                                                                                                  d log(Q)
Note that  = d log(p(1+ ))/d log(1+ ) and corresponds to the estimate  p(1+ ) , ~D             d log(p(1+ ))
                                                   d log(Q)
and corresponds to the estimate , and ~D          d log(1+ )
                                                             ,   which corresponds to the estimate  Q . If

there is complete pass-through ( = 1), then the "plug-in" estimate of  reduces to the ratio of the

tax elasticity (~D ) to the price elasticity (~D ) when  = 0. The formula accounts for the fact that

when pass-through is incomplete and taxes are not fully salient, manipulating the actual after-tax

price is not the same as manipulating the perceived price. Similar to other estimation approaches


                                                   29
in the literature, our identification of  relies on consumers perceiving tax and price changes to be

equally persistent, such that there is no difference in the degree of intertemporal substitution under

full salience. Similarly, it requires that equivalent price and tax changes induce the same degree of

substitution between product-modules.

       Panel C of Table 3 reports our "plug-in" estimates of  using our reduced-form results and

using  = 0.036, which is the sample average sales tax rate. We estimate  = 0.575 (s.e. 0.147)

using the full sample and  = 0.528 (s.e. 0.130) using the border-pair subsample.22 For compar-

ison, Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) estimate  = 0.35 using a field experiment which posted

tax-inclusive prices in a grocery store. Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018) and Morisson and Taubin-

sky (2020) conduct online shopping experiments in which participants face different tax rates on

common household goods. Using experimental variation in tax rates along with a pricing mecha-

nism used to elicit willingness to pay, they report ranges of experimental estimates of  between

0.23 and 0.54 and between 0.23 and 0.79, respectively.

       As a robustness test, we consider an alternative method for calculating the tax elasticity and the

price elasticity, as well as the associated value of  , in Appendix Table OA.6. In Panels A and

B, we report the effect of taxes and of the price instrument on total expenditures.23 We then back

out the implied effect on quantity by subtracting the effect on prices (column 2) from the effect on

expenditures (column 3). The implied values of the average tax salience parameter are  = 0.552

and  = 0.491 for the full sample and the border-pair subsample, respectively.
  22
      Appendix Table OA.5 presents results based on alternative ways to account for spatial heterogeneity in consump-
tion trends in our main sample. To account for county-level time-varying heterogenetity, we parameterize country-
specific trends for each module as linear time trends (module-by-county-by-year-quarter fixed effects leave no residual
variation in tax rates and therefore cannot be used). We also consider store-specific linear trends for each module.
The tax and price elasticities under these alternative specifications are smaller than our preferred estimates and imply
slightly lower values of  , ranging between 0.376 and 0.507. We note that the inclusion of module-by-state-by-year-
quarter fixed effects in our preferred specification effectively shuts down variation from state-level tax rates, whereas
county-module linear trends do not.
   23
      Total expenditures on module m is equal to j m (qjrn × pjrn ), where j denotes a UPC. The effect on expendi-
tures therefore captures both the effects on prices and on quantity.




                                                           30
6         Calibrations

In this section, we calibrate the incidence and marginal excess formulas for ad valorem taxes using

the estimates in the previous section. To do this, we first recover the markup and the conduct pa-

rameter in several intermediate steps shown in the bottom of Table 4. We assume constant marginal

costs and constant price elasticity of demand throughout this calibration exercise.

         Using our estimates of  and  , along with the pass-through expression, we recover an esti-

mate of vq /(J      ms )   = 0.041 by exploiting the fact that the elasticity of marginal surplus is equal to

the inverse of the price elasticity of demand under constant elasticity of demand; i.e.,                    ms    = 1/   D.

Next, in order to estimate the markup (p - mc)/p, we translate vq /(J                ms )   into vq /(J   D ),   and since

the latter determines the markup, we estimate (p - mc)/p = 0.028.24 Our last intermediate step

estimates vq /J = 0.034.

         With the estimated markup and conduct parameters in hand, we can calibrate the incidence and

marginal excess burden formulas for ad valorem taxes using the results in Table 3. Extending the

incidence formula for ad valorem taxes to allow for heterogeneity in  results in the following:
                                 (1 +  ) + (1 -  ) ~D +  (1 +  )~D (1/p)V ar( )
                           I=                   q                  q
                                                                                                                         (5)
                                           1-   J
                                                    (1 -  ) +      J 
                                                                         (1 +   )
In Table 3, column (1) assumes no heterogeneity in  , while column (2) illustrates sensitivity

to heterogeneity in  by assuming that the variance of  is equal to 0.25.25 In column (1), we

calculate I = 17.051, which suggests that much of the incidence of sales taxes falls on consumers.
    24
      Grocery stores operate on relatively low profit margins; industry analyst Jeff Cohen recently said that
"It's a very competitive industry ... grocery stores can only slightly mark up the prices for their products."
https://www.marketplace.org/2013/09/12/groceries-low-margin-business-still-highly-desirable/.
   25
      The empirical model assumed "constant effects" and thus ignored heterogeneity across consumers. The sensi-
tivity analysis in column (2) can thus be interpreted as allowing for heterogeneity across consumers in tax salience
(as accommodated by the theory), but continuing to assume that all consumers would respond similarly when fully
optimizing (Assumption 1). To accommodate richer consumer heterogeneity in the empirical analysis requires more
detailed individual-level data than the retail scanner data that we use in this paper. Also, in calibrating the incidence
formlua we assume a value for (1/p)V ar( ), which normalizes the consumer heterogeneity in  by price and avoids
having to calibrate a value for the pre-tax price in any of our calibrations. To put the variance of  of 0.25 in con-
text, consider the special case where   {0, 1}; i.e., some consumers fully optimize, while others are completely
inattentive to taxes. Since  is binary, an average  of 0.575 (i.e., the share of consumers fully optimizing) implies
a variance of 0.24. By comparison, Taubinsky and Rees-Jones (2018) report a lower bound estimate of the variance
of  around 0.1. Since the variance of  enters the welfare and incidence formula linearly, using a lower value of
the variance in our calibrations would naturally bring the incidence and marginal excess burden estimates reported in
column (2) closer to the values in column (1) that assume no heterogeneity in tax salience across consumers.


                                                           31
In column (2), we allow for heterogeneity in tax salience, and we find this reduces the incidence

on consumers to I = 16.857. Ignoring salience entirely ( = 1) but holding fixed the estimated

markup at 0.028, we find I = 13.701 (column (3)). Lastly, column (4) continues to assume full

optimization, but recalibrates the markup assuming  = 1. This is important to consider since

different assumptions on the value of  affect the incidence formula directly, but also indirectly

since it affects the estimated markup. In this case, we find I = 17.124, showing that the incidence

on consumers is greater when consumers are more attentive to the tax, and contrasts with the

intuition from Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009). In the case of perfect competition, the incidence

of the tax is fully born by consumers regardless of the magnitude of  under our assumption of

constant marginal costs. These results demonstrate how salience and imperfect competition interact

to determine tax incidence.

   Turning to marginal excess burden, we extend the ad valorem marginal excess burden formula

to allow for heterogeneity in  and scale the expression so that it represents the change in welfare

as a percentage of total revenue. This results in the following:
             dW  (1 +  ) dW            p - mc
                            =                 +   ~D +  (1 +  )~D (1/p)V ar( )                  (6)
              d    pQ d                   p
   Using the sample average tax rate of 3.6 percent for  , we find dW /d = -0.033 (column 1).

This implies that the marginal excess burden is about 3.3 percent of total revenue. The formula

in Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) gives an estimate of dW /d = -0.014 (column 1), while the

standard Harberger formula assuming full optimization gives an estimate of dW /d = -0.024

(column 3). Interestingly, both estimates are smaller than the main estimate in column (1), sug-

gesting that accounting for both salience and imperfect competition leads to a change in welfare

that is larger than the estimates implied by a standard analysis. Allowing for heterogeneity in 

across consumers increases the welfare cost of taxation to dW /d = -0.043 (column 2). Under

perfect competition, allowing for heterogeneity in  increases the welfare cost of taxation by the

same amount as it does under imperfect competition (holding constant the other parameters).

   Ignoring salience ( = 1 for all consumers) while holding fixed the markup increases the



                                                 32
welfare cost of taxation (in magnitude) by 1 percentage point to -0.043, which is the exact same

change as we move from the Chetty, Looney and Kroft (2009) formula to the standard Harberger

formula. This illustrates the similar way that tax salience affects welfare under different market

structures.

   Lastly, column (4) continues to assume full optimization, but recalibrates the markup accord-

ingly (assuming  = 1). In this case, the markup falls to 1.6 percent, and the implied dW /d =

-0.035, which is smaller than the estimate in column (3), but still larger in magnitude than the

standard Harberger formula. We note that although the estimated markup appears small, it has

a first-order impact on welfare that exceeds that of tax salience. Under imperfect tax salience

( = 0.575), imperfect competition raises the welfare cost of sales taxes by 2 percentage points,

from -0.014 to -0.033. Overall, results in Table 4 show the subtle impact of salience on the wel-

fare consequences of sales taxes, since salience both directly impacts the welfare formula through

  , but also affects it indirectly through our inference on the markup. Also, heterogeneity in tax

salience increases the marginal excess burden but decreases the incidence on consumers.

   We assess the robustness of the calibration results in a number of dimensions. Appendix Table

OA.7 reports all of the results in Table 3 using the county border pair subsample instead of the full

sample of counties. Since the reduced-form effects are fairly similar, it is not surprising that the

incidence and welfare results are broadly similar, although the difference between the Harberger

formula and the full welfare formula allowing for imperfect competition and tax salience is reduced

somewhat. This is because using the county border pair results we find that the attenuating effect

of the tax salience parameter largely offsets the increase in magnitude of welfare change due to

imperfect competition. In Appendix Table OA.8, we show senstivity to alternative values of the

elasticity of marginal surplus. For the main results in Table 3, we assume that this elasticity is equal

to the inverse of the price elasticity of demand. Alternative functional form assumptions would lead

to different relationships between these parameters. Since we do not have sufficient data to estimate

the elasticity of marginal surplus directly, we instead show sensitivity across different values of this

parameter. Varying this parameter by roughly 50 percent in either direction does not change the


                                                  33
main qualitative conclusions from our main results that the incidence largely falls on consumers,

the incidence is increasing in the tax salience parameter, and the Harberger formula understates

the welfare change relative to the general welfare formula that allows for both tax salience and

imperfect competition.



7    Conclusion

This paper develops new formulas for the welfare effects of commodity taxation in a model with

heterogeneous consumers featuring imperfect competition and tax salience. We find important

interactions between salience and the degree of competition for tax incidence, but no direct inter-

actions for efficiency analysis. We also show that heterogeneity in inattention matters for incidence

under all market structures, including perfect competition.

    We estimate the inputs into the formulas using Nielsen Retail Scanner data and detailed sales

tax data. We find nearly-complete pass-through of sales taxes onto prices and meaningful effects

of taxes on quantity. We also find that consumers substantially "underreact" to taxes, with a tax

elasticity about 53 to 58 percent of the price elasticity. We use our formulas to calibrate a markup

around 3 percent, which is consistent with grocery stores operating with fairly low profit margins.

    We use these estimates to calibrate our new incidence and efficiency formulas, and we find lower

incidence on consumers (as compared to perfect competition) and that greater attention to the tax

can lead to consumers bearing a higher share of the burden of the tax. Accounting for heterogeneity

in consumers' inattention to taxes further lowers the incidence of taxes on consumers. Turning to

welfare, we find the standard marginal excess burden formula substantially understates the welfare

costs of commodity taxation, even after accounting for consumers' underreaction due to salience

effects. While we estimate substantial underreaction to taxes alongside a fairly small markup (and

thus fairly small depature from perfect competition), our calibration results suggests that both are

important for welfare analysis. Ignoring imperfect competition but allowing for salience effects

leads to a substantial underestimate of the marginal excess burden, while ignoring salience effects



                                                 34
but allowing for imperfect competition leads to an overestimate of the marginal excess burden by

roughly the same magnitude. As a result, we conclude that both imperfect competition and tax

salience are important factors to consider together when analyzing the incidence and efficiency

consequences of commodity taxation. Focusing on either one in isolation will, in some circum-

stances, lead to misleading estimates.




                                              35
References

  1. Adachi, Takanori and Michal Fabinger (2019). "Multi-Dimensional Pass-Through and Wel-
     fare Measures under Imperfect Competition," Working paper.
  2. Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky (2015). "Evaluating Behaviorally Motivated Policy:
     Experimental Evidence from the Lightbulb Market," American Economic Review, 105(8):
     2501-2538.
  3. Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood and Dmitry Taubinsky (2018). "Ramsey Strikes Back:
     Optimal Commodity Taxes and Redistribution in the Presence of Salience Effects," American
     Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 108(5): 88-92.
  4. Allcott, Hunt, Rebecca Diamond, Jean-Pierre Dubé, Jessie Handbury, Ilya Rahkovsky, Molly
     Schnell (2019). "Food Deserts and the Causes of Nutritional Inequality," The Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 134(4): 1793­1844, https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz015.
  5. Anderson, Simon P., Andre De Palma and Brent Kreider (2001a). "The Efficiency of Indirect
     Taxes under Imperfect Competition," Journal of Public Economics, 81(2): 231-251.
  6. Anderson, Simon P., Andre De Palma and Brent Kreider (2001b). "Tax Incidence in Differ-
     entiated Product Oligopoly," Journal of Public Economics, 81(2): 173-192.
  7. Atkin, David, Benjamin Faber and Marco Gonzalez-Navarro (2018). "Retail Globalization
     and Household Welfare: Evidence from Mexico," Journal of Political Economy, 126(1): 1-
     73.
  8. Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines Jr. (2001). "Perfect Taxation with Imperfect Compe-
     tition," NBER Working Paper #8138.
  9. Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines Jr. (2002). "Taxation and Economic Efficiency,"
     Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3 (Chapter 21).
 10. Baker, Scott R., Stephanie Johnson, and Lorenz Kueng (2018). "Shopping for Lower Sales
     Tax Rates," Working Paper.
 11. Bernheim, Douglas B. and Dmitry Taubinsky (2018). "Behavioral Public Economics," In B.
     Douglas Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson (eds.), Handbook of Behavioral
     Economics, Volume 1, New York: Elsevier: 381-516.
 12. Besley, Timothy J. and Harvey S. Rosen (1999). "Sales taxes and prices: an empirical analy-
     sis,"National Tax Journal, 52(2): 157-158.
 13. Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer (2013). "Salience and Consumer
     Choice." Journal of Political Economy, 121 (5): 803­43.
 14. Bradley, Sebastien and Naomi E. Feldman (2019). "Hidden Baggage: Behavioral Responses
     to Changes in Airline Ticket Tax Disclosure," forthcoming American Economic Journal:
     Economic Policy.
 15. Bulow, Jeremy and Paul Pfleiderer (1983). "A Note on the Effect of Cost Changes on Prices,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 91(1): 182-185.



                                              36
16. Caplin, Andrew, and Mark Dean (2015). "Revealed Preference, Rational Inattention, and
    Costly Infor-mation Acquisition," American Economic Review 105 (7): 2183­2203.
17. Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney and Kory Kroft (2009). "Salience and Taxation: Theory and
    Evidence," American Economic Review, 99 (4): 1145-77.
18. DellaVigna, Stefano and Matthew Gentzkow (2019). "Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains,"
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4): 2011-2084.
19. Delipalla, Sophia and Michael Keen (1992). "The Comparison between Ad Valorem and
    Specific Taxation under Imperfect Competition," Journal of Public Economics, 49(3): 351-
    361.
20. Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich (2010). "Minimum Wage Effects
    Across State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties," The Review of Economics and
    Statistics, 92(4): 945­964.
21. Einav, Liran, Jonathan D. Levin, Neel Sundaresan (2014). "Sales Taxes and Internet Com-
    merce," American Economic Review, 104(1): 1-26.
22. Farhi, Emmanuel and Xavier Gabaix (2020). "Optimal Taxation with Behavioral Agents,"
    American Economic Review, 110(1): pp. 298-336.
23. Goldin, Jacob and Tatiana Homonoff (2013). "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes: Cigarette Tax
    Salience and Regressivity," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(1): 302-36.
24. Gruber, Jonathan, and Botond K   oszegi (2004). "Tax incidence when individuals are time-
    inconsistent: the case of cigarette excise taxes." Journal of Public Economics, 88(9-10):
    1959-1987.
25. Hackner, Jonas and Mathias Herzing (2016). "Welfare Effects of Taxation in Oligopolistic
    Markets," Journal of Economic Theory, 163(C): 141-166.
26. Handbury, Jessie, and David E. Weinstein (2015), "Goods Prices and Availability in Cities,"
    Review of Economic Studies, 82(1): 258-296.
27. Harberger, Arthur (1964). "The Measurement of Waste," American Economic Review 54(3):
    58-76.
28. Hausman Jerry A. (1996). "Valuation of new goods under perfect and imperfect competition,"
    The Economics of New Goods, eds. TF Bresnahan, RJ Gordon, chap. 5. Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press, 209­248.
29. Holmes, Thomas J. (1998). "The Effects of State Policies on the Location of Industry: Evi-
    dence from State Borders," Journal of Political Economy, 106(4): 667-705.
30. Koszegi, Botond, and Adam Szeidl (2013). "A Model of Focusing in Economic Choice,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1): 53­104.
31. Liebman, Jeffrey B., and Richard J. Zeckhauser (2004). "Schmeduling," https://scholar.
    harvard.edu/files/jeffreyliebman/files/Schmeduling_WorkingPaper.
    pdf.
32. Miravete, Eugenio J., Katja Seim and Jeff Thurk (2018). "Market Power and the Laffer
    Curve," Econometrica, 86(5): 1651-1687.


                                             37
33. Morrison, William and Dmitry Taubinsky (2020). "Rules of Thumb and Attention Elastici-
    ties," Working Paper.
34. Nevo, Aviv (2001). "Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry," Econo-
    metrica, 69: 307­42.
35. Taubinsky, Dmitry and Alex Rees-Jones (2018). "Attention Variation and Welfare: Theory
    and Evidence from a Tax Salience Experiment," Review of Economic Studies, 85: 2462-2496.
36. Seade, Jesus (1987). "Profitable Cost Increases and the Shifting of Taxation: Equilibrium
    Responses of Markets in Oligopoly," Working Paper.
37. Stern, Nicholas (1987). "The Effects of Taxation, Price Control, and Government Contracts
    in Oligopoly and Monopolistic Competition," Journal of Public Economics, 32: 133-158.
38. Veiga, André and Glen Weyl (2016). "Product Design in Selection Markets," Quarterly Jour-
    nal of Economics, 131(2): 1007-1056.
39. Weyl, Glen and Michal Fabinger (2013). "Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principle of
    Incidence under Imperfect Competition," Journal of Political Economy, 121(3): 528-583.




                                            38
                       Table 1: Sales Tax Exemptions for Food and Non-Food Products Across States

                                                  Panel A: Food Modules
                               Average Store-Level States taxing all     States taxing           States taxing module at full
           Module               Expenditure Share          food       module at reduced         rate (but otherwise exempting
                                                      AL, ID, KS,     AR, IL, MO, NC,
       DAIRY - MILK                  3.04%
                                                       MS, OK, SD       TN,UT,VA,WV
                                                                                                CA, CT, FL, IA, IN, KY, MD,
      SOFT DRINKS -                                      AL, ID, KS,         AR, IL, MO,
                                       2.88%                                                     ME, MN, NC, ND, NJ, NY,
      CARBONATED                                         MS, OK, SD           TN,UT,VA
                                                                                                OH, PA, RI, TX, WA, WI, WV
                                                         AL, ID, KS,       IL, MO, TN, UT,
BAKERY - BREAD - FRESH                 2.19%
                                                         MS, OK, SD             VA, WV
                                                         AL, ID, KS,       AR, IL, MO, NC,
CEREAL - READY TO EAT                  1.93%
                                                         MS, OK, SD         TN,UT,VA,WV
                                                                                                CA, CT, FL, IA, IN, KY, MD,
      SOFT DRINKS -                                      AL, ID, KS,         AR, IL, MO,
                                       1.62%                                                     ME, MN, NC, ND, NJ, NY,
      LOW CALORIE                                        MS, OK, SD           TN,UT,VA
                                                                                                OH, PA, RI, TX, WA, WI, WV
                                                         AL, ID, KS,       AR, IL, MO, NC,
    WATER-BOTTLED                      1.42%                                                        LA, MD, ME, MN, NY
                                                         MS, OK, SD         TN,UT,VA,WV
                                                         AL, ID, KS,       AR, IL, MO, NC,
    ICE CREAM - BULK                   1.22%                                                                FL, MD
                                                         MS, OK, SD         TN,UT,VA,WV
                                                         AL, ID, KS,       AR, IL, MO, NC,
         COOKIES                       1.21%
                                                         MS, OK, SD         TN,UT,VA,WV
                                                         AL, ID, KS,         AR, IL, MO,        CT, FL, IA, IN, KY, MD, ME,
   CANDY-CHOCOLATE                     0.64%
                                                         MS, OK, SD          UT,VA,WV           MN, NC, ND, NJ, NY, RI, TN,

                                      Panel B: Non-Food Modules
                      Average Store-Level   States with no  States exempting                         States taxing module
        Module         Expenditure Share        sales tax        module                                  at reduced rate
   WINE - DOMESTIC          2.11%          DE, MT, NH, OR PA, KS, KY, MA
     CIGARETTES             1.70%          DE, MT, NH, OR     CO, MN, OK
    TOILET TISSUE           1.07%          DE, MT, NH, OR         PA, NJ
 DETERGENTS - LIQUID        0.75%          DE, MT, NH, OR
    PAPER TOWELS            0.66%          DE, MT, NH, OR           NJ
         RUM                0.54%          DE, MT, NH, OR PA, KS, KY, MA
                                                            MA, MN, NJ, PA,
 DISPOSABLE DIAPERS         0.50%          DE, MT, NH, OR                                                     IL
                                                                    VT
     MAGAZINES              0.41%          DE, MT, NH, OR MA, ME, NY, OK
 CAT FOOD - DRY TYPE        0.35%          DE, MT, NH, OR
                                                           CT, FL, MD, MN,
COLD REMEDIES - ADULT       0.28%          DE, MT, NH, OR                                                     IL
                                                            NJ, NY, PA, TX,
  DOG & CAT TREATS          0.25%          DE, MT, NH, OR
         ALE                0.25%          DE, MT, NH, OR PA, KS, KY, MA
 DOG FOOD - WET TYPE        0.23%          DE, MT, NH, OR
    FACIAL TISSUE           0.22%          DE, MT, NH, OR           NJ
   TOOTH CLEANERS           0.22%          DE, MT, NH, OR           PA                                        IL

Notes: Tax exemption status as in September 2008 for selected list of modules. The list only includes modules in our analysis
sample.




                                                               39
                                                    Table 2
           Estimates of Tax Elasticities, Price Elasticity of Demand, and Tax Salience Parameter
                                                                                             County Border
Sample:                                                                       Full Sample
                                                                                             Pair Subsample

                                                                                  (1)               (2)

   Panel A: Reduced-form OLS Estimates of the Effects of Sales Taxes on Consumer Prices and Quantity
d log( p (1 +  ))/d log(1 +  )                                                   0.961            0.986
                                                                                (0.045)          (0.016)

d log( Q )/d log(1 +  )                                                          -0.668           -0.650
                                                                                (0.185)          (0.084)

                          Panel B: 2SLS Estimates of the Price Elasticity of Demand
d log( Q )/d log( p )                                                            -1.202           -1.223
                                                                                (0.027)          (0.027)

                          Panel C: "Plug-in" Estimate of the Tax Salience Parameter
                                                                                 0.575            0.528
                                                                                (0.147)          (0.130)

Specification:
Store × Module fixed effects                                                       y                 y
Module × Year-Quarter fixed effects                                                y                 y
Module × State × Year-Quarter fixed effects                                        y
Module × Border Pair × Year-Quarter fixed effects                                                   y
N                                                                             53,895,446       33,749,157

Notes: This table reports estimates of the effects of sales taxes, of the price elasticity of demand, and of
the tax salience parameter. In Panel A, the independent variable is quarterly sales tax rate of module m in
county c in state s . One observation is a module in a store in a given quarter. Consumer prices p (1+)
are tax inclusive. The Retail Scanner data is restricted to modules above the 80th percentile of the
national distribution of sales. In Panel B, the reported coefficients are 2SLS estimates of the effect of
consumer prices on quantity sold, where prices are instrumented with leave-self-out chain-level average
prices. In Panel C, we report the estimate of the tax salience parameter. For this parameter, standard
errors are based on 100 bootstrap replications. All standard errors in this table are clustered at the state-
module level and are reported in parentheses. In column (1), the sample includes our full sample of
stores and the regression model includes module-by-store and module-by-quarter-by-state fixed effects.
In column (2), the sample is restricted to stores in border counties and the regression model includes
module-by-store and module-by-border-pair-by-year-quarter fixed effects, where border pairs denote
pairs of contiguous counties on opposite sides of a state border. In column (2), observations are
weighted by the inverse of the number of times a store appears in the data.




                                                     40
                                                                   Table 3
                                       Calibration of Incidence and Marginal Excess Burden Formulas
                                                                          Plug-in estimate of tax salience
Tax salience parameter (  ):
                                                                             parameter, E[  ] = 0.575              Full salience,  = 1
Heterogeneity in  :                                                  (1/p )Var(  ) = 0 (1/p )Var(  ) = 0.25 No heterogeneity, (1/p )Var(  ) = 0
                                                                                                                                Re-calibrate
Implied markup:                                                                           Same markup        Same markup       markup under
                                                                     Baseline markup         from (1)          from (1)             = 1
                                                                              (1)                 (2)             (3)                (4)

                                           Panel A: Incidence and Marginal Excess Burden Formulas
Incidence ( I )
General formula (imperfect salience, imperfect competition):         17.051                     16.857          13.701             17.124
  (  (1+) + (1- ) D + (1+) D(1/p )Var( )) / ( (1- v/J)(1- ) + ( v/J) (1+) )
Incidence under perfect competition (for 0 <  < 1)                                                                                   

Marginal Excess Burden ( dW/ d )
General formula (imperfect salience, imperfect competition):                -0.033              -0.043           -0.043            -0.035
 dW/d  = ( ( p - mc)/p + ) D + (1+) D(1/p )Var( )
CLK / Taubinsky Rees-Jones formulas (perfect competition):                  -0.014              -0.025                    -0.024
 dW/d  = D + (1+) D(1/p )Var( )

                                   Panel B: Inputs and Intermediate Estimates Needed to Calibrate Formulas
Inputs:
Average tax rate,                                                            0.036               0.036            0.036             0.036
Price Elasticity, D  log(Q)/log( p )                                        -1.202              -1.202           -1.202            -1.202
Tax Pass-Through,   d log( p (1+))/d log(1+)                                 0.961               0.961            0.961             0.961
Tax Elasticity, D  d log( Q)/d log(1+)                                      -0.668              -0.668           -0.668            -0.668
Tax Salience Parameter, 
 Implied "Plug-In" Estimate of E[ ]                                         0.575               0.575
 Assuming full salience (E[ ] = 1)                                                                                1.00              1.00
 (1/p )Var(  )                                                               0.00                0.25             0.00              0.00

Intermediate estimates:
Implied estimate of vq /( Jms)                                              0.041               0.041                              0.023
Implied markup (p - mc )/p                                                  0.028               0.028                              0.016
Implied estimate of v q /J                                                  0.034               0.034                              0.019
  ( v q /J = 0 is perfect competition, v q /J = 1 is perfect collusion)

Notes: This table reports calibrations of the tax incidence and marginal excess burden formulas. The results of these calibrations are
shown in Panel A. Panel B presents the value of the input parameters taken from Table 2 column (1), as well as estimates of
intermediate parameters. In column (1), the incidence and marginal excess burden formulas are implemented with no restrictions. In
column (2) we allow for heterogeneity in salience parameter. In column (3), we use estimates of the markup based on the tax salience
parameter reported in column (1), but assume full salience elsewhere in the formulas. In column (4), full salience is assumed
throughout, including when calculating the markup.




                                                                            41
 Online Appendix for "Salience and Taxation with Imperfect
                                        Competition"

    Kory Kroft, Jean-William P. Laliberté, René Leal-Vizcaíno, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo

                                            November 2020




Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1

Proof. Note that

                            dD(p(t), t) p + t
                     Dt   =
                                  dt    q (t)
                            p + t Di               dp
                          =              (p(t), t)      + i di
                            q (t)     p             dt
                            p+t             D         Di
                          =          ( - 1)      +          (p(t), t)i di
                            q (t)            p          p
                            p+t                      D                  Di (p, t)
                          =          ( - 1 + E(i ))        + Cov i ,
                            q (t)                    p                    p
                                                    p+t              Di (p, t)
                          = -(E(i ) +  - 1) D +            Cov i ,
                                                     q (t)                p

   Finally, under assumption 1   Di
                                 p
                                    (p(t), t)   is constant in i and so Cov i , Dp
                                                                                 i (p,t)
                                                                                         =0


Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. Let the market be perfect competition. Consumer surplus can be expressed as

                                                qi
                                   CSi =             wtpi (s)ds - (p + t)qi
                                            0




                                                       OA-1
                   dp
   Given   1 +     dt
                      ,   we have

                                    dCSi              dqi                dqi
                                         = wtpi (qi )     - qi - (p + t)
                                     dt               dt                 dt
                                                      dqi                dqi
                                         = (p + i t)      - qi - (p + t)
                                                       dt                 dt
                                                             dqi
                                         = -qi - (1 - i )t
                                                              dt

where the second equality follows from the fact that wtpi (qi ) = p + i t, then



                              dCS         dCSi
                                  =            di
                               dt          dt
                                                                dqi
                                     = -E(qi ) - tE (1 - i )
                                                                dt
                                                            dq            dqi
                                     = -q - (1 - E(i ))t       + tCov i ,
                                                            dt            dt

   For the tax revenue, we have
                                                dR      dq
                                                   =q+t
                                                dt      dt
   For producer surplus, we have

                                              dP S
                                                   = -(1 - )q
                                               dt

   Note that

                             dq   dqi
                                =     di
                             dt   dt
                                  Di dp
                               =          + i di
                                   p dt
                                   Di                              Di
                               =E         ( - 1 + E(i )) + Cov i ,
                                    p                              p




                                                     OA-2
Then we have

                               dp
                         =        +1
                               dt                                                   
                                              1                       Cov i , D
                                                                              p
                                                                                i

                             = 1 - 1 -             p
                                                         E(i ) +
                                                                            D
                                                                                    
                                         1+   D
                                              S   p+t                       p
                                                                         
                                                         Cov i , D
                                                                 p
                                                                   i

                             = 1 - (1 -  ) E(i ) +                D
                                                                         
                                                                  p


                1
where  =   1+   D p
                S p+t
   Using Lemma 1, we have

                             -q - (1 - E(i ))t dq
                                               dt
                                                  + tCov i , dq
                                                             dt
                                                               i

                        I=
                                     -(1 - )q
                                1 - E(i ) t                            t           dqi
                         =    +                          Dt   -            Cov i ,
                           1-     1- p+t                          q (1 - )         dt

   Finally, the marginal excess burden of a unit tax is calculated by summing up the incidence on
consumers, producers, and government.


Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. Let the firm be a monopoly in the market. The incidence of a tax on consumers is the same
as in the perfect competitive market, since the incidence does not depend on the firm's behavior.
Similarly, the incidence on the government is the same as in the perfect competitive market.
   Using Lerner's rule, we have in monopoly that p - mc(q ) = -mwtp(q )q . The incidence on the




                                                    OA-3
producer is then

                                        dP S  dp                dq
                                             = q + [p - mc(q )]
                                         dt   dt                dt
                                                                           dq
                                              = ( - 1)q - mwtp(q )q
                                                                           dt
                                                                 dqi
                                                                 dt
                                                                     di
                                              = ( - 1)q - q      D
                                                                 p
                                                                 Di     dp
                                                                 p      dt
                                                                           + i di
                                              = ( - 1)q - q             D
                                                                         p
                                                                                    
                                                                 dp        i D
                                                                             p
                                                                               i
                                                                                 di
                                              = ( - 1)q - q           +     D
                                                                                    
                                                                 dt          p
                                                                                
                                                              Cov i , D
                                                                      p
                                                                        i

                                              = -q E(i ) +             D
                                                                                
                                                                       p

                                                                                                q
    Recall thar marginal surplus is ms(q ) = -mwtp(q )q . Furthermore, define M S (q, t) = - D (p (t),t)
                                                                                                         =
                                                                                                                     p
        ms(q )                                                     M S                          MS
mwtp(q (t)) D  (p(t),t)
                        ,   then M S (q, 0) = ms(q ). Let M St =   t
                                                                       ,   and let     ms   =   M Sq q
                                                                                                       ,   we have
            p



                                                p - mc(q ) = M S (q, t)


Therefore

                   dp                           dq
                      = (M Sq (q, t) + mc (q ))    + M St
                   dt                           dt
                                                 D dp                       Di
                      = (M Sq (q, t) + mc (q ))           + E(i ) + Cov i ,                           + M St
                                                  p dt                      p




                                                         OA-4
Then we have

       dp
   =      +1
       dt
          (ms (q ) + mc (q )) D
                              p
                                E(i ) + Cov i , D  p
                                                    i
                                                                             + M St
      =1+
                       1 - D p
                               (ms (q ) + mc (q ))
                                                                                         
                     1                          Cov i , D
                                                        p 
                                                          i
                                                                                                         M St
      =1+                            -1 E(i ) +
                                                            +
           1 - D
               p
                 (ms (q ) + mc (q ))                D
                                                    p
                                                              1-                                   D
                                                                                                   p
                                                                                                       (ms (q ) + mc (q ))
                                                                                  
                                  1                            Cov i , D
                                                                       p
                                                                         i
                                                                                                 M St
      =1-1 -                    p
                                                   
                                                    E(i ) +            D
                                                                                  +
                                                                                           D
                             D p+t -1         1                                       1-       (ms (q ) + mc (q ))
                     1+         S
                                          +   ms
                                                                       p                   p
                                                          
                                          Cov i , D
                                                  p
                                                    i

      = 1 - (1 -  ) E(i ) +                       D
                                                           + M St
                                                  p


                      1
where  =             p
                  D p+t -1
                                  .
             1+            + 1
                     S       ms
   The incidence of the tax is then:

                             -q - (1 - E(i ))t dq
                                               dt
                                                  + tCov i , dq
                                                             dt
                                                               i

                    I=                        
                                                                  Di
                                                                       
                                                        Cov i ,   p
                                     -q  E(i ) +             D
                                                                       
                                                             p


                                      D                                 t          t              dqi
                       =     p+t
                                                    + (1 - E(i ))            Dt   - Cov i (p, t),
                                 E    i Di                             p+t         q              dt
                              q         p




   The marginal excess burden of the tax is calculated by summing up the incidence on consumers,
producers, and government.


Derivation of Marginal Surplus Remark
                             ms(q )                                                                       -mwtp(q (t))q (t)
Let M S (q, t) =     mwtp(q (t)) D  (p(t),t)
                                             ,     then M S (q, 0) = ms(q ), and M S (q (t), t) =       mwtp(q (t)) D (p(t),t)
                                                                                                                                 =
                                 p                                                                                  p

- D q (t)
    (p(t),t)
             . If M St =     M S
                             t
                                      then:
  p




                                                                  OA-5
                    -ms(q )                                                D                                     D
M St =                                       2    wtp (q (t))q (t)           (p(t), t) + wtp (q (t))               (p(t), t)
          mwtp(q (t))         D
                                (p(t), t)                                  p                          t          p
                              p
                    -ms(q )                                                D                                       Di
     =                                       2    wtp (q (t))q (t)           (p(t), t) + wtp (q (t))                  (p(t) + i t, 0) di
          mwtp(q (t))         D
                                (p(t), t)                                  p                                 t     p
                              p
                    -ms(q )
     =                                       2
                              D
          mwtp(q (t))         p
                                (p(t), t)
                               D                                         2 Di                    dp
      wtp (q (t))q (t)           (p(t), t) + wtp (q (t))                   2
                                                                              (p(t) + i t, 0)        + i di
                               p                                        p                        dt
               -q                        D dq                           dp  2 Di                2 Di
     =                        2 wtp (q )       + mwtp(q )                            di +             i di
         mwtp(q )   D                    p dt                           dt      p2             p2
                    p
               -q                            D dq             2D                dp ¯         2 Di
     =                        2   wtp (q )        + mwtp(q )                       +  + Cov       , i
         mwtp(q )   D                        p dt            p2                 dt          p2
                    p
          -q               2 Di
               2 Cov            , i
          D               p2
          p


Note that under Assumption 1 the second derivatives are 0 and so M St = 0. Also for the model with
                                        -1                              (q )  2 D dp
fixed  it is easy to show that wtp = D     implies wtp (q ) dq = - mwtp
                                                                    D           2    +¯ so M St = 0.
                                                     p                            dt             p      dt
                                                                                            p



Proof of Proposition 3

Proof. Let the market be symmetric imperfect competition with J products j = 1, . . . , J and the
                                             pk
market conduct parameter p =                 pj
                                                  (k = j ).

                                                             Qi
                                             CSi =                wtpi (s)ds - (p + t)Qi
                                                         0
                       dp
   Given   1 +         dt
                          ,   we have

                              dCSi              dQi (p(t), t)                dQi (p(t), t)
                                   = wtpi (Qi )               - Qi - (p + t)
                               dt                    dt                           dt
                                               dQi (p(t), t)                 dQi (p(t), t)
                                   = (p + i t)                - Qi - (p + t)
                                                     dt                           dt
                                                         dQi (p(t), t)
                                   = -Qi - (1 - i )t
                                                               dt

where the second equality follows from the fact that wtpi (Qi ) = p + i (p, t)t, then




                                                                    OA-6
                       dCS          dCSi
                           =             di
                        dt           dt
                                                       dQi (p(t), t)
                                = -E(Qi ) - tE (1 - i )
                                                             dt
                                                    dQ(p(t), t)            dQi (p(t), t)
                                = -Q - (1 - E(i ))t             + tCov i ,
                                                       dt                       dt

    For the tax revenue, we have
                                              dR      dQ(p(t), t)
                                                 =Q+t
                                              dt         dt
    For producer surplus, taking the derivative of P S = pQ - Jc(q ) with respect to t, we have

                      dP S                            dq
                           = ( - 1)Q + J (p - mc(q ))
                       dt                             dt
                                        q dQ(p(t), t)
                           = ( - 1)Q +                  p
                                       J D     dt
                                       q dQ(p(t), t) 1
                           = ( - 1)Q - Q                 Q
                                       J       dt        p
                                                    dQi (p(t),t)
                                           q             dt
                                                                 di
                                = ( - 1)Q - Q           Q
                                           J             p
                                                    Qi     dp
                                           q        p      dt
                                                              + i di
                                = ( - 1)Q - Q               Q
                                           J                p
                                                                       
                                           q   dp             i Q
                                                                p
                                                                  i
                                                                    di
                                = ( - 1)Q - Q            +     Q
                                                                       
                                           J   dt              p

                                                                Cov i , Q
                                                                                                    
                                                                          i
                                      q             q                   p 
                                =- 1-   [Q(1 - )] -   Q E(i ) +     Q
                                      J             J               p


                                                                      p-mc(q )        q
    The second equality comes from the Lerner condition                 p
                                                                                 =   J D
                                                                                         ,   and the fifth equation comes
from dQi (dt
          p(t),t)
                  =   Qi
                      p
                           dp
                           dt
                                + i .
    Also note that

                            dQ(p(t), t)     dQi (p(t), t)
                                        =                 di
                               dt                dt
                                            Qi dp
                                         =             + i di
                                             p dt
                                             Qi                              Qi
                                         =E         ( - 1 + E(i )) + Cov i ,
                                             p                               p



                                                          OA-7
Now, to obtain the formula for pass-through, from Lerner condition we have

                                                             q Q
                                             p - mc(Q) = -
                                                             J Q
                                                               p


                                                                                        Q
Recall thar marginal surplus is ms(Q) = -mwtp(Q)Q. Furthermore, define M S (Q, t)  - Q (p (t),t)
                                                                                                 =
                                                                                                               p
      ms(Q)                                                     M S                         MS
mwtp(Q(t)) Q (p(t),t)
                      ,   then M S (Q, 0) = ms(Q). Let M St =   t
                                                                    ,   and let   ms   =   M SQ Q
                                                                                                  ,   we have
           p



                                                         q
                                           p - mc(Q) =     M S (Q, t)
                                                         J

Therefore

            dp   q                      dQ(p(t), t) q
               =   M SQ (Q, t) + mc (Q)             + M St
            dt   J                         dt         J
                 q                       Q dp                        Qi                               q
               =   M SQ (Q, t) + mc (Q)            + E(i ) + Cov i ,                            +       M St
                 J                       p dt                        p                                J

and

                                                dp     Q q
                                                    1-         M SQ (Q, t) + mc (Q) =
                                                dt      p J
                     q                          Q                    Qi        q
                       M SQ (Q, t) + mc (Q)        (E(i )) + Cov i ,         + M St
                     J                          p                    p         J




                                                     OA-8
Then we have

                       dp
                =         +1
                       dt
                                    q                           Q                                             q
                                    J
                                      ms   (Q) + mc (Q)          p
                                                                   E(i ) + Cov             i , Q
                                                                                               p
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                         +    J
                                                                                                                M St
                  =1+                                      Q    q
                                                      1-   p    J
                                                                  ms (Q) + mc             (Q)
                                                                                                     Cov i , Q
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                               i
                                                      1                                                      p
                  =1+                    Q q
                                                                              - 1 E(i ) +                     Q
                                                                                                                       
                                    1-   p  J
                                              ms      (Q) + mc (Q)                                            p
                                         q
                                         J
                                           M St
                  +             Q     q
                       1-       p     J
                                        ms    (Q) + mc (Q)
                                                                
                                                                                                Qi
                                                                                                     
                                                  1                      Cov i ,                p
                  =1-1 -                         q         q
                                                                
                                                                 E(i ) +     Q
                                                                                                     
                                               D- J
                                         1+       S
                                                      +    J
                                                           ms
                                                                                           p
                                           q
                                           J
                                             M St
                  +             Q     q
                       1-       p     J
                                        ms    (Q) + mc (Q)
                                                          Cov i , Q
                                                                              
                                                                    i
                                                                  p                      q
                  = 1 - (1 -  ) E(i ) +                         Q
                                                                              +            M St
                                                                p
                                                                                         J

                  1
where  =           q       q    .
                D- J       J
           1+          +
                 S         ms
   The incidence of the tax is then:

                                           -Q - (1 - E(i ))t dQ
                                                             dt
                                                                + tCov i , dQi (dt
                                                                                p(t),t)

                           I=                                                  
                                                                                                         Qi
                                                                                                               
                                                                                               Cov i ,   p
                                              q                       q
                                    - 1-      J
                                                  [Q(1 - )] -         J
                                                                          Q E(i ) +                  Q
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                     p

                                                    t
                                     + (1 - E(i )) p+ t        Dt
                                                                     t
                                                                    -Q              p(t),t)
                                                                       Cov i , dQi (dt
                            =                                                       Qi
                                                                              E i   p
                                                                q         q
                                              (1 - ) 1 -        J
                                                                      +   J       Qi
                                                                              E   p




   The marginal excess burden of the tax is calculated by summing up the incidence on consumers,
producers, and government.




                                                                    OA-9
Proof of Lemma 2

Proof. Observe

                                dQ p(1 +  ) + t
                          D   =
                                d       Q
                                               dp
                              = - D  (1 +  ) + p
                                               d
                                        p              1       p
                              =- D            (1 +   ) (1 +  )   + 1 +  - 1
                                      1+               p       
                                        p
                              =- D          ((1 +   )  +  - 1)
                                      1+

Solving for  we obtain:
                                                  (1 -  ) p D - D (1 +  )
                                           =
                                                       (1 +   ) p D




Proof of Proposition 4

Proof. Note that

                                         dp      1           dq
                                            =       (mwtp(q ) - p )                                               (A1)
                                         d    1 +            d

    The first order condition with J symmetric products and conduct parameter q is p - mc(q ) =
                                   wtp(q )-t t               wtp(q )-t t
- q mwtp(q )q
 J 1+ 
              ,   substitute p =     1+ 
                                                 so we get     1+ 
                                                                           - mc(q ) = -  q mwtp(q )q
                                                                                        J 1+ 
                                                                                                     or wtp(q ) - t t -
mc(q ) (1 +   ) = - J
                     q
                       mwtp(q )q . Taking thederivative with respect to  , we have

                      dq                   dq            q          dq            dq
           mwtp(q )      - (1 +   ) mc (q ) - mc(q ) = -   mwtp (q ) q + mwtp(q )
                      d                    d             J          d             d

    Rearrange terms, we have

                             q                               q           dq
                      (1 +     )mwtp(q ) - (1 +   ) mc (q ) + mwtp (q )q    = mc(q )
                             J                               J           d




                                                         OA-10
   And so

                       dq                                    mc(q )
                          =            q                                                     q
                       d    (1 +       J
                                         )mwtp(q )       - (1 +   ) mc (q ) +                J
                                                                                               mwtp   (q )q
                                                          mc(q )
                                                          mwtp(q )
                            =          q         mc (q )q mc(q )(1+  )         q mwtp (q )
                                (1 +   J
                                         )   -   mc(q )    mwtp(q )q
                                                                           +   J mwtp(q )
                                                                                           q

   Thus,
                                                                mc(q )
                                             dq                mwtp (q )
                                                =                   - q            q
                                             d    1+
                                                           (1+ )   D  J
                                                                               +   J
                                                                  S                ms


   Therefore,                                                                                     
                                                                 mc(q )
                                 dp                                 p
                                    =                                                        - 1
                                                                                                  
                                                                        q               q
                                 d    1 +   1 +               (1+ ) D- J
                                           
                                                                       S
                                                                                   +    J
                                                                                        ms


   And
                                                                                              
                                                               mc(q )
                                     (1 +  )                      p
                             =                                                           - 1 + 1
                                                                                              
                                                                      q            q
                                    1 +                     (1+ ) D- J
                                             
                                              1+                   S
                                                                               +   J
                                                                                   ms


Similarly, we have

                                        dp      1           dq
                                           =       (mwtp(q ) - t )
                                        dt   1 +            dt

   The first order condition of monopoly is p-mc(q ) = -  q mwtp(q )q
                                                         J 1+ 
                                                                      , or wtp(q )-t t-mc(q ) (1 +   ) =
-J
  q
    mwtp(q )q . Taking the derivative w.r.t t we get:

                                                              q             q         dq
                  mwtp(q ) - mc (q ) (1 +   ) +                 mwtp (q )q + mwtp(q )    = t
                                                              J             J         dt

   And so

                     dq                              t
                        =                                                  q                      q
                     dt   mwtp(q ) - mc (q ) (1 +   ) +                    J
                                                                             mwtp       (q )q +   J
                                                                                                    mwtp(q )
                                                         t
                                                       mwtp(q )
                        =
                                                              q
                                                              J
                                                                   mwtp (q )q +mwtp(q )
                                 mc (q )q (1+  )mc(q )
                            1-   mc(q )     mwtp(q )q
                                                          +                mwtp(q )




                                                           OA-11
   Thus,
                                                     t
                                      dq           mwtp(q )
                                         =               - q        q
                                      dt   1+
                                                (1+ )   D  J
                                                               +    J
                                                     S              ms


   Therefore,                                                                     
                              dp      t                   1
                                 =                                            - 1
                                                                                  
                                                           - q           q
                              dt   1 +   1 +
                                        
                                                  (1+ )
                                                         S
                                                          D  J
                                                                   +     J
                                                                         ms


   consumer price is
                                                                                                
                            dp               (1 +  )t                         1
                 t = 1 +       (1 +  ) = 1 +                                                  - 1
                                                                                                
                                                                               - q       q
                            dt                1 +  
                                                      
                                                                   (1+ )
                                                       1+                 S
                                                                              D  J
                                                                                     +   J
                                                                                         ms




Proof of Proposition 5
                                                                                                              p
Proof. Denote wtp = p(1 +   ) + t t the perceived price by the consumer and                     D   =   D p(1+ )+t .   We
have

                   dCS          dQ      d(p(1 +  ) + t)                  dQ
                       = wtp(Q)    -Q                   - (p(1 +  ) + t)
                    d           d             d                          d
                            d(p(1 +  ) + t) dQ
                       = -Q                 -      (1 -  )p + (1 - t )t
                                  d           d



                       dCS          dQ      d(p(1 +  ) + t)                  dQ
                           = wtp(Q)     -Q                  - (p(1 +  ) + t)
                        dt          dt            dt                         dt
                                d(p(1 +  ) + t) dQ
                           = -Q                 -      (1 -  )p + (1 - t )t
                                       dt          dt




                                             d (p - mc(q ))q
                                    dP S
                                         =
                                     d            d
                                           dp                dq
                                         =    q + p - mc(q )
                                           d                 d




                                                 OA-12
                                      d (p - mc(q ))q
                           dP S
                                =
                            dt         dt
                                  dp              dq
                                 = q + p - mc(q )
                                  dt              dt



                     dR            dQ    d( p + t)
                        = ( p + t)    +Q
                     d             d        d
                                   dQ p dQ               p dQ
                        = ( p + t)    -       - (1 +  )
                                   d    D d             D  d




                        dR            dQ    d( p + t)
                           = ( p + t)    +Q
                        dt            dt       dt
                                      dQ p dQ         p dQ
                           = ( p + t)    -       -
                                      dt   D dt     D t d


Therefore, we have



                         dW   dCS dP S dR
                            =    +    +
                          d    d   d    d
                                                               dQ
                             = (p(1 +   ) + t t - mc(q ))
                                                               d

                         dW                               dQ
                             = (p(1 +   ) + t t - mc(q ))
                          dt                              dt
We also have
                                     dW
                                      d
                        M C = -      dR
                                      d
                                   p(1 +   ) + t t - mc(q )
                             =-
                                  ( p + t) - pD
                                                - (1 +  ) Dp
                                              wtp-mc
                                                 p
                             =   D      1+                     t
                                     (1+  ) + -1
                                                   -    D (   +p )




                                          OA-13
   And
                                             dW
                                              dt
                               M Ct = -      dR
                                              dt
                                          p(1 +   ) + t t - mc(q )
                                     =-
                                            ( p + t) - pD
                                                          - Dp
                                                              t
                                                       wtp-mc
                                                          p
                                     =   D      1+                     t
                                             (1+  ) + -1
                                                           -    D (   +p )




Derivations for ad valorem tax with heterogeneous consumers
(used in calibrations)
For reference, we add the formulas to calculate the effect of increasing an ad-valorem tax on con-
sumer surplus, and producer surplus in the presence of heterogenous consumers. We also derive the
                                                                                          1  (p(1+ )+t)
marginal excess burden and incidence formulas that we take to the data. Recall            p      

and D(p, t,  ) = D(p(1 +   ) + t t, 0, 0). Then

  dCS         dQ                                         dQi                                    dQi
      = -pQ -    (1 - E( ))p + (1 - E(t ))t + p  Cov i ,                        + t  Cov it ,
   d          d                                           dt                                     dt

                                                                  Cov i , Q
                                                                                                      
                                                                            i
 dP S             q          1           q                                p 
      = -pQ   1 -              [1 -  ] +    1-    (1 -  ) E(i ) +
                                                          
                                                                      Q
  d               J         1+           J     1+                     p

   If only there is no unit tax, then t = t = 0 and so:

                   dCS         dQ                          dQi
                       = -pQ -    (1 - E( ))p + p  Cov i ,
                    d          d                            dt

                                                                  Cov i , Q
                                                                                                      
                                                                            i
 dP S             q          1           q                                p 
      = -pQ   1 -              [1 -  ] +    1-    (1 -  ) E(i ) +
                                                          
                                                                      Q
  d               J         1+           J     1+                     p

   Furthermore, under assumption 1:

                    dCS         dQ                   Q
                        = -pQ -    (1 - E(i ))p + p    V ar (i )
                     d          d                    p




                                                   OA-14
       dP S                     q     1           q      
            = -pQ       1-              [1 -  ] +    1-    (1 -  ) [E(i )]
        d                       J    1+           J     1+
From where, we can derive a formula for incidence:

                                                dQ                 Q
                                 + (1 - E(i )) Q d
                                                   -      Q
                                                                   p
                                                                     V ar (i )
                 I=         q        1               q             
                       1-   J       1+
                                         [1 -  ] +   J
                                                          1-      1+
                                                                      (1 -  )       E(i )

And so:
                   dW                            dQ      Q
                      = (p(1 + E(i ) ) - mc(q ))    + p    V ar (i )
                    d                            d       p
Finally, for the empirical implementation we use the follwing variations:


                                            dlog (Q)                 log (Q)
                         + (1 - E(i )) 1+  dlog (1+ )
                                                      -       p
                                                                     log (p)
                                                                             V   ar (i )
                 I=         q        1               q             
                       1-   J       1+
                                         [1 -  ] +   J
                                                          1-      1+
                                                                       (1 -  ) E(i )

      dW 1 +                               dlog (Q)               log (Q)
              = (p(1 + E(i ) ) - mc(q ))              +  (1 +  )          V ar (i )
       d Q                               dlog (1 +  )             log (p)




                                               OA-15
                                Online Appendix Table OA.1: Examples of Universal Product Codes (UPC)
                                                                              Department
  UPC Description              Module Description      Group Description       Description      Brand Description Multi Size   Units
M&M PLN DK CH HDY-            CANDY-CHOCOLATE-                                                    M&M MARS
      M HDY                         SPECIAL                 CANDY           DRY GROCERY           M&M PLAIN        1    12.6   OZ
 M&M PLN CH/TY                CANDY-CHOCOLATE-                                                    M&M MARS
   SHREK 2 HL                       SPECIAL                 CANDY           DRY GROCERY           M&M PLAIN        1    1.75   OZ
 M&M PLN CH DSP               CANDY-CHOCOLATE-                                                    M&M MARS
   STAR WARS                        SPECIAL                 CANDY           DRY GROCERY           M&M PLAIN        1    1.06   OZ
                               COSMETICS-EYE                                  HEALTH &           REVLON STAR
R SSY E-C MSE AP CHFN             SHADOWS                COSMETICS          BEAUTY CARE             STYLE          1    0.17   OZ
                               COSMETICS-EYE                                  HEALTH &           REVLON STAR
  R SSY E-S PWD SQN               SHADOWS                COSMETICS          BEAUTY CARE             STYLE          1    0.05   OZ
                            DEODORANTS - COLOGNE                              HEALTH &
    AXE AR R TWIST                   TYPE                DEODORANT          BEAUTY CARE               AXE          1      4    OZ
   CTL BR EGGS A LG              EGGS-FRESH                  EGGS                DAIRY              CTL BR         1     12    CT
    CTL BR B-E JMB               EGGS-FRESH                  EGGS                DAIRY              CTL BR         1     12    CT
                                SOFT DRINKS -           CARBONATED                                COCA-COLA
 COKE CLS R CL NB 6P            CARBONATED               BEVERAGES          DRY GROCERY            CLASSIC R       6      8    OZ
                                SOFT DRINKS -           CARBONATED                                COCA-COLA
 COKE CLS R CL CN &             CARBONATED               BEVERAGES          DRY GROCERY            CLASSIC R       1     12    OZ
GPC 2 UL L M F UT 85 P                                   TOBACCO &            NON-FOOD
          -.30                   CIGARETTES             ACCESSORIES            GROCERY                GPC          1     20     CT
GPC 2 UL L M F UT 85 C                                   TOBACCO &            NON-FOOD
         -2.00                   CIGARETTES             ACCESSORIES            GROCERY                GPC          10    20     CT
Source: Nielsen's Retail Scanner Data.




                                                                OA-16
                                    Online Appendix Table OA.2: Sources of sales tax exemption information
State   URLs                                                                                                        Type of Document
AL      http://revenue.alabama.gov/salestax/rules/810-6-5-.02.pdf                                                   Laws and Regulations
AL      http://www.alabamaadministrativecode.state.al.us/docs/rev/810-6-3.pdf                                       Laws and Regulations
AL      http://revenue.alabama.gov/publications/business-taxes/sales/Sales_Tax--Sales_Tax_Brochure.pdf              Brochure
AZ      http://www.azleg.state.az.us/ArizonaRevisedStatutes.asp?Title=42                                            Laws and Regulations
AZ      http://www.azsos.gov/public_services/Title_15/15-05.htm                                                     Laws and Regulations
AZ      https://www.azdor.gov/Portals/0/TPTRates/08012016RateTable.pdf                                              Table
AZ      https://www.azdor.gov/Portals/0/Brochure/575.pdf                                                            Brochure
AR*     http://www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/arcode/Default.asp                                                      Laws and Regulations
AR*     http://www.dfa.arkansas.gov/offices/policyAndLegal/Documents/et2008_3.pdf                                   Laws and Regulations
AR*     http://www.dfa.arkansas.gov/offices/policyAndLegal/Documents/et2007_3.pdf                                   Laws and Regulations
AR*     http://www.dfa.arkansas.gov/offices/exciseTax/salesanduse/Documents/SalesTaxExemptionsFY2011.pdf            Brochure
CA      http://www.boe.ca.gov/lawguides/business/current/btlg/business-taxes-law-guide.html                         Laws and Regulations
CA      https://www.boe.ca.gov/pdf/pub31.pdf                                                                        Brochure
CA      https://www.boe.ca.gov/pdf/pub27.pdf                                                                        Brochure
CA      https://www.boe.ca.gov/pdf/pub61.pdf                                                                        Brochure
CO      https://www.sos.state.co.us/CCR/GenerateRulePdf.do?ruleVersionId=4753                                       Laws and Regulations
CO      http://codes.findlaw.com/co/title-39-taxation/co-rev-st-sect-39-26-707.html                                 Laws and Regulations
CO      https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/DR1002.pdf                                             Brochure
CO      https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/Sales04.pdf                                            Brochure
CT      http://www.cga.ct.gov/2011/pub/chap219.htm                                                                  Laws and Regulations
CT      https://www.cga.ct.gov/2011/rpt/2011-R-0238.htm                                                             Brochure
CT      http://www.ct.gov/drs/cwp/view.asp?A=1514&Q=563394                                                          Brochure
CT      http://www.ct.gov/drs/cwp/view.asp?a=1511&q=267404                                                          Brochure
DE      http://revenue.delaware.gov/services/current_bt/taxtips/grocery.pdf                                         Brochure
FL      http://www.leg.state.fl.us/statutes/index.cfm?App_mode=Display_Statute&URL=0200-                            Laws and Regulations
        0299/0212/0212ContentsIndex.html
FL      https://www.flrules.org/gateway/ChapterHome.asp?Chapter=12A-1                                               Laws and Regulations
FL      http://floridarevenue.com/Forms_library/current/dr46nt.pdf                                                  Brochure
GA*     http://www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/gacode/Default.asp                                                      Laws and Regulations
GA*     http://garules.elaws.us/rule/560-12-2                                                                       Laws and Regulations
GA*     https://dor.georgia.gov/sites/dor.georgia.gov/files/related_files/document/LATP/Bulletin/2016%20List%20of   Brochure
        %20Sales%20and%20Use%20Tax%20Exemptions.pdf
ID      http://adminrules.idaho.gov/rules/current/35/0102.pdf                                                       Laws and Regulations
ID      http://www.legislature.idaho.gov/idstat/Title63/T63CH36.htm                                                 Laws and Regulations
ID      https://tax.idaho.gov/pubs/EBR00012_07-01-2001.pdf                                                          Brochure
ID      https://tax.idaho.gov/pubs/EBR00016_03-23-2015.pdf                                                          Brochure
IL      ftp://www.ilga.gov/JCAR/AdminCode/086/08600130sections.html                                                 Laws and Regulations
IL      http://www.revenue.state.il.us/publications/Bulletins/2010/FY-2010-01.PDF                                   Brochure
IL      http://www.revenue.state.il.us/Publications/Pubs/Pub-117.pdf                                                Brochure
IN*     http://codes.findlaw.com/in/title-6-taxation/                                                               Laws and Regulations
IN*     http://www.in.gov/legislative/iac/20080827-IR-045080658NRA.xml.pdf                                          Brochure
IA*     https://www.legis.iowa.gov/law/iowaCode/chapters?title=X                                                    Laws and Regulations
IA*     http://law.justia.com/codes/iowa/2013/titlex/subtitle1/chapter423                                           Laws and Regulations
IA*     https://tax.iowa.gov/iowa-sales-tax-food                                                                    Brochure
KS*     http://kansasstatutes.lesterama.org/Chapter_79/                                                             Laws and Regulations
KS*     http://rvpolicy.kdor.ks.gov/Pilots/Ntrntpil/IPILv1x0.NSF/$$ViewTemplate%20for%20Regulations%20Only?O        Laws and Regulations
        penForm
KS*     http://www.ksrevenue.org/pdf/pub1510.pdf                                                                    Brochure
KY*     http://www.lrc.ky.gov/Statutes/chapter.aspx?id=37663                                                        Laws and Regulations
KY*     http://www.lrc.ky.gov/kar/TITLE103.HTM                                                                      Laws and Regulations
KY*     http://revenue.ky.gov/Documents/AppendixN_CandyProduct91114.pdf                                             Brochure
KY*     http://revenue.ky.gov/News/Publications/Pages/Sales-Tax-Facts.aspx                                          Brochure
LA      http://www.legis.state.la.us/lss/lss.asp?folder=121                                                         Laws and Regulations
LA      http://www.doa.louisiana.gov/osr/lac/61v01/61v01.doc                                                        Laws and Regulations
LA      http://www.rev.state.la.us/Miscellaneous/FoodExemptionFlyer.pdf                                             Brochure
LA      http://revenue.louisiana.gov/Publications/R-1002(01-17)%20FINAL.pdf                                         Brochure



                                                                 OA-17
ME    http://www.mainelegislature.org/legis/statutes/36/title36ch0sec0.html                                     Laws and Regulations
ME    http://www.maine.gov/revenue/salesuse/Bull1220160101v2.pdf                                                Brochure
ME    http://www.maine.gov/revenue/salesuse/Bull2720160101v2.pdf                                                Brochure
MD    http://www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/mdcode/                                                               Laws and Regulations
MD    http://www.dsd.state.md.us/COMAR/title_search/Title_List.aspx                                             Laws and Regulations
MD    http://taxes.marylandtaxes.com/Resource_Library/Tax_Publications/Tax_Tips/Business_Tax_Tips/bustip5.pdf   Brochure

MA    https://malegislature.gov/Laws/GeneralLaws/PartI/TitleIX/Chapter64H                                       Laws and Regulations
MA    http://www.mass.gov/dor/individuals/taxpayer-help-and-resources/tax-guides/salesuse-tax-guide.html        Brochure
MI*   http://w3.lara.state.mi.us/orrsearch/948_2010-012TY_AdminCode.pdf                                         Laws and Regulations
MI*   https://www.michigan.gov/documents/treasury/RAB_2009-                                                     Brochure
      8_Food_for_Human_Consumption_Oct_09_299470_7.pdf
MN*   https://www.revisor.mn.gov/statutes/?id=297A.67                                                           Laws and Regulations
MN*   http://www.revenue.state.mn.us/businesses/sut/factsheets/FS102A.pdf                                       Brochure
MN*   http://www.revenue.state.mn.us/businesses/sut/factsheets/FS102B.pdf                                       Brochure
MN*   http://www.revenue.state.mn.us/businesses/sut/factsheets/FS102C.pdf                                       Brochure
MN*   http://www.revenue.state.mn.us/businesses/sut/factsheets/FS102D.pdf                                       Brochure
MN*   http://www.revenue.state.mn.us/businesses/sut/factsheets/FS117A.pdf                                       Brochure
MN*   http://www.revenue.state.mn.us/businesses/sut/factsheets/FS117F.pdf                                       Brochure
MS    http://www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/mscode/                                                               Laws and Regulations
MS    http://www.sos.ms.gov/admincodesearch/default.aspx                                                        Laws and Regulations
MS    https://www.dor.ms.gov/Laws-Rules/Documents/Part%20IV%20Sales%20and%20Use%20Tax%2092216.pdf               Laws and Regulations

MS    http://www.dor.ms.gov/Business/Pages/Sales-Tax-Exemptions.aspx                                            Brochure
MO    http://www.moga.mo.gov/mostatutes/stathtml/14400000301.html                                               Laws and Regulations
MT    https://revenue.mt.gov/home/individuals/businesses_otherinformation#Sales%20Tax                           Brochure
NE*   http://www.revenue.nebraska.gov/legal/regs/slstaxregs.html                                                Laws and Regulations
NE*   http://www.nebraskalegislature.gov/laws/browse-chapters.php?chapter=77                                    Laws and Regulations
NE*   http://www.revenue.nebraska.gov/info/6-432.pdf                                                            Brochure
NE*   http://www.revenue.nebraska.gov/info/6-437.pdf                                                            Brochure
NV*   http://www.leg.state.nv.us/NRS/NRS-372.html                                                               Laws and Regulations
NV*   http://www.leg.state.nv.us/NAC/NAC-372.html                                                               Laws and Regulations
NV*   https://tax.nv.gov/FAQs/Sales_Tax_Information___FAQ_s/                                                    Brochure
NH    https://www.revenue.nh.gov/assistance/tax-overview.htm                                                    Brochure
NJ*   http://law.justia.com/codes/new-jersey/2009/title-54/54-32b                                               Laws and Regulations
NJ*   http://www.state.nj.us/treasury/taxation/pdf/pubs/sales/su4.pdf                                           Brochure
NJ*   http://www.state.nj.us/treasury/taxation/pdf/ssutfood.pdf                                                 Brochure
NM    http://www.nmcpr.state.nm.us/nmac/_title03/T03C002.htm                                                    Laws and Regulations
NM    http://public.nmcompcomm.us/nmpublic/gateway.dll/?f=templates&fn=default.htm                              Laws and Regulations
NM    http://realfile.tax.newmexico.gov/FYI-105%20-                                                             Brochure
      %20Gross%20Receipts%20&%20Compensating%20Taxes%20-%20An%20Overview.pdf
NM    http://www.zillionforms.com/2016/P668403604.PDF                                                           Brochure
NY    http://codes.findlaw.com/ny/tax-law/tax-sect-1105.html                                                    Laws and Regulations
NY    https://govt.westlaw.com/nycrr/Document/I50f2201ecd1711dda432a117e6e0f345?viewType=FullText&ori           Laws and Regulations
      ginationContext=documenttoc&transitionType=CategoryPageItem&contextData=(sc.Default)
NY    https://www.tax.ny.gov/pdf/publications/sales/pub840.pdf                                                  Brochure
NY    https://www.tax.ny.gov/pdf/publications/sales/pub750.pdf                                                  Brochure
NY    https://www.tax.ny.gov/pdf/memos/sales/m11_3s.pdf                                                         Brochure
NY    https://www.tax.ny.gov/pdf/memos/sales/m06_6s.pdf                                                         Brochure
NY    https://www.tax.ny.gov/pdf/tg_bulletins/sales/b11_525s.pdf                                                Brochure
NY    https://www.tax.ny.gov/pdf/tg_bulletins/sales/b14_103s.pdf                                                Brochure
NY    https://www.tax.ny.gov/pdf/tg_bulletins/sales/b11_160s.pdf                                                Brochure
NY    https://www.ny.gov/sites/ny.gov/files/atoms/files/GuideForTaxableandExemptPropertyandServices.pdf         Brochure
NC*   http://www.ncga.state.nc.us/gascripts/Statutes/StatutesTOC.pl?Chapter=0105                                Laws and Regulations
NC*   http://www.dornc.com/practitioner/sales/bulletins/toc.html                                                Laws and Regulations
NC*   http://www.dornc.com/taxes/sales/foodnotice6-06.pdf                                                       Brochure
ND*   http://law.justia.com/codes/north-dakota/2013/title-57/chapter-57-39.2                                    Laws and Regulations
ND*   https://www.nd.gov/tax/data/upfiles/media/gl-22062.pdf?20170414121353                                     Brochure



                                                               OA-18
OH*     http://codes.ohio.gov/orc/5739                                                                          Laws and Regulations
OH*     http://www.tax.ohio.gov/portals/0/sales_and_use/information_releases/st200401.pdf                       Brochure
OK*     http://law.justia.com/codes/oklahoma/2006/os68.html                                                     Laws and Regulations
OK*     https://www.ok.gov/tax/documents/rule6509.pdf                                                           Laws and Regulations
OK*     https://www.ou.edu/controller/fss/dwnload/SalesTax%20GeneralFAQs.pdf                                    Brochure
OR      http://landru.leg.state.or.us/ors/                                                                      Laws and Regulations
OR      http://arcweb.sos.state.or.us/pages/rules/oars_100/oar_150/150_tofc.html                                Laws and Regulations
PA      http://www.pacode.com/secure/data/061/061toc.html                                                       Laws and Regulations
PA      http://www.revenue.pa.gov/FormsandPublications/FormsforBusinesses/Documents/Sales-Use%20Tax/rev-        Brochure
        717.pdf
RI*     http://www.tax.ri.gov/regulations/FINAL%20REGS%202009/FoodandFoodIngredientsRegFinal%20v2%2002          Laws and Regulations
        122010.pdf
RI*     http://law.justia.com/codes/rhode-island/2010/title44/chapter44-18/                                     Laws and Regulations
RI*     http://www.tax.ri.gov/regulations/salestax/11-60.pdf                                                    Laws and Regulations
RI*     http://www.tax.state.ri.us/streamlined/candy_soft_diet.php                                              Brochure
SC      http://www.scstatehouse.gov/code/t12c036.php                                                            Laws and Regulations
SC      http://www.scstatehouse.gov/coderegs/c117.php                                                           Laws and Regulations
SC      https://dor.sc.gov/resources-site/lawandpolicy/Advisory%20Opinions/RR06-5.pdf                           Laws and Regulations
SC      https://dor.sc.gov/resources-                                                                           Brochure
        site/publications/Publications/Sales%20and%20Use%20Tax%20Manual%202015%20Edition-Web.pdf
SC      http://media.clemson.edu/procurement/2011SalesTaxSeminarManual_May.pdf                                  Brochure
SD*     http://legis.sd.gov/Statutes/Codified_Laws/DisplayStatute.aspx?Type=Statute&Statute=10-45               Laws and Regulations
SD*     http://dor.sd.gov/taxes/business_taxes/publications/pdfs/stguide2014.pdf                                Brochure
SD*     http://dor.sd.gov/Publications/2013_Session_Presentations/PDFs/SummaryofStateSalesTaxExemptions0113.    Brochure
        pdf
TN*     http://www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/tncode/                                                             Laws and Regulations
TN*     https://www.tnumc.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/TN-Sales-Tax-booklet-2013.pdf                          Brochure
TN*     https://revenue.support.tn.gov/hc/en-us/article_attachments/202401125/Notice__13-05.pdf                 Brochure
TX      http://www.statutes.legis.state.tx.us/                                                                  Laws and Regulations
TX      https://comptroller.texas.gov/taxes/publications/96-280.pdf                                             Brochure
TX      https://comptroller.texas.gov/taxes/publications/94-155.pdf                                             Brochure
TX      https://comptroller.texas.gov/taxes/audit/docs/convenience-manual.pdf                                   Brochure
UT*     http://le.utah.gov/UtahCode/chapter.jsp?code=59                                                         Laws and Regulations
UT*     http://www.tax.utah.gov/sales/food-rate                                                                 Brochure
UT*     http://www.tax.utah.gov/forms/pubs/pub-25.pdf                                                           Brochure
VT*     http://www.leg.state.vt.us/statutes/sections.cfm?Title=32&Chapter=233                                   Laws and Regulations
VT*     http://www.state.vt.us/tax/pdf.word.excel/legal/regs/SU.finals.11012010.pdf                             Laws and Regulations
VT*     http://tax.vermont.gov/sites/tax/files/documents/SalesTaxTaxable%26ExemptFS.pdf                         Brochure
VA      http://law.lis.virginia.gov/vacode/title58.1/chapter6/                                                  Laws and Regulations
VA      http://lis.virginia.gov/000/reg/TOC23010.HTM#C0210                                                      Laws and Regulations
VA      https://www.tax.virginia.gov/laws-rules-decisions/rulings-tax-commissioner/05-78                        Brochure
VA      https://www.tax.virginia.gov/sites/default/files/inline-files/TB%2013-5%20Nonprescription%20Drugs.pdf   Brochure
WA* http://apps.leg.wa.gov/rcw/default.aspx?cite=82.08                                                          Laws and Regulations
WA* http://apps.leg.wa.gov/WAC/default.aspx?cite=458-20                                                         Laws and Regulations
WA* http://dor.wa.gov/Docs/Pubs/SpecialNotices/2012/sn_12_SoftDrinks.pdf                                        Brochure
WA* http://dor.wa.gov/Docs/Pubs/SpecialNotices/2010/sn_10_WaterCandyGumTaxRepeal.pdf                            Brochure
WA* http://dor.wa.gov/content/aboutus/statisticsandreports/stats_ExemptionStudy.aspx                            Brochure
WV* http://www.legis.state.wv.us/wvcode/Code.cfm?chap=11&art=1                                                  Laws and Regulations
WV* http://tax.wv.gov/Documents/TSD/tsd300.pdf                                                                  Brochure
WV* http://tax.wv.gov/Documents/TSD/tsd419.pdf                                                                  Brochure
WV* http://tax.wv.gov/Documents/TSD/tsd420.pdf                                                                  Brochure
WI* https://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/statutes/statutes/77/III/51                                                Laws and Regulations
WI* https://www.revenue.wi.gov/DOR%20Publications/pb220.pdf                                                     Brochure
WY* http://www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/wystatutes/                                                             Laws and Regulations
WY* http://revenue.wyo.gov/home/rules-and-regulations-by-chapter                                                Laws and Regulations
WY* http://revenue.wyo.gov/FoodExemption.pdf?attredirects=0                                                     Brochure
* States indexed participate in the Streamlined Sales Tax Project (SSTP): http://www.streamlinedsalestax.org/




                                                               OA-19
                                         Online Appendix Table OA.3:
           OLS and Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Effects of Sales Taxes on Prices and Quantity
                                                                                          County Border Pair Sample
Sample:                                                County Border Pair Sample           [Instrumental Variables
                                                                                                  Estimates]
Dependent variable:                                        Price          Quantity           Price           Quantity
                                                            (1)             (2)               (3)              (4)

log(1 +  mcs )                                            0.986             -0.650           0.977               -0.594
                                                         (0.016)           (0.084)          (0.017)             (0.093)

First-stage coefficient for log(1 +  ms )                                                              1.011
                                                                                                      (0.002)
First stage F-statistic                                                                               413,454


Specification:
Store × Module fixed effects                                y                 y                y                  y
Module × Year-Quarter fixed effects                         y                 y                y                  y
Module × State × Year-Quarter fixed effects                 y                 y
Module × Border Pair × Year-Quarter fixed effects                                              y                  y

N (observations)                                       33,749,157       33,749,157        33,749,157       33,749,157
N (modules)                                                198              198               198              198
N (stores)                                                2,714            2,714             2,714            2,714
N (counties)                                               468              468               468              468
N (county-modules)                                       88,249           88,249            88,249           88,249

Notes: Columns (1) and (2) replicate the estimates of the OLS effects of sales taxes on quantity and prices reported
in Table 2, column (2) (Panel A and Panel B). In columns (3) and (4), we report 2SLS estimates from instrumenting
the county-level module-specific sales tax rates with the associated state-level sales tax rate. The independent
variable is quarterly sales tax rate of module m in county c in state s and the instrument is is quarterly sales tax rate
of module m in state s . One observation is a module in a store in a given quarter. Consumer prices p (1+ ) are tax
inclusive. The Retail Scanner data is restricted to modules above the 80th percentile of the national distribution of
sales. The sample is restricted to stores in border counties. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the number
of times a store appears in the data. The regression model includes module-by-store and module-by-year-quarter-
by-pair fixed effects, where pairs denote pairs of contiguous counties.




                                                         OA-20
                                 Online Appendix Table OA.4: Reduced-form OLS Estimates of the Effects of Chain Instrument on Prices and Quantity
Sample:                                                                             Full Sample                                                             County Border Pair Sample
Dependent variable:                                                  Price                                 Quantity                                 Price                           Quantity
                                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)           (9)        (10)         (11)          (12)

Leave-me-out chain average log( p )                    0.969                                   -1.165                                  0.964                                  -1.179
                                                      (0.002)                                 (0.026)                                 (0.003)                                (0.026)

Leave-county-out chain average log( p )                              0.951                                  -1.148                                  0.951                                  -1.155
                                                                    (0.003)                                (0.026)                                 (0.003)                                (0.026)

Index based on UPC-level leave-me-out                                             0.981                                   -1.062                                 0.975                                  -1.086
 chain average log(p)                                                            (0.002)                                 (0.024)                                (0.003)                                (0.023)

Specification:
Store × Module fixed effects                              y            y            y            y             y            y            y            y             y           y            y             y
Module × Year-Quarter fixed effects                       y            y            y            y             y            y            y            y             y           y            y             y
Module × State × Year-Quarter fixed effects               y            y            y            y             y            y
Module × Border Pair × Year-Quarter fixed effects                                                                                        y            y             y           y            y             y
N                                                      53,895,446   53,890,260   53,892,855   53,895,446    53,890,260   53,892,855   33,749,157   33,739,222   33,746,705   33,749,157   33,739,222   33,746,705



Notes: This table reports estimates of the reduced-form effect of price instruments on consumer prices and quantity sold. One observation is a module in a store in a given quarter.
Consumer prices are tax inclusive. The Retail Scanner data is restricted to modules above the 80th percentile of the national distribution of sales. All standard errors in this table are
clustered at the state-module level and are reported in parentheses. In columns (1) to (6), the sample includes our full sample of stores and the regression model includes module-by-store
and module-by-quarter-by-state fixed effects. In columns (7) to (12), the sample is restricted to stores in border counties. Observations are weighted by the inverse of the number of times a
store appears in the data. The regression model includes module-by-store and module-by-quarter-by-pair fixed effects, where pairs denote pairs of contiguous counties. In columns (1),
(4), (7) and (10) the independent variable is the chain average log price leaving store r out. In columns (2), (5), (8), and (11) the independent variable is the chain average log price
leaving all stores in county c out. In remaining columns, the dependent variable is a regression-adjusted price index where each UPCs price is a leave-me-out chain average price.




                                                                                               OA-21
                               Online Appendix Table OA.5: Robustness to Local Trends
Sample:                                                                                       Full Sample
                                                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)

            Panel A: Reduced-form OLS Estimates of the Effects of Sales Taxes on Consumer Prices and Quantity
d log( p (1+ ))/d log(1+ )                                                      0.961            0.926            0.928
                                                                               (0.045)          (0.036)          (0.036)

d log( Q )/d log(1+ )                                                           -0.668           -0.507           -0.336
                                                                               (0.185)          (0.165)          (0.164)

                                 Panel B: 2SLS Estimates of the Price Elasticity of Demand
d log( Q )/d log( p )                                                           -1.202           -1.127           -1.064
                                                                               (0.027)          (0.030)          (0.030)

                                 Panel C: "Plug-in" Estimate of the Tax Salience Parameter
                                                                                0.575            0.507            0.376

Specification:
Store × Module fixed effects                                                      y                y                y
Module × Year-Quarter fixed effects                                               y                y                y
Module × State × Year-Quarter fixed effects                                       y
Module × County × Linear time trend                                                                y
Module × Store × Linear time trend                                                                                  y
N                                                                            53,895,446       53,902,268       53,902,268

Notes: This table reports estimates of the effects of sales taxes, of the price elasticity of demand, and of the tax salience
parameter. In Panel A, the independent variable is quarterly sales tax rate of module m in county c in state s . One
observation is a module in a store in a given quarter. Consumer prices p (1+ ) are tax inclusive. The Retail Scanner data is
restricted to modules above the 80th percentile of the national distribution of sales. In Panel B, the reported coefficients
are 2SLS estimates of the effect of consumer prices on quantity sold, where prices are instrumented with leave-self-out
chain-level average prices. In Panel C, we report the estimate of the tax salience parameter. All standard errors in this
table are clustered at the state-module level and are reported in parentheses. The sample includes our full sample of stores.
In columns (1), the regression model includes module-by-store and module-by-quarter-by-state fixed effects. In column
(2), the regression model includes module-by-store and module-by-quarter fixed effects, as well as county-module
specific time trends. In column (3), the regression model includes module-by-store and module-by-quarter fixed effects,
as well as store-module specific time trends.




                                                           OA-22
   Online Appendix Table OA.6: Reduced-form OLS Estimates of the Effects of Sales Taxes on Quantity and Expenditure
Sample:                                                           Full Sample                    County Border Pair Sample
Dependent variable:                                   Quantity Pre-tax price Expenditure Quantity Pre-tax price Expenditure
                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

                              Panel A: Reduced-form OLS Estimates of the Effects of Sales Taxes
log(1 +  ) mrn                                          -0.668      -0.0388      -0.741        -0.650        -0.014       -0.667
                                                       (0.185)      (0.045)     (0.183)       (0.084)       (0.016)      (0.083)
Implied effect on quantity                                                -0.702                                   -0.653

                          Panel B: Reduced-form OLS Estimates of the Effects of the Price Instrument
z mrn                                                   -1.165       0.969       -0.351        -1.179        0.964        -0.359
                                                       (0.026)      (0.002)     (0.0249)      (0.026)       (0.002)      (0.024)
Implied effect on quantity                                                 -1.320                                  -1.323

                                   Panel C: "Plug-in" Estimate of the Tax Salience Parameter
                                                                          0.552                                    0.491


Specification:
Store × Module fixed effects                              y            y            y             y            y            y
Module × Year-Quarter fixed effects                       y            y            y             y            y            y
Module × State × Year-Quarter fixed effects               y            y            y
Module × Border Pair × Year-Quarter fixed effects                                                 y            y            y

N (observations)                                     53,895,446 53,895,446 53,895,446 33,749,157 33,749,157 33,749,157
N (modules)                                              198        198        198        198        198        198
N (stores)                                              8,652      8,652      8,652      2,714      2,714      2,714
N (counties)                                            1,460      1,460      1,460       468        468        468
N (county-modules)                                    277,398    277,398    277,398     88,249     88,249     88,249

Notes: This table replicates the key parameters reported in Table 2, but using an alternative measure of quantity. Here, we
report separately the effects of sales taxes (Panel A) and the effects of the price instrument (Panel B) on total expenditures on
module m in store r at time n and on pre-tax prices. We then report the difference between the effect on expenditure and on
prices as an alternative measure of the effect on quantity. Panel C reports the associated value of the tax salience parameter.
The Retail Scanner data is restricted to modules above the 80th percentile of the national distribution of sales. All standard
errors in this table are clustered at the state-module level and are reported in parentheses. In columns (1) to (3), the sample
includes our full sample of stores and the regression model includes module-by-store and module-by-quarter-by-state fixed
effects. In columns (4) to (6), the sample is restricted to stores in border counties. Observations are weighted by the inverse of
the number of times a store appears in the data. The regression model includes module-by-store and module-by-quarter-by-
pair fixed effects, where pairs denote pairs of contiguous counties.




                                                              OA-23
                           Online Appendix Table OA.7: Calibration of Incidence and Marginal Excess Burden Formulas
                                           [Table 3 Using County Border Pair Sample Estimates]
                                                                         Plug-in estimate of tax salience
Tax salience parameter (  ):
                                                                            parameter, E[  ] = 0.528                     Full salience,  = 1
Heterogeneity in  :                                                   (1/p )Var(  ) = 0 (1/p )Var(  ) = 0.25      No heterogeneity, (1/p )Var(  ) = 0
                                                                                                                                        Re-calibrate
Implied markup:                                                                            Same markup            Same markup          markup under
                                                                      Baseline markup        from (1)               from (1)               = 1
                                                                            (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)

                                                Panel A: Incidence and Marginal Excess Burden Formulas
Incidence ( I )
General formula (imperfect salience, imperfect competition):            48.429                 47.913                37.601               48.749
  (  (1+) + (1- ) D + (1+) D(1/p )Var( )) / ( (1- v/J)(1- ) + ( v/J) (1+) )
Incidence under perfect competition (for 0 <  < 1)                                                                                           

Marginal Excess Burden ( dW/ d )
General formula (imperfect salience, imperfect competition):              -0.019               -0.029                -0.029               -0.026
 dW/d  = ( ( p - mc)/p + ) D + (1+) D(1/p )Var( )
CLK / Taubinsky Rees-Jones formulas (perfect competition):                -0.012               -0.022                           -0.022
 dW/d  = D + (1+) D(1/p )Var( )

                                        Panel B: Inputs and Intermediate Estimates Needed to Calibrate Formulas
Inputs:
Average tax rate,                                                          0.034                0.034                 0.034                0.034
Price Elasticity, D  log(Q)/log( p )                                      -1.223               -1.223                -1.223               -1.223
Tax Pass-Through,   d log( p (1+))/d log(1+)                               0.986                0.986                 0.986                0.986
Tax Elasticity, D  d log( Q)/d log(1+)                                    -0.650               -0.650                -0.650               -0.650
Tax Salience Parameter, 
 Implied "Plug-In" Estimate of E[ ]                                        0.528                0.528
 Assuming full salience (E[ ] = 1)                                                                                     1.00                1.00
 (1/p )Var(  )                                                              0.00                0.25                   0.00                0.00
Intermediate estimates:
Implied estimate of v/( Jms)                                               0.016                0.016                                      0.008
Implied markup (p - mc )/p                                                 0.011                0.011                                      0.006
Implied estimate of v /J                                                   0.013                0.013                                      0.007
  ( v /J = 0 is perfect competition, v /J = 1 is perfect collusion)

Notes: This table reports calibrations of the tax incidence and marginal excess burden formulas. The results of these calibrations are shown in Panel
A. Panel B presents the value of the input parameters taken from Table 2 column (2), as well as estimates of intermediate parameters. In column
(1), the incidence and marginal excess burden formulas are implemented with no restrictions. In column (2) we allow for heterogeneity in salience
parameter. In column (3), we use estimates of the markup based on the tax salience parameter reported in column (1), but assume full salience
elsewhere in the formulas. In column (4), full salience is assumed throughout, including when calculating the markup.




                                                                       OA-24
                Online Appendix Table OA.8: Calibration of Incidence and Marginal Excess Burden Formulas
                     [Sensitivity of Table 3 to Alternative Values of Elasticity of Marginal Surplus]
Tax salience parameter (  ):                                              Plug-in estimate of tax salience parameter, E[  ] = 0.575
Heterogeneity in  :                                                                            (1/p )Var(  ) = 0
Implied markup:                                                                               Baseline markup
                                                                             (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)

                                      Panel A: Incidence and Marginal Excess Burden Formulas
Incidence ( I )
General formula (imperfect salience, imperfect competition):            17.051             19.489      18.129      16.473      15.932
  (  (1+) + (1- ) D + (1+) D(1/p )Var( )) / ( (1- v/J)(1- ) + ( v/J) (1+) )
Incidence under perfect competition (for 0 <  < 1)                                                                                

Marginal Excess Burden ( dW/ d )
General formula (imperfect salience, imperfect competition):                -0.033         -0.025      -0.029      -0.035       -0.037
 dW/d  = ( ( p - mc)/p + ) D + (1+) D(1/p )Var( )
CLK / Taubinsky Rees-Jones formulas (perfect competition):                  -0.014         -0.014      -0.014      -0.014       -0.014
 dW/d  = D + (1+) D(1/p )Var( )

                               Panel B: Inputs and Intermediate Estimates Needed to Calibrate Formulas
Inputs:
Average tax rate,                                                            0.036          0.036       0.036       0.036        0.036
Price Elasticity, D  log(Q)/log( p )                                        -1.202         -1.202      -1.202      -1.202       -1.202
Tax Pass-Through,   d log( p (1+))/d log(1+)                                 0.961          0.961       0.961       0.961        0.961
Tax Elasticity, D  d log( Q)/d log(1+)                                      -0.668         -0.668      -0.668      -0.668       -0.668
Tax Salience Parameter, 
 Implied "Plug-In" Estimate of E[ ]                                          0.575          0.575       0.575       0.575       0.575
 Assuming full salience (E[ ] = 1)
 (1/p )Var(  )                                                               0.00           0.00        0.00         0.00        0.00
Intermediate estimates:
Implied estimate of v/( Jms)                                                 0.041          0.052       0.046       0.037       0.034
ms (assume 1/D in col (1), sensitivity analysis in (2)-(5))                  0.832          0.400       0.600       1.000       1.200
Implied markup ( p - mc)/p , which equals v/( JD)                            0.028          0.017       0.023       0.031       0.034
Implied estimate of v /J                                                     0.034          0.021       0.028       0.037       0.041
  ( v /J = 0 is perfect competition, v /J = 1 is perfect collusion)

Notes: This table reports calibrations of the tax incidence and marginal excess burden formulas. The results of these calibrations are
shown in Panel A. Panel B presents the value of the input parameters taken from Table 2 column (1), as well as estimates of
intermediate parameters. In column (1), the calibration assumes a specific relationship between the demand elasticity and the
elasticity of marginal surplus ( ms), while in the remaining columns the calibration assumes alternative values for ms.




                                                                 OA-25
                                                                    Online Appendix Figure OA.1: Map of Cross-Sectional Variation in Sales Tax Rates




Notes: 'No data' indicates counties for which no grocery store sales were recorded in Nielsen's Retail Scanner data in 2008.




                                                                                                           OA-26
                                                    Online Appendix Figure OA.2: Map of Cross-Sectional Variation in Sales Tax Exemption Status of Food Products




Notes: 'No data' indicates counties for which no grocery store sales were recorded in Nielsen's Retail Scanner data in 2008.




                                                                                                           OA-27
