                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE ECONOMICS OF SOVEREIGN DEBT, BAILOUTS
                          AND THE EUROZONE CRISIS

                                   Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
                                        Philippe Martin
                                        Todd E. Messer

                                      Working Paper 27403
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27403


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




The first draft of this paper was written while P-O. Gourinchas was visiting Harvard University,
whose hospitality is gratefully acknowledged. We thank the Fondation Banque de France and the
Banque de France-Sciences Po partnership for its financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Philippe Martin, and Todd E. Messer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Economics of Sovereign Debt, Bailouts and the Eurozone Crisis
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Philippe Martin, and Todd E. Messer
NBER Working Paper No. 27403
June 2020
JEL No. F34,F45

                                           ABSTRACT

Despite a formal `no-bailout clause', we estimate significant net present value transfers from the
European Union to Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain, ranging from roughly 0.5%
(Ireland) to 43%(Greece) of 2011 output during the recent Eurozone crisis. We propose a model
to analyze and understand bailouts in a monetary union, and the large observed differences across
countries. We characterize bailout size and likelihood as a function of the economic fundamentals
(economic activity, debt-to-gdp ratio, default costs). Our model embeds a `Southern view' of the
crisis (transfers did not help) and a `Northern view' (transfers weaken fiscal discipline). While a
stronger no-bailout commitment reduces risk-shifting, it may not be optimal from the perspective
of the creditor country, even ex-ante, if it increases the risk of immediate insolvency for high debt
countries. Hence, the model provides a potential justification for the often decried policy of
`kicking the can down the road'.

Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas                         Todd E. Messer
Department of Economics                           University of California at Berkeley
University of California, Berkeley                530 Evans Hall #3880
530 Evans Hall #3880                              Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           messertodd@berkeley.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER
pog@econ.berkeley.edu

Philippe Martin
SciencesPo
28, rue des Saints-Peres
75007 Paris
and CEPR
philippe.martin@sciencespo.fr
1    Introduction.
         e markets are deluding themselves when they think at a certain point the other member
      states will put their hands on their wallets to save Greece.
      ECB Executive Board member, J´    urgen Stark (Reuters, 2010, January 10)

         e euro-region treaties don't foresee any help for insolvent countries, but in reality the other
      states would have to rescue those running into di culty.
      German nance minister Peer Steinbrueck ( e Financial Times, 2009, February 18)

      No, Greece will not default. Please. In the euro area, the default does not exist.
      Economics Commissioner Joaquin Almunia (Reuters, 2009, January 29)


       e above quotes illustrate the uncertainties and disagreements on the possibility of sovereign de-
faults in the European Monetary Union (Eurozone), as well as the distance between words and deeds.
   is paper explores theoretically and empirically the conditions under which a member of a Monetary
Union might choose to default on its sovereign contractual obligations, and the conditions under which
other members of the Monetary Union prefer to bail it out.
    As the Eurozone crisis of 2010-2015 highlighted, a potential default on government debt inside a
monetary union comprised of sovereign members involves some unique features that a ect the po-
tential costs and bene ts to debtor and creditor countries. First, a monetary union facilitates nancial
integration. With larger within-union cross-border holdings of nancial assets, including government
debt held by banks, the exposure of creditor countries inside the union to sovereign risk is high. In
addition, monetary and economic unions usually go hand in hand, fostering real integration. Should
a country experience a severe scal crisis, this has the potential to disproportionately disrupt its trad-
ing partners inside the union. Further, a sovereign default could be the rst step towards a potential
exit from the monetary union, potentially impairing the credibility of other members or of the mone-
tary union as a whole. For creditor countries inside the union, there is signi cant direct and indirect
exposure if a scally weak member defaults.
    Should these costs for the group of creditor countries exceed the resources the debtor country needs
to avoid a default, a unilateral transfer -in the form of a bailout- might be a preferred outcome for the
union, helping to achieve (ex-post) e ciency. It follows that a monetary union, through the direct
and collateral linkages it generates between members, creates conditions where creditor countries may
desire (ex-post) to bail-out weaker members. For the defaulting country, not surprisingly, the possibility
of future bailouts distorts (ex-ante) incentives to issue debt by so ening the debtor's budget constraint.
   is results in excessive debt issuance that can weaken the union.

                                                      1
        e founders of the European Monetary Union well understood this trade-o and sought explicitly
to limit the potential for excessive debt issuance. For instance, Article 125 of the Treaty on the Func-
tioning of the European Union (TFEU), o en referred to as the no-bailout clause, prevents any form of
liability of the Union or Member States for another Member's debt obligations.1 A distinctive additional
feature of a monetary union is the way in which debt monetization a ects member countries. While
the bene ts and costs of in ation are borne by all members, their distribution is not uniform. Sur-
prise in ation reduces the ex-post real value of debt for all members. is bene ts disproportionately
highly indebted countries, while the costs of in ation are more uniformly distributed. Article 123 of the
same treaty sought to address this by expressly prohibiting the European Central Bank from directly
purchasing member countries' public debt.2
    Yet the same European Treaty did not close the door entirely on the possibility of (ex-post) nancial
assistance. For instance, Article 122 of the TFEU allows the Union or other Member States to provide
assistance to other members, under exceptional circumstances.3 Indeed, at various points during the
Eurozone sovereign debt crisis, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Cyprus lost market access and
had to ask for the support of other eurozone members, in order to avoid a default or a collapse of
their domestic banking sector. is nancial support was mainly provided through the creation of the
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and its successor, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM),
who lent large amounts to these countries. More recently, discussions about unilateral transfers in the
Eurozone have been revived in the context of the COVID-19 crisis (B´    enassy- e ´ r´
                                                                                     e et al., 2020).
      is raises two critical questions, one empirical and one theoretical.      e empirical question is
whether fragile Eurozone countries received unilateral support during the crisis, and if so how much
as a share of the recipient country's economy?       e theoretical question is who bene ts from these
transfers, and under which conditions it might be (ex-ante) preferable for the creditor members of the
union to bail-out a debtor member? is paper answers both questions. First, we document large and
sizable implicit transfers in the context of the Eurozone debt crisis of 2010-2015. Second, we present
a model that captures the trade-o between ex-post bailout and ex-ante borrowing incentives.           e
   1
      Article 125 stipulates that ` e Union shall not be liable for or assume the commitments of central governments, re-
gional, local or other public authorities, other bodies governed by public law, or public undertakings of any Member State,
without prejudice to mutual nancial guarantees for the joint execution of a speci c project. A Member State shall not
be liable for or assume the commitments of central governments, regional, local or other public authorities, other bodies
governed by public law, or public undertakings of another Member State, without prejudice to mutual nancial guarantees
for the joint execution of a speci c project' EU (2012b).
    2
      Article 123 stipulates `Overdra facilities or any other type of credit facility with the European Central Bank or with
the central banks of the Member States (hereina er referred to as `national central banks') in favour of Union institutions,
bodies, o ces or agencies, central governments, regional, local or other public authorities, other bodies governed by public
law, or public undertakings of Member States shall be prohibited, as shall the purchase directly from them by the European
Central Bank or national central banks of debt instruments.' EU (2012b)
    3
      Article 122 stipulates "..Where a Member State is in di culties or is seriously threatened with severe di culties caused
by natural disasters or exceptional occurrences beyond its control, the Council, on a proposal from the Commission, may
grant, under certain conditions, Union nancial assistance to the Member State concerned.' EU (2012b)

                                                              2
model allows us to characterize the likelihood and size of bailouts in equilibrium, as a function of
country characteristics. It also explores under which conditions it is bene cial (ex-ante) for the creditor
country to allow for the possibility of (ex-post) bailouts.
    How much, if any, of a given nancial assistance program constitutes a transfer to the recipient
country? e answer depends on the risk pro le of the program and the interest rate charged by the
lending institution. If the ESM or EFSF are providing risk-free funding at the market risk-free rate,
there is no implicit subsidy. If instead the ESM charges a rate that is below the risk-adjusted market
rate, i.e. the rate that re ects the risk-pro le of the program, then there is an expected transfer compo-
nent. We provide estimates of the implicit transfers arising from o cial European Union nancing to
  ve eurozone crisis countries: Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain. e key assumption nec-
essary to construct our estimates is the choice of a relevant risk-adjusted market rate. It should not be
the market rate since o en o cial lending will have a much lower risk pro le. is paper uses instead
the internal rate of return on the International Monetary Fund (IMF) lending to these countries.4 is
assumption is justi ed by the evidence that IMF programs almost always get repaid and do not incor-
porate a substantial transfer component, except for concessional lending to poor and highly indebted
countries (Joshi and Ze elmeyer, 2005). Importantly, this assumption yields a lower bound on the size
of the transfers from the European Union to the recipient countries for three reasons. First IMF pro-
grams are relatively short term (between three and nine years) compared to ESM and EFSF programs
with duration ranging from 10 years to 30 years. Adjusting the IMF internal rate for a term-premia
would increase estimates of the transfers. Second, IMF programs are super-senior, even to the Euro-
pean Union institutions. erefore the proper risk-adjusted rate for European Union programs is likely
to be higher than the IMF. Lastly, we ignore any potential transfer component arising from European
Central Bank policies (namely the Security Market Program, or the Asset Purchase Program).
    Our estimates indicate substantial variation in the implicit transfers received by the scally weak
Eurozone countries, from roughly 0.4 percent of output for Ireland or Spain, to roughly 3 percent of
output for Cyprus and Portugal and a very substantial 43.7 percent of output for Greece. By contrast,
non-eurozone program countries such as Hungary, Latvia or Romania did not receive any measurable
direct transfer from the European Union. It is clear, based on these estimates, that unilateral transfers
did happen, or said di erently, that the no-bail out clause did not apply.
    Next, we present a two-period model that captures the trade-o between ex-post bailout and ex-ante
borrowing incentives inside a monetary union. e model features two countries that are members of
a monetary union, one scally strong and one scally fragile, and a third country that represents the
rest of the world, outside the union. Each region issues sovereign debt and private portfolio holdings
are determined endogenously. A sovereign default in icts direct costs on bondholders, but also indirect
   4
       Spain did not have an IMF program, so we use an average of the IMF's internal rate of return for the other four countries.


                                                                 3
costs on both the defaulting country and its partner within the monetary union. e structure of these
collateral costs, together with the realization of output and the composition of portfolios, determines
the conditions under which the scally strong country may prefer to bailout its scally weak partner.
We show that while the bailout allows the union to achieve (ex-post) e ciency, it does so by transfer-
ring all the surplus to the scally strong country, leaving the debtor country no be er o with a bailout
(and no default) than with a default (and no bailout). We call this the `Southern view' of the crisis: nan-
cial assistance may come, but it does not really help the a icted country. at nancial assistance to a
country that is close to default does not improve its fate may seem surprising. However, in absence of
political integration, there is no reason creditor countries would o er more than the minimal transfer
required that leaves the debtor country indi erent between default and no default. Seen through the
lens of our model, even if Greece receives a transfer equal to 43 percent of its output, ex-post this does
not make Greece be er o .

    What the possibility of a bailout does, however, is distort the ex-ante incentives of the scally weak
country and generate excessive borrowing. We establish this result with both a risk neutral lender and
borrower, so the incentive to borrow arises exclusively from the expected ex-post transfer. A higher
likelihood of transfer lowers the cost of borrowing for the scally weak country below the risk free
rate, at the expense of the scally strong country.       e debtor country then trades-o the increased
riskiness of debt against the likelihood of a bailout. We call this the `Northern view' of the crisis: the
ability to obtain a bailout weakens scal discipline. In the context of the Eurozone crisis, this position
has been articulated many times by the German Treasury and other who have pointed to scal laxity
in some of the crisis countries.
     Our analysis very naturally reconciles the `Northern' and `Southern' views of the crisis as the two
sides of the same coin: risk shi ing by the debtor country occurs in the rst period because of the
transfer, even if ex-post the creditor country captures all the e ciency gains from avoiding a default.
    is suggests a simple x: if the creditor country could credibly commit to a no bail-out clause, this
would eliminate ex-ante risk shi ing and over-borrowing. Yet we show that such ex-ante commitment
may not be optimal, even from the perspective of the creditor country. Instead, we nd that, under
certain conditions, the creditor country may prefer an imperfect commitment to the no-bailout clause.
    is is more likely to be the case if the debtor country has an elevated level of debt that needs to be rolled
over. Under a strong no-bailout clause, the debtor country may become immediately insolvent. Instead,
if a future bailout is possible, the debtor country might be able to roll-over its debt in the initial period.
Of course, this can lead to some risk shi ing and excessive borrowing, but the scope for excessive
borrowing is less signi cant the larger is the initial debt to roll-over. Hence the creditor country faces a
meaningful trade-o between immediate insolvency and the possibility of a future default. Interpreted
in this fashion, our model provides conditions under which it is optimal for creditor countries to `gamble

                                                       4
for resurrection' or `kick the can down the road' in o cial EU parlance, by remaining evasive about the
strength of the no-bailout clause. is part of the model captures well what happened between 2000
and 2008 when spreads on sovereign debts were severely compressed.
    We consider two important extensions. In the rst extension, we allow for two separate decisions by
  scally weak countries: whether to default on sovereign debt and whether to exit the monetary union.
   is extension is motivated by the fact that Greece received the largest transfer from EU institutions in
2012, i.e. the year it defaulted on its debt. is would not happen in our baseline model where creditors
would only o er a bailout if it were su cient to avoid a default. Yet, it can happen in our extended
model: our model suggest that the 2012 bailout was not intended to prevent a default on public debt
-seen as inevitable, but instead to was necessary to ensure that Greece would remain in the Eurozone.
As in our baseline model, however, the ex-post welfare gains from that transfer accrue entirely to the
creditor countries inside the Eurozone.
    In our second extension, we also consider the possibility of debt monetization -through higher
in ation- by the common central bank of the monetary union. Debt monetization di ers from trans-
fers in the sense that the distortion cost is borne by all Member States. We rst show that if debt
monetization generates a surplus for the monetary union, it is captured by creditor countries. As in the
case of bailouts, the common central bank may prefer, ex-post, to monetize the debt rather than let a
default occur. Yet because in our model in ation is more distortionary than a direct bailout, we derive a
pecking order in terms of policies : direct scal transfers should come rst before debt monetization. A
contrario, the model suggests that the central bank of a common currency can become `overburdened'
and pushed to monetize the debt if excessively tight restrictions on direct scal bailouts are adopted.
    Our paper relates to several literatures. e theoretical literature on sovereign debt crisis has fo-
cused on the following question: why do countries repay their debt? Two di erent approaches have
emerged (see the recent survey by Bulow and Rogo (2015)). On the one hand, Eaton and Gersovitz
(1981) focus on the reputation cost of default for countries that value access to international capital mar-
kets to smooth consumption. On the other hand, Cohen and Sachs (1986), Bulow and Rogo (1989b),
Bulow and Rogo (1989a) and Fernandez and Rosenthal (1990) focus on the direct costs of default in
terms of disruption of trade for example. Our model clearly belongs to this second family of models as
we emphasize output loss for the country that defaults which comes from trade and nancial disrup-
tions but also which may come from the risk of exit of the eurozone. Empirically, Rose (2005) shows
that debt renegotiation entail a decline in bilateral trade of around 8 percent a year which persists for
around 15 years.
   Collateral damage of a sovereign default plays an important role in our analysis of the euro crisis
and the existence of e cient ex post transfers. We are not the rst to make this point. A related argu-
ment can be found in Bulow and Rogo (1989a) who show that because protracted debt renegotiation

                                                     5
can harm third parties, the debtor country and its lenders can extract side-payments. Mengus (2014)
shows that if the creditor's government has limited information on individual domestic portfolios, di-
rect transfers to residents cannot be perfectly targeted so that it may be be er o honoring the debtor's
liabilities. Tirole (2015) investigates ex ante and ex post forms of solidarity. As in our paper, the im-
pacted countries may stand by the troubled country because they want to avoid the collateral damage
in icted by the la er. A related paper is Farhi and Tirole (2018) which adds a second layer of bailout in
the form of domestic bailouts of the banking system by the sovereign to analyze the `deadly embrace'
or two-way link between sovereign and nancial balance sheets. e main di erences with our paper
are that the rst paper focuses on the determination of the optimal debt contract, that both rule out
strategic default as well as legacy debt and possible debt monetization. Dovis and Kirpalani (2020) also
analyze how expected bailouts change the incentives of governments to borrow but concentrate on
the conditions under which scal rules can correct these incentives in a reputation model. Niepmann
and Schmidt-Eisenlohr (2013) analyze how bank bailouts are a ected by cross-border contagion costs.
Broner et al. (2014) analyze the eurozone sovereign crisis through a model which features home bias
in sovereign debt holdings and creditor discrimination. Our model shares with Broner et al. (2014) the
  rst feature but not the second. In their model, creditor discrimination provides incentives for domes-
tic purchases of debt which itself generate ine cient crowding-out of productive private investment.
Uhlig (2014) analyzes the interplay between banks holdings of domestic sovereign debt, bank regula-
tion, sovereign default risk and central bank guarantees in a monetary union. Contrary to this paper,
we do not model banks explicitly but the home bias in sovereign bonds plays an important role in the
incentive to default. A related paper is also Dellas and Niepelt (2016) who show that higher exposure
to o cial lenders improves incentives to repay due to more severe sanctions but that it is also costly
because it lowers the value of the sovereign's default option. Our model does not distinguish private
and o cial lenders. Our model also relates to Corse i, Erce and Uy (2018) who introduce o cial lending
institutions in a model of sovereign debt and default motivated by the euro crisis but focus on di erent
questions as they analyze how o cial lending and its conditions (maturity and rates) may restore debt
sustainability and a ect a government's decision to default.
    Since the seminal paper of Calvo (1988), a large part of the literature on sovereign default has
focused on an analysis of crisis as driven by self-ful lling expectations (see for example Cole and Kehoe
(2000)). is view has been very in uential to analyze the euro crisis: this is the case for example of
de Grauwe (2012), Aguiar et al. (2015) and Corse i and Dedola (2016)) for whom the crisis can be
interpreted as a rollover crisis where some governments (Spain for example) experienced a liquidity
crisis. In this framework, the crisis abates once the ECB agrees to backstop the sovereign debt of
eurozone members. For example, Corse i and Dedola (2016) ) analyze a model of sovereign default
driven by either self-ful lling expectations, or weak fundamentals, and analyze the mechanisms by
which either conventional or unconventional monetary policy can rule out the former. We depart from

                                                   6
this literature and do not focus on situations with potential multiple equilibria and on liquidity issues.
   is is not because we believe that such mechanisms have been absent but in a framework where the
crisis is solely driven by self-ful lling expectations, the bad equilibrium can be eliminated by a credible
 nancial backstop and transfers should remain "o the equilibrium path". However, we will show in
the next section that transfers (from the EFSF/ESM) to the periphery countries have been substantial
and not only to Greece. An important di erence between Aguiar et al. (2015) and our work is that they
exclude the possibility of transfers and concentrate on the lack of commitment on monetary policy
that makes the central bank vulnerable to the temptation to in ate away the real value of its members'
nominal debt. We view the lack of commitment on transfers as an distinctive feature of a monetary
union and analyze the interaction between the monetary policy and transfers in a situation of possible
sovereign default.
       e remaining of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review how bailouts unfolded
during the eurozone debt crisis in the di erent countries and estimate transfers implicit in lending from
European countries to Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Cyprus and Spain. e possibility of such transfers is
a key element of our theoretical model which we present in Section 3. Section 4 analyzes the incentives
for defaults and bailouts and Section 5 studies how these incentives shape optimal debt issuance. Section
Section 6 then extends the model into two directions: rst, the possibility that a country could default
but still remain in the eurozone and second the possibility that the ECB monetises the debt. Section
Section 7 concludes.


2       Implicit Transfers During the Euro area crisis
   is section brie y describes the nancial assistance programs for the major crisis countries (Cyprus,
Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain). We also review the terms of EU nancial assistance programs
to three non-Eurozone members of the European Union (Hungary, Latvia and Romania). We refer the
reader to the Online Appendix and to Corse i, Erce and Uy (2017) for a more detailed analysis and
description of the development of a euro area crisis resolution framework.


2.1      Historical Overview
Lenders. Financial assistance to distressed countries in the Eurozone was provided by the so-called
"Troika", a tripartite group consisting of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the European Commis-
sion (EC), and the European Central Bank (ECB). is paper, for reasons that will become clear shortly,
focuses on the rst two legs of the Troika: the IMF and the EC.5 e la er provided nancial support
using di erent lending institutions, including the European Financial Stability Mechanism (EFSM), the
    5
        e role of the ECB has been discussed at length in, for example, Shambaugh (2012) or Giannone et al. (2012).


                                                             7
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), the Greek Loan
Facility (GLF), and the Balance of Payments (BoP) facility.
    Since the crisis countries are all high-income, IMF loans came through non-concessional Stand-by
Arrangements or Extended Fund Facilities, subject to structural reforms and macroeconomic condition-
ality. Loans were medium-term, with maximum maturities of up to 10 years.6 Under normal access,
the maximum amount that countries can borrow depends on their IMF quota.7 Many countries were
given "exceptional access," allowing them to override the borrowing limit. e lending rate on all non-
concessional facilities is tied to the `Basic Rate of Charge,' which is the SDR rate (revised weekly) plus
a margin depending on the size of the loan relative to a country's quota.8
    At the beginning of the crisis, the EC had few tools with which to manage debt crises within the
Eurozone.      e March 2010 program for Greece, through the newly created GLF, marked the begin-
ning of large-scale EC lending. In June 2010, the EC created the EFSF, which would provide support to
Greece, Ireland, and Portugal. In 2011, the EC further created the European Financial Stability Mecha-
nism (EFSM) which provided assistance to Ireland and Portugal. Finally, the in September 2012, the EC
created the ESM, a permanent facility to replace the EFSF and to continue providing support to Greece,
Spain, and Cyprus. With the exception of the GLF which uses bilateral loans from Eurozone members,
all EC programmes typically use an on-lending scheme in which the lender borrows rst from nancial
markets. As with the IMF, lending from the EC comes with structural and macroeconomic condition-
ality. Lending rates for these facilities typically followed the same structure as the IMF, with a variable
interest rate given by the cost of funding plus some margin.For non-Eurozone countries, the EC used
its Balance of Payments assistance facility under Article 143 of the TFEU. is facility also funds itself
through an on-lending scheme and was used by Hungary, Latvia, and Romania.

Greek Financial Assistance Programmes. Greece was by far the largest recipient of nancial as-
sistance during the European sovereign debt crisis. We describe the Greek nancial assistance pro-
grammes in some detail and relegate the details of the other Eurozone countries programmes to the
online-appendix. e country entered the rst of three successive programmes following sharp rises
in government yields and revelations that the Greek government had materially understated its public
debt and de cit gures in late 2009.9 Programme 1 resulted in assistance from the EC via the Greek
   6
     Early programs were mostly medium-term maturity Stand-By Arrangements, with repayment typically due within 3-5
years. Later programs were designed under the Extended Fund Facility (EFF), with slightly longer maturity of 4-10 years.
   7
     Both SBA and EFF loans stipulate that, under normal access, the maximum amount a country can borrow is 145% of a
their quota annually or 435% over the lifetime of a program.
   8
       e margin is 100bp for loans less than 187.5% of quota, 200bp for credit above 187.5% of quota, and 300bp for credit
above 187.5% of quota for more than 51 months. ere is also a service charge of 50bp and commitment fees of up to 60bp.
(IMF, 2016b, 2017)
   9
       ere is by now a substantial literature discussing the unfolding of the Greek crisis. See Ze elmeyer, Trebesch and
Gulati (2013), Blustein (2015), Schumacher and Mauro (2015), Gourinchas, Philippon and Vayanos (2017), and Chodorow-
Reich, Karabarbounis and Kekre (2019) among others.


                                                            8
Lending Facility (GLF) and the IMF in the period 2010-2011. Programme 2 resulted in assistance from
the EFSF and the IMF in 2012-2015. Programme 3 resulted in assistance from the ESM in 2015-2018.
       e size of Programme 1 was approximately e110 bn with e80 bn coming from the GLF and e30
bn from an IMF's SBA program. Actual disbursements by the IMF totaled e20.1 bn in six tranches
between May 2010 and December 2011. Actual disbursements from the EC totaled e52.9 bn also over
six tranches between May 2010 and December 2011. e disbursements were apportioned to each Eu-
ropean country, with Germany (e15.17 bn), France (e11.39 bn), and Italy (e10.00 bn) contributing the
bulk of the funding (EC, 2014).10      e maximum maturity was initially set to 5 years with a 3-year
grace period (EC, 2010). e bilateral loans were pooled by the European Commission then disbursed
to Greece with a variable lending rate originally based on the 3-month Euribor, representative of bor-
rowing costs, plus a margin of 300 basis points for the rst three years and 400 basis points therea er.
   ree amendments to this loan agreement altered the grace period, the maturity structure, and the
interest rates resulting in an extension of the weighted average maturity to 30 years and a lowering of
the interest rate margin to only 50bp.11
    Towards the end of Programme 1, it became apparent that the nancial assistance and structural
reforms were not su cient to restore growth and nancial market access. e IMF and the EC agreed
to a second programme, with the la er operating through the EFSF, coinciding with a restructuring of
Greek debt.12 is programme included the un-disbursed amount from Programme 1, plus an additional
e130 bn, for a total of almost e180 bn (EC, 2012b). Actual disbursements by the IMF for Programme 2
totalled around e11.6 bn out of a total planned contribution of e28 bn (IMF, 2014). ese loans were
now given through the EFF, beginning with the rst tranche in March 2012 and the last in June 2014.
   e EFSF commi ed a total of e144.7 bn of which approximately e141.8 bn was disbursed (EC, 2012b).13
Lending rates were calculated as the EFSF cost of funding plus two fees: a guarantee commitment fee
and a service fee.14 (EC, 2012c) In January 2017, the maturity of the loans was lengthened to "update"
the weighted average maturity back to the maximum permi ed 32.5 years.15
    Programme 2 was interrupted at the end of 2014 by Greek elections. Following the election of Syriza
and six months of failed negotiations, Programme 2 was allowed to expire in June 2015 during the h
review.     at August, Greece and the EC, through the ESM, agreed to a third programme, this time
  10
      Originally, Ireland and Portugal were also slated to contribute to Programme 1. However, their own scal struggles
caused them to eventually drop out.
   11
        e three amendments occurred in June 2011, February 2012, and December 2012 (EFSF, 2014, 2015; ESM, 2017).
   12
      See Ze elmeyer, Trebesch and Gulati (2013) for a summary of the restructuring.
   13
        ere is a net outstanding amount of e130.9 bn as of October 2018, due to the return of e10.9 bn. e e10.9 bn returned
consisted of bonds that were to be used to recapitalize Greek banks through the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund.
   14
      Originally, interest payments on the debt buyback scheme were to be subject to a margin of 200bps per annum beginning
in January 2017 (the "Step-Up" Scheme). is was waived temporarily in January 2017, and has since been waived annually.
   is rate can be reduced to zero by an ESM board decision each half year until 2022. (ESM, 2019a)
   15
        e agreement also reduced interest rate risk via bond exchanges, swap arrangements, and matched funding. Note that
we do not take this second factor into account in our calculation of transfers.



                                                            9
without the IMF, which was concluded in August 2018.16 Programme 3 consisted of new loans by the
ESM only, who commi ed e86 bn to Greece and disbursed e61.9 bn in total.

Other Eurozone Financial Assistance Programmes.                 ree of the other four Eurozone crisis coun-
tries, Cyprus, Ireland, and Portugal, had similar, although less extreme pa erns of nancial assistance
by the IMF and the European Union. Ireland and Portugal both received assistance in late 2010 and
early 2011, respectively, before both receiving debt relief measures in 2013. Cyprus received assistance
in 2013 with no debt relief measures institutes since. Finally, Spain received assistance in 2012 from the
ESM only.
    Ireland request for nancial assistance in November 2010 was approved in December 2010. Total
commitments were e85 bn, with e67.5 bn commi ed externally.17 Such external funding comprised
e17.7 bn from the EFSF, e22.5 bn from the EFSM, e22.5 bn from the IMF, and e4.8 bn from Bilateral
Loans (United Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark).18 All commi ed funds were eventually disbursed.
IMF support came through the EFF between January 2011 and December 2013.(IMF, 2013) EFSF sup-
port was given over the same time period, with interest payments initially given by the EFSF cost
of funding.(EFSF, 2012a) e maximum average maturity was initially set to               een years, but later
extended to 22 years.(EFSF, 2013b) EFSM support was given between January 2011 and March 2014.
While interest payments were originally set to the EFSM cost of funding plus a margin of 292.5bps,
in October 2011 all EFSM margins were cancelled (EU, 2011e). e weighted average maturity of both
EFSF and EFSM loans, initially set to 7.5 years, were eventually extended to 19.5 years (EU, 2013).
    Portugal received nancial assistance from the EC via the EFSF and the EFSM, as well as the IMF
between May 2011 and June 2014. Portugal allowed the programme to lapse without taking the nal
tranche of funding available. e three groups each commi ed approximately e26 bn for a total of e78
bn (EC, 2016). e EFSF disbursed the full e26 bn with lending rates equal to the EFSF Cost of Funding.
   e EFSM disbursed e24.3 bn of its commitment. e original agreement in May 2011 stipulated the
loans would have an average maturity of 7.5 years and a margin of 215bp on top of the EU's cost of
funding. In 2011, the average maturities of Portugal's EFSM loan were extended to 12.5 years and
margins were eliminated(EU, 2011b). In 2013, the average maturities were again extended to 19.5 years
(EU, 2011a). e IMF lent through the EFF nearly all of its e26 bn but the nal disbursement did not
occur.
    Cyprus o cially asked for assistance in 2012 and was approved for a joint IMF/ESM programme in
April/May 2013. Cyprus o cially exited its programme in March 2016. e program's total approved
  16
     Greece received one bridge loan from the European Financial Stability Mechanism (EFSM) when it missed a payment
on its loans to the IMF in July 2015. is was a three-month loan for e7.16 bn given to allow Greece time to transition to
Programme 3 and receive assistance from the ESM.
  17
     Ireland had to commit e17.5 bn itself. is money came from, among other sources, their pension program.
  18
     Sweden provided e600 million, the United Kingdom provided e3,830 million (£3.23 million), and Denmark provided
e400 million.


                                                          10
 nancing was e10 bn, with the ESM commi ing e9 bn and the IMF approximately e1 bn. e ESM
disbursed only e6.3 bn between May 2013 and October 2015, with expected repayment between 2025
and 2031. e IMF disbursed a li le less than its commitment through the EFF. Expected repayment is
between 2020 and 2026, although Cyprus made one early repayment in July 2017 to take advantage of
declining market-based nancing.(IMF, 2018b)
    Spain received assistance from the ESM only, with no assistance from the IMF.19 A total of e100
bn was commi ed in July 2012. Only e41.3 bn were disbursed in December 2012 and February 2013.
   e assistance was used to recapitalize the banking sector. Expected repayment should take place
between 2022 and 2027, although Spain has made voluntary early repayments on these loans. Table 1
summarizes the nancial assistance measures to all Eurozone countries.

Other European Bailout Programmes. Financial assistance was also o ered to three European
Union countries outside of the monetary union: Hungary, Latvia, and Romania. Assistance was pri-
marily made under the EC's medium-term Balance of Payment (BoP) assistance programme and by the
IMF through SBAs. Assistance was granted to Hungary in November 2008 and lasted through the end
of 2009. e total amount available was e6.5 bn in assistance from the EC and approximately e12.5
bn from the IMF.20 However, only e5.5 bn was disbursed by the EC.21 e realized EC loans comprised
three installments given over the course of December 2008 to July 2009, each with a maturity between
three and six years. For the IMF, approximately e8.7 bn (SDR7.6 bn) was disbursed between November
2008 and September 2009 and was repaid between February 2012 and August 2013. Latvia received
assistance in January 2009. A total of e7.5 bn was made available, with e3.1bn from the EC and ap-
proximately e1.7 bn from the IMF.22 For the EC, realized nancial assistance came in four installments
of e2.9 bn between February 2009 and October 2010. e IMF disbursed approximately SDR1 bn be-
tween 2008 and 2010 and was repaid in 2013. Finally, assistance to Romania was granted in May 2009.
A total of e20 bn was made available, comprised of e5 bn from the EC and approximately e12.95 bn
from the IMF.23




  19
      Technically, Spain agreed to a programme with the EFSF. e ESM was set up before any disbursements were given,
and so the assistance was transferred.
   20
        e World Bank made approximately e1bn available as well.
   21
      We focus on actual disbursements, so the second round of assistance in July 2012, which did not result in any assistance,
is excluded from our analysis.
   22
      Additionally, e1.9 bn were made available by Nordic countries (Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Estonia, and Norway), the
World Bank, the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development, the Czech Republic, and Poland.
   23
      Additionally, there was e1 bn from the World Bank, and e0.5 bn each from the European Investment Bank (EIB) and
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)


                                                              11
     Programme           Facility         Initial Lending Rate                                             Initial Maturity                      Current Lending Rate                                             Current Maturity
     Greece I            IMF (SBA)        Standard Rate of Charge +     ota Penalty (IMF,                  3-5 Years                             No Changes                                                       No Changes
                                          2016b)
                         EC (GLF)         3-Month Euribor + 300bp Margin (100bp Addi-                      4-Year WAMb                           3-Month Euribor + 50bp Margin + One-Time 50bp                    30-Year WAM
                                          tional A er 3 Years) + Up-Front 50bp Service Feec                                                      Commission Fee
     Greece II           IMF (EFF)        Standard Rate of Charge +     ota Penalty (IMF,                  4-10 Years                            No Changes                                                       No Changes
                                          2017)
                         EC (EFSF)        EFSF Cost of Funding (In Kind) (ESM, 2019b)                      17.5 Year WAM                                                           , ESM (2019b)
                                                                                                                                                 EFSF Cost of Funding (Pool Fundinga                              32.5-Year WAM
                                          + 10bp Guarantee Commission Feed   c
                                                                               + 0.5bp Up-                                                       + Service Fees + Commitment Fees (+ Step-Up
                                                            c
                                          Front Service Fee+ 50bp Annual Service Fee +                                                           Margin on Some Loans, waived annually thus far)
                                          Commitment Fee (+ Step-Up Margin on Some
                                          Loans)
     Greece III          EC (ESM)         ESM Cost of Funding (Pool-Funded) + 10bp Mar-                    32.5-Year WAM                         No Changes                                                       32.5-Year WAM
                                          gin + 50bp Up-Front Service Fee + 0.5bp Annual
                                          Service Fee + Commitment Fee
     Cyprus              IMF (EFF)        Standard Rate of Charge +    ota Penalty                         4-10 Years                            No Changes                                                       No Changes
                         EC (ESM)         ESM Cost of Funding (Pool-Funded) + 10bp Mar-                    15 Years (EFSF, 2010)                 No Changes                                                       No Changes
                                          gin + One-Time 50bp Commission Fee + Commit-
                                          ment Fee (Reuters, 2013)
     Ireland             IMF (EFF)        Standard Rate of Charge +    ota Penalty                         4-10 Years                            No Changes                                                       No Changes
12




                         EC (EFSF)        Fixed-Rate Back-to-Back (EFSF, 2012a)                            15-Year WAM                           Diversi ed Funding Strategy + Service Fee (ESM,                  22-Year WAM (EFSF, 2013b)
                                                                                                                                                 2019b)
                         EC (EFSM)        EU Cost of Borrowing + 292.5bp Margin (Fixed-                    7.5 Years                             EU Cost of Funding (Pool-Funded) (EU, 2011c)                     19.5-Year WAM (EU, 2013)
                                          Rate Bullet) (EU, 2011e)
     Portugal            IMF (EFF)        Standard Rate of Charge +     ota Penalty                        4-10 Years                            No Changes                                                       No Changes
                         EC (EFSF)        EFSF Cost of Funding (Fixed-Rate)                                15-Year WAM (EFSF, 2012b)             No Changes                                                       22-Year WAM (EFSF, 2013a)
                         EC (EFSM)        EU Cost of Borrowing + 215bp Margin (EU, 2011b)                  7.5-Year WAM                          EU Cost of Borrowing (EU, 2011d)                                 19.5-Year WAM (EU, 2011a)
     Spain               EC (ESM)         ESM Cost of Funding (In-Kind) + 10bp Guarantee                   12.5-Year WAM                         No Changes                                                       No Changes
                                          Commission Feed  c
                                                             + 0.5bp Up-Front Service Feec
                                                                                         +
                                          50bp Annual Service Fee (EC, 2012a)
     a      e EFSF originally used a "back-to-back" lending scheme. is scheme meant the EFSF would issue bonds of the same maturity as the loans given to borrowers. In early 2012, they formally switched to a "pool funding" scheme under the
         Diversi ed Funding Strategy. is means that the EFSF would no longer match bond issuances to borrowing countries, but would rather take advantage of di erent maturities in order to lower the cost of funding. e ESM always used a
         pooled funding scheme.
     b   WAM stands for "Weighted Average Maturity," and is calculated by taking the sum of the product of the duration and total amount of each repayment.
     c      e di erent types of fees on loans is as follows. One-time fees, such as the service fee by the GLF, are only assessed when loans are disbursed. From the EFSF and the ESM, there are annual fees, such as the 10bp guarantee commission fee
         or the 0.5bp service fee, and up-front fees, such as the 50bp service fee. e commitment fee is assessed based on changes in the borrowing strategies by the relevant institutions.
     d      e guarantee commitment fee was cancelled in November 2012.
     e   Sources: See text and online-appendix.

                                                                                                         Table 1: Debt Relief Summary
2.2     Transfers estimates
2.2.1    Motivation and Methodology

To estimate the implicit transfers in nancial assistance for the programmes described above, we follow
Joshi and Ze elmeyer (2005) who perform a similar exercise for transfers implicit in IMF programs. A
  rst estimate of transfers was a empted by the ESM itself (see ESM (2014) and ESM (2015) reports).
   e discount rate used was the market interest rate that crisis countries would have paid had they
been able to cover their nancing needs from private investors. Using these market rates, however,
overlooks the fact that public loans may have a very di erent risk pro le than private loans. To put
this point in sharp relief, imagine that ESM loans are risk free and that the ESM charges the risk-free
rate. In that case, there is no implicit transfer from lenders to the borrowers, regardless of the market
rate on risky loans. Using the private sector (risky) interest rate to discount public sector (risk-less)
loans would erroneously conclude that there is a large concessional component in these programs.
What is needed instead, is an estimate of the risk-adjusted discount rate on public assistance programs
to crisis countries.
    Our approach consists in assuming that the default risk on EU funding is similar or higher than
the default risk of IMF loans to these same countries, during the same period. Importantly, we do not
need to assume that the IMF loans themselves are risk-free. As long as the risk pro le of IMF loans and
EU loans are similar, then we can use the internal rate of return on IMF programs to each country to
discount the term sheet of European loans to that same country.24
       e IMF interest rate is an a ractive choice for three reasons. First and most importantly, while both
IMF and EC lending are expected to enjoy preferred creditor status, IMF loans are legally senior to loans
from the EFSF and the ESM.25 e fact that IMF loans have more seniority implies that the risk of default
on IMF loans is lower than that of European loans. erefore, the correct discount rate on European
loans should be even higher than the IMF's internal rate. is biases downwards our bailout estimates.
Second, European loans are time-varying, based on the cost of funds.            e relevant benchmark rate
must also be time-varying in order to account for changes in global lending conditions. As discussed
above, IMF loans are time-varying, with an interest rate related to the IMF's cost of funding and to the
size of the loan relative to the country's quota. ird, IMF programs tend to be have a medium term
maturity (3 to 9 years) while while European loans have a longer duration (10 to 30 years). To the extent
that there is a positive term premium, this also biases downward our bailout estimates.
    One concern with our methodology is that the IMF programs themselves may include a transfer
component. We do not consider that this is a serious issue for two reasons. First, Joshi and Ze elmeyer
(2005), estimating the realized transfers in IMF lending from 1973 to 2003 nd no evidence of a signi -
  24
      e internal rate of return is the standard discount rate that sets the net present value of cash ows equal to zero.
  25
    Article 13 of the ESM Treaty states "ESM loans will enjoy preferred creditor status in a similar fashion to those of the
IMF, while accepting preferred creditor status of the IMF over the ESM" EU (2012a).


                                                            13
cant transfer component for high and middle income countries, unlike low income countries or Highly
Indebted Poor Countries. Second, one might still be concerned that IMF lending to European countries
during the Eurozone crisis may have adopted lending criteria that deviated from past practice, resulting
in a potential concessional component from IMF lending. In that case, however, using the IMF interest
rate would again bias downwards our transfer estimates from EC programs.
    To summarize, our estimated transfers provide a lower bound on the true transfer for three reasons:
because EC programs are riskier than the IMFs; because they have longer maturity; and because IMF
programs themselves may be subsidized. Conversely, our estimates would be biased upwards if either
EC lending was senior to the IMF, was shorter maturity or if the IMF was lending at a penalty rate. For
reasons argued above, we do not view these scenarios as serious possibilities.
                                               i,j
    To estimate the NPV of total transfers, T rt   , for borrower i and creditor j at time t, we calculate the
di erence between the present value of the sequence of net transfers discounted at our benchmark IMF
internal rate of return and the present value of the sequence of net transfers discounted at its actual
internal rate of return. By de nition, this la er term is zero, and so we can write the NPV of transfers
as
                                                  T
                                          i,j              1
                                      T rt0 =                 i t
                                                                  N Tti,j ,                                 (1)
                                                t=t
                                                       (1 + r¯)
                                                    0


in which t0 refers to year 2010 and T is the date of the last net transfer ow (always a repayment).
As explained above we use the internal rate of return on the IMF's lending for borrower i during the
Eurozone crisis, r¯i , as the discount rate for country i. N Tti,j are net transfers from lender j to borrower
i at time t, constructed as:
                                    N Tti,j = Dt i,j    i,j
                                                     - Rt   -     ii,j  i,j
                                                                   t- Dr,t- ,
                                                              =1
         i,j                                                        i,j
where Rt     are principal repayments from j to i at time t, and Dt     denotes disbursements from i to j
                                                                i,j
at time t.  denotes the maturity of each disbursement and Dr,t- is the outstanding principal balance
remaining at time t on a disbursement e ected at time t -  , and ii,j      i,j
                                                                     t- Dr,t- the corresponding interest
payments at time t. e internal rate of return irri,j is the value that sets the sequence of net transfers
to zero.
    We compile data on disbursements, repayments, and interest payments for the eight borrowing
countries and ve o cial international lenders described above. We make two key assumptions. First
we assume that the most current speci cation of future repayments and interest rates coincides with
future realized outcome. is assumes that there will be no more debt renegotiations in the future. Any
changes to the current agreement, such as delaying interest payments or extending the overall maturity,
could only make the terms more favorable for the borrower and would result in a larger transfer than
we estimate. Second, for loans with variable interest rates, we construct a proxy for future interest



                                                        14
  Borrower i          Lender j        irri,j       ¯i
                                                   r      irri,j         di,j         Di,j       T ri,j     T ri,j /GDP i
                                        (1)       (2)      (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)              (7)
  Cyprus              ESM              0.82      1.73     0.90          15.48       6.30         0.74           3.62%
                      IMF              1.73      1.73                   7.26        0.95
  Greece              EC               0.68      3.26       2.58        20.66      52.90         18.49          8.18%
                      EFSF             1.16      3.26       2.11        37.20      171.20        66.82          28.19%
                      ESM              1.83      3.26       1.43        33.81      61.90         16.64          7.30%
                      IMF              3.26      3.26                   6.70       31.99
  Ireland             EFSF             1.83      2.66       0.83        21.98      17.70          2.22           1.29%
                      EFSM             3.23      2.66       -0.57       16.04      22.50         -1.51          -0.88%
                      IMF              2.66      2.66                   4.59       22.61
  Portugal            EFSF             1.78      3.25       1.46        21.92      26.00         5.47            2.93%
                      EFSM             3.10      3.25       0.14        15.64      24.30         0.38            0.21%
                      IMF              3.25      3.25                   5.65       26.39
  Spain               ESM              0.93      2.65       1.73        9.14       41.33         5.55            0.49%

                            Table 2: Implicit Transfers from Eurozone Funding Programs
   e table reports the internal rate of return (irri,j ) for each recipient country i and funding agency j , the duration of the
program (di,j ), the total (nominal) amount disbursed ( Di,j ), the implicit transfer T ri,j in billions of euros and scaled by
                                                        2010 nominal GDP.


rates by adding an estimate of the term premium to the current interest rate.26

2.2.2    Results

Table 2 reports our results for Eurozone borrowers. Column (1) reports the calculated internal rate of
return for each given borrower-lender pair i, j , irri,j . Column (2) reports the IMF internal rate of return
for borrower i, r¯i , which is used as the discount rate. Note that this is simply repeated for reference
from the IMF row by country.27 Column (3) calculates the di erence between the IMF internal rate of
return and the loan's internal rate of return (Column (2) minus Column (1)). With the notable exception
of the EFSM loan to Ireland, the IMF internal rate of return is always higher, which implies a transfer
element from European institutions.
       e IMF internal rate varies from 1.73% for Cyprus to 3.26% for Greece. ere are at least two reasons
for this variation across countries. First, countries borrowed at di erent points in time. Greece's IMF
program started in May 2010, while Cyprus' program started in May 2013 (see Table A.1). Over that
  26
      We construct this term premium at various maturity from the di erence between forward 3-month Euribor rate and
the current 3-month Euribor. See the Online Appendix for details.
   27
      For Spain, who did not receive any IMF loans, we take the simple average of the other IMF internal rates for the other
countries.



                                                              15
  Borrower i Lender j                irri,j    irri,IM F      irri,j        di,j        Di,j      T ri,j    T ri,j /GDP i
  Hungary    BoP                      3.56       2.42         -1.13         5.24      5.50        -0.28        -0.31%
             IMF                      2.42       2.42                       4.22      8.75
  Latvia     BoP                      3.09       2.55           -0.53       6.92      2.90        -0.09          -0.49%
             IMF                      2.55       2.55                       3.85      1.11
  Romania    BoP                      3.00       2.70           -0.30       7.96      5.00        -0.10          -0.08%
             IMF                      2.70       2.70                       4.65      11.87

                         Table 3: Implicit Transfers from non-Eurozone Funding Programs
   e table reports the internal rate of return (irri,j ) for each recipient country i and funding agency j , the duration of the
program (di,j ), the total (nominal) amount disbursed ( Di,j ), the implicit transfer T ri,j in billions of euros and scaled by
                                                        2010 nominal GDP.


period, the IMF's basic rate of charge decreased from 1.25% to 1.06%.28 Second, countries borrowed
various fraction of their quotas, with a corresponding penalty adjustment in their borrowing rate (see
Table A.2). Greece, which borrowed 3,374% of its 2010 quota, faced a higher rate than Cyprus which
borrowed `only' 547% of its 2010 quota.29 As discussed above, these di erences can be interpreted as
risk premia on IMF lending, and do not a ect our calculations as long as EC lending remained less
senior than IMF lending to that country.30
    Column (4) displays the duration of the lending cycle, d, following the methodology in Joshi and
Ze elmeyer (2005). e duration of the lending cycle between borrower i and lender j , di,j , is calculated
as:
                                                  T     i,j
                                                     Rt
                                          di,j =            i,j · t,
                                                 t=1  s R   s

          i,j
where Rt      are the principal repayments from country i to lender j at time t.      e duration of IMF
programs, between 4.59 years (Ireland) and 7.26 years (Cyprus), is much shorter than the duration of
EC programs, between 9.14 years (Spain) and 33.81 years (Greece, ESM). As discussed above, these
duration di erences suggest a transfer element.
     Column (5) shows the sum of all nominal disbursements Di,j , in ebillion. ey vary between 7.25
ebillion for Cyprus representing 36% of its 2010 GDP, to 317.82 ebillion for Greece, representing 140%
of its 2010 GDP. Columns (6) and (7) of Table 2 show our estimates of the net present value of transfers,
calculated according to Eq. (1), rst in 2010 billions of Euros and then as a percentage of the country's
2010 GDP. ere are striking di erences in the estimated transfers across countries. Two countries
stand out. First, we nd that the size of Ireland's transfer was positive but very small, at 0.69ebillion,
  28
         e IMF's historical basic rate of charge is available at h ps://www.imf.org/external/np/ n/data/query.aspx.
  29
      Given the size of its program, Cyprus also spent a lot less time above its quota, at a penalty rate, relative to Greece.
   30
      In addition, since we use the realized IMF schedule of disbursements, repayments, and interest rates, countries like
Ireland, which repaid their IMF debt early mechanically faced a lower IMF internal rate of return.



                                                              16
representing 0.41% of its 2010 GDP. At the other extreme, Greece received a very substantial transfer of
98.6 ebillion, representing 42.3% of its 2010 GDP. For Portugal and Cyprus the transfer is positive and
quite sizable, between 3.14 and 3.62% of GDP. In the case of Spain, where lending was directed towards
bank recapitalization and therefore of a di erent nature from the other countries, the transfer is less
than 0.5% of GDP.31
    We also calculate the transfer component included in the nancial assistance programs that the
European Commission extended to three EU members outside the Eurozone: Hungary, Latvia and
Romania.32 All three countries bene ed also from a concurrent IMF program. Table 3 reports the
results. Since these countries were not in the Eurozone, they constitute an interesting control group
with which to compare the Eurozone bailouts. We highlight three important results. First, the internal
rates of return for the EC programs - between 3.00% and 3.56%­ are never lower than the IMF internal
rate of return ­ between 2.42% and 2.70%. Second, the IMF loans are again always shorter, even though
in some cases the IMF lent more than the EC. Finally, in the last two columns, we see that the transfer
is always negative, between -0.08% (Romania) and -0.49% (Latvia). Taken together, we interpret this
result as saying there was no transfer element embedded in the EC lending to these countries.
    We draw the following conclusions from our empirical analysis. First, we estimate implicit trans-
fers of very di erent sizes to di erent eurozone countries during the euro crisis. ey vary from small
(Ireland) to extremely large (Greece). We view these transfers as a central part of the crisis resolu-
tion. Second, non-eurozone EU countries did not receive any signi cant transfer from the EC: sizable
transfers are tied to membership in the monetary union, not to membership of the European Union.


3        Model
We now present a simple model to help us think about the conditions under which a monetary union
might agree to bail out one of its members and characterize the determinants of that transfer. e model
emphasizes the collateral cost of default and/or exit from the monetary union in case of default on the
other members of the union.


3.1      Assumptions
   e baseline model we consider is a simple extension of Calvo (1988). Consider a world with 2 periods,
t = 0, 1, and three countries. We label the countries g , i and u. Countries g and i belong to a monetary
union while country u does not. Countries g and u are scally strong, in the sense that their government
debt is risk-free. Instead, country i is scally fragile: its government may be unable or unwilling to
    31
      As noted above, our calculation for Spain is a bit less precise since the country did not have an IMF program and we
are using an average of the IMF internal rate of return for the other countries.
   32
      Latvia adopted the Euro on January 1, 2014.


                                                           17
repay its debts either in period 0 or period 1. Countries can have di erent sizes, and we denote  j the
relative size of country j , with j  j = 1.
                                                                                                j
    Each country/region j receives an exogenous per capita endowment in period t denoted yt       . is en-
dowment represents the maximum scal resources available in each period and region. e only source
                                                                                i
of uncertainty is the realization of the endowment in country i in period 1, y1   . We de ne expected out-
       i       i                                                       i     i    i
put y¯1  E [y1 ], where E [.] denotes the expectation operator, and 1 = y1 /y  ¯1 is an endowment shock
that satis es E [ i        i
                  1 ] = 1. 1 is distributed according to a cumulative distribution function G( ) with pdf
g ( ), over a bounded support [ min , max ], with 0 < min  max < .
      e only traded nancial assets are sovereign bonds issued by each country. In country j , a rep-
resentative agent -representing a composite of the country's households and banks- has preferences
de ned over aggregate consumption sequences {cj       j
                                                 0 , c1 } and over holdings of sovereign bonds, as fol-
lows:

                                 U j = cj       j
                                        0 + E [c1 ] + 
                                                       j
                                                         s ln bs,j i,j  i,j
                                                               1 +  ln b1   .                                            (2)

    In Eq. (2), bk,j
                 1 denotes the face value of debt issued at t = 0 by country k , held by agent j .   e rst
part of these preferences is straightforward: households are risk neutral over consumption sequences.
In addition, we assume that government bonds provide `money-like' liquidity services that are valued
by households. We model these liquidity services in a very simple way, by including the face value of
bonds maturing next period directly in the utility function, as in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2012).33
    Crucially, we assume that bonds from di erent countries provide di erent levels of liquidity ser-
vices, depending on how `money-like' these government bonds are perceived to be by di erent in-
vestors. Speci cally, we assume that sovereign bonds from countries u and g are perfect substitutes
and provide identical liquidity services. is is a natural assumption, since both countries are scally
sound, so their debt is risk free. It follows that we can consider the total demand for safe assets by
households in country j , denoted bs,j     g,j  u,j
                                    1 = b 1 + b1 .     e liquidity services provided by these `safe assets'
is the same in all countries, hence s,j = s .
    Since country i is scally fragile, its debt is not necessarily safe and we should expect s  i,j .
Moreover, the liquidity services from holding i's government debt may vary across investors. In what
follows, we assume that i-bonds provide higher liquidity services to i-investors, then g -investors, then
u-investors: i,i > i,g > i,u .
       We view this assumption as reasonable. First, i-investors are likely to perceive i-debt as more liq-
  33
    A number of recent models have introduced bonds in the utility function. is captures, in a simple reduced form, the
demand for safe stores of value that would arise in presence of idiosyncratic risk. For a discussion, see Kaplan and Violante
(2018).

                                                             18
uid/safe than other investors if risk-shi ing leads them to ignore the states of the world where both
they and their government default. i-investors may also be coerced into holding debt of their own
sovereign, through moral suasion or outright nancial repression. In our set-up, this would be cap-
tured by a higher i,i . Second, collateral policy (i.e which government debt is accepted for collateral
and at which haircut) inside the monetary union may make i-debt more desirable for foreign investors
also located inside the monetary union (i.e. g -investors) than for investors located outside the mone-
tary union (i.e. u-investors). In the Eurozone, for instance, the Eurosystem collateral framework was
criticized before the crisis by Buiter and Sibert (2005) for reducing risk premia and thereby contributing
to the insu cient di erentiation of sovereign risk.34 During the crisis, the ECB implemented numerous
changes to its collateral framework, including in the application of its minimum rating threshold.35 For
the time being, these liquidity services are taken as given but will discuss how changes in collateral
policy can a ect the equilibrium bailouts.
    In order to simplify a number of expressions, we will o en consider the bondless limit that obtains
when s  0 and i,j  0, while keeping the ratios  j i,j / k  k i,k constant.36 In this limit, as we
will see, the bond portfolios remain well de ned, but the liquidity services become vanishingly small,
so the level of debt does not a ect utility.
     As mentioned above, countries i and g di er in their scal strength. While g is scally sound, i is
  scally fragile: it needs to re nance maturing debt bi
                                                      0 in period t = 0, and can decide to default in either
period. Should a default occur, we follow the literature and assume that i su ers an output loss in the
                                i
period of default equal to yt     , with 0    1. is output loss captures the disruption to the domestic
economy caused by the default event. With a default cost increasing in output, a default is more costly,
and therefore less likely, when the economy is doing well. ere are many possible dimensions to the
economic cost of a default. In particular, for country i, a default may force the country to exit the
monetary union. One way to capture this is to write  = d + e where d is the share of output lost
if the country defaults but remains in the currency union, while e is the additional share of output
lost from a potential exit, conditional on a default. While d might be low, e could be much larger.37
                                                                                    i
   In the event of a default, we assume that creditors can recover an amount yt       where 0   < 1
on their original claims.   is assumption captures the fact that country i's decision not to repay its
debt does not generally result in a full expropriation of outstanding creditor claims. Importantly, the
  34
      see Bindseil et al. (2017) for a description of the Eurosystem collateral framework.
  35
      Before the crisis only high-rated government debt (A- at minimum) were accepted as collateral with a haircut of 3% (for
a residual maturity of 5-7 years). Lower-rated government bonds (BBB- and above) became eligible on October 2008 with
a haircut of 8%. In September 2013, these haircuts were changed to 2% and 10% respectively for high-rated and lower-rated
government bonds. Furthermore, the ECB o en waived the minimum rating threshold for low grade sovereign bonds. See
Bindseil et al. (2017).
   36
        e terminology here is by analogy with Woodford (1998)'s `cashless limit' where the direct utility gains from money
holdings become vanishingly small.
   37
      Section 6.2 considers separately the possibility of a sovereign default and an exit from the currency union.

                                                             19
                                                                                       i
recovery amount is proportional to output, and not to the outstanding debt. Hence, yt    is economically
equivalent to the implicit collateral value of the outstanding debt. e recovery payment is distributed
pari passu among all creditors, domestic or foreign, in proportion to their claims. We restrict our anal-
ysis to the case where  +  < 1 so that the country always has enough resources for the recovery
amount, in the event of default.
    A default in i creates direct economic losses on foreign bondholders (both g and u), through their
portfolio holdings of i's debt, bi,j
                                 1 . In addition to this direct portfolio exposure, we assume that country
                                                                               g
g also su ers a collateral output loss when country i defaults, equal to yt      , with 0   < 1. Country
u, by contrast, does not su er any collateral damage. is assumption captures the idea that, since i
and g belong to a monetary union, their economies are deeply intertwined. It is reasonable to expect
that a default in country i would severely disrupt economic activity in country g as well, to a greater
extent than in country u. is contagion cost could be especially high if, as a consequence of its default
decision, country i was forced to exit the common currency. By analogy with the cost of default for i,
we can re-write  = d + e , where e captures the cost of an exit by i on g , conditional on a default
in i. Countries outside the monetary union do not face similarly high levels of economic disruption
caused by a collapse of the monetary union.
    As in Tirole (2015), both the direct exposure and the collateral cost for country g create a so budget
constraint for country i. Our interpretation is that this so budget constraint was at the heart of the
discussions regarding bailout decisions in the Eurozone. For instance, the decision to bail-out Greece in
May 2010 and avoid a debt restructuring was directly in uenced by the perception that a default event
could have quickly spread the sovereign debt crisis to other vulnerable economies in the Eurozone,
such as Spain, Italy, Portugal or Ireland, disrupting their economies.38 It was also argued that a Greek
restructuring could have hurt France or Germany through the exposure of their banking system to
Greek sovereign debt. Implicitly, a common perception at the time was that bailing out Greece -so that
the Greek government could in turn repay foreign creditors, including French and German banks­ was
preferable to a restructuring that would have forced the German and French governments to directly
recapitalize the losses of domestic banks on their Greek portfolio holdings.
   Finally, we allow for voluntary transfers from g to i in either period, denoted t . Crucially, we
consider an environment where g can make ex-post transfers conditional on the realization of output,
and therefore on i's default decision. ese transfers are voluntary and therefore must satisfy: t  0.
  ere is no reason for g to make a transfer to i in case of default, so the optimal transfer in that case is
zero.39
  38
    See Const^ ancio (2012).
  39
    While we allow for unilateral transfers from g to i, we do not need to consider transfers from u to i.          ere are two
reasons for this. First, g has more exposure to i's default than u, both through larger direct portfolio holdings and indirectly
through the collateral damage. erefore, g has a stronger incentive than u to bailout i. Conditional on a bailout from g , u


                                                              20
3.2     Budget Constraints and Market Clearing
  e government of country j issues one-period bonds with face value bj  1 in period t = 0. It also raises
                             j
aggregate lump-sum taxes Tt on domestic residents in period t. We begin by writing down the budget
constraints of the representative household in country i, assuming that no default occurs at t = 0:

                                        i,i     s,i               i,i  s,i
                                  ci        i           i    i
                                   0 + b1 /R + b1 /R = y0 - T0 + b0 + b0 .                                              (3)

                                                                                              i,i     s,i
    Country i's representative household consumes ci  0 , invests in domestic and safe debt, b1 and b1 ,
with respective yields Ri and R . Its resources consist of a er tax income y0 i
                                                                                - T0i
                                                                                      and the face-value
                          i,i    s,i
of maturing debt claims b0 and b0 .
    In period t = 1, the household consumes:
                        
                         ci = y i - T i (r) + bi,i + bs,i            if i repays (r)
                          1    1     1         1      1
                                                           b i,i
                                                                 s,i                                                    (4)
                         ci     i              i          i 1
                          1 = y1 (1 - ) - T1 (d) + y1 bi + b1        if i defaults (d).
                                                                    1



      e household consumes a er tax income, and liquidates its bond portfolio. In case of default, it
                            i                     i
su ers the direct cost y1     and recovers only y1  /bi
                                                      1 per unit of domestic bond purchased. Note that
                  i
period 1 taxes T1   are state dependent and will depend on the realization of output and the decision to
default or repay.

    Now consider g 's household. Using similar notation, the budget constraint in period t = 0 is

                                cg    i,g i   s,g
                                 0 + b1 /R + b1 /R
                                                       g
                                                    = y0    g
                                                         - T0 + bi,g  s,g
                                                                 0 + b0 ,                                               (5)

while period t = 1 consumption satis es
                        
                         cg = y g - T g (r) + bi,g + bs,g            if i repays (r)
                          1    1     1         1      1
                                                           b i,g                                                        (6)
                         cg     g             g           i 1
                          1 = y1 (1 - ) - T1 (d) + y1 bi + b1
                                                                 s,g
                                                                     if i defaults (d).
                                                                    1


                                                                                g
   In the case of default, g 's representative household su ers an output loss y1 . As in the case of i,
                         g
taxes raised in t = 1, T1 , are state contingent and may depend on whether g o ers a bailout to i. A
similar set of budget constraints hold for households in the rest of the world.
    We now write the budget constraints of the governments in i and g .                    e budget constraints for i's
does not need to intervene since a default is already prevented. Second, in the event that g declines to intervene, we will
see that u will have no incentive to intervene either, given its lower exposure. We implicitly rule out the case where u and
g could coordinate their bailout e orts. is last assumption is plausible and does not preclude IMF-style programs, as long
as these do not include a concessional component.



                                                            21
government in periods t = 0 and t = 1 are:

                                          i
                                         T0 + bi   i       i
                                               1 /R + 0 = b0 ,                                        (7)

and
                                    i
                                   T1 (r) + 1 = bi
                                                 1   if i repays (r)
                                        i          i
                                                                                                      (8)
                                      T1  (d) = y1   if i defaults (d).
    In these expressions, t denotes the direct unilateral transfer from g 's government to i's government
in period t. As discussed previously, these transfers can be made conditional on the decision to default
by i in the same period, or ex-ante, so as to reduce i's debt overhang. at is, g can make a transfer 0
either to avoid a default in the current period or to in uence default decisions in the second period.
      e budget constraints for g 's government are derived similarly:

                                          g
                                         T0 + bg       g
                                               1 /R = b0 + 0 ,                                        (9)

and
                                    g
                                   T1 (r) = bg
                                             1 + 1 if i repays (r)
                                                                                                     (10)
                                   T1 (d) = bg
                                    g
                                             1     if i defaults (d).
   Finally, the markets for safe bonds and i-bonds clear:

                                         bs,j  s
                                          1 = b1   ;        bi,j  i
                                                             1 = b1 .                                (11)
                                     j                  j


3.3   Optimal Portfolios
Denote P j  1 the expected payment per unit of i's sovereign debt for j 's household, given the optimal
default decision at t = 1. If i cannot discriminate between di erent types of bondholders when default-
ing, this expected payo is the same for all investors: P j  P . e optimal bond portfolio maximizing
U j satis es:

                     1         j i,j                              1      j s
                        -  P = i,j ,                                -  = s,j .                       (12)
                     Ri        b1                                 R      b1

      e rst equation characterizes the demand for i bonds.      e le -hand side of that equation rep-
resents the expected monetary cost from purchasing one more unit of i's debt: a cost 1/Ri and an
expected discounted return  P . e right hand side of that equation represents the additional liquid-
ity bene t. e second equation characterizes the demand for safe bonds. Denote      ¯i         k i,k
                                                                                           k        the
weighted average of liquidity services provided by i-debt. Combining the equilibrium condition Eq. (12)
and the bond market clearing condition Eq. (11), the aggregate share i,j of i's debt held by country j

                                                   22
satis es:

                                                                   bi,j
                                                                    1      j i,j
                                                   i,j                  =   ¯i .                                             (13)
                                                                   bi1     

    In the absence of selective default, the model implies that equilibrium portfolio shares are propor-
tional to the relative liquidity bene ts of i-debt across investor classes. To understand the intuition
for this result, observe that all investors expect the same payment per unit of debt,  P , and pay the
same price, 1/Ri . Hence, di erence in equilibrium portfolios must arise entirely from di erences in
the relative liquidity services provided by the bonds, i.e.  j i,j /¯ i . ese shares don't depend on the
riskiness of i's debt and remain well de ned in the bondless limit.
       Similarly derivations for safe bonds yield:

                                                               bs,j
                                                         s,j
                                                                1s =  j .                                                    (14)
                                                                b1

For safe assets, liquidity services are the same, up to size di erences. It follows that equilibrium port-
folios only re ect size di erences with larger countries holding a larger share of safe assets.40
    Substituting Eqs. (13) and (14) into Eq. (12), we can rewrite the equilibrium conditions as:

                                                         -1                        ¯i     -1
                                             s                             i       
                                  R =       + s                     ;     R =   P + i          .                             (15)
                                             b1                                    b1

   e rst expression indicates that the yield on safe debt can be lower than the inverse of the discount
rate 1/ because of a liquidity premium s /bs        1 . As the supply of safe assets increases, this liquidity
premium decreases, as documented empirically by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012). Simi-
larly, the yield on i's debt decreases with its liquidity premium equal to  ¯ i /bi , but increases with default
                                                                                  1
risk, i.e. as the expected payo per unit of i's debt P decreases.

       In the bondless limit, i,j  0, s  0, and we obtain:

                                           R =  -1             ;     Ri = ( P )-1 .                                          (16)

In that limit case, portfolio holdings remain determined by Eq. (13) and Eq. (14) but the liquidity pre-
  40
     Since equilibrium portfolios are constant regardless of the riskiness of the bonds, our benchmark portfolio allocation
cannot replicate the large shi s in cross-border bond holdings observed rst a er the introduction of the Euro (globalization
of bond portfolios), then following the sovereign debt crisis (re-nationalization of bond portfolios). See Broner et al. (2014)
for a description and a model of this portfolio rebalancing based on creditor discrimination. In the benchmark version of
the model, this re-nationalization can only occur if the liquidity services provided by i's debt to i's banks (i,i ) increases, or
if the liquidity services provided by i's debt to foreign investors (i,g or i,u ) decrease. A possible extension, le for future
work, would allow for either discrimination in default or di erential bailout policies, so that P i becomes di erent from P j .


                                                                     23
mium on safe debt disappears and the premium on i's debt re ects entirely default risk (P  1). We
summarize these results in the following proposition.
Proposition 1 (Optimal Portfolios and Equilibrium Yields). In the absence of selective default, and given
an expected repayment P per unit of i-debt,
    · Equilibrium bond portfolios are independent from yields and re ect relative liquidity services:

                                                   j i,j
                                          i,j =     ¯i      ;   s,j =  j
                                                   

    · In the bond-less limit, equilibrium yields satisfy:

                                          R =  -1      ;    Ri = ( P )-1 .


Proof. See text.


4    Ex-Post Defaults and Bailouts
We solve the model by backward induction, starting from the nal period t = 1. In that period, i's
government can unilaterally decide to repay its debt or default, a er observing the realization of the
income shock i 1 , and taking as given the transfer 1 it receives from g 's government in the event it does
not default. Consolidating the budget constraint of i's government and households Eqs. (4) and (8), a
government maximizing the welfare of domestic agents will decide to repay its debts when:

                                  i
                                 y1  + (1 - i,i ) + 1  bi      i,i
                                                        1 (1 -  ).                                       (17)

       is equation has a natural interpretation.        e le hand side captures the cost of default for i's
government. is cost has three components. First there is the direct disruption to the domestic econ-
                        i
omy captured by y1        . Second, when a default occurs the country has to repay a fraction  of output
to foreign investors. ese foreign investors hold a fraction (1 - i,i ) of marketable debt, hence will
            i
receive y1    (1 - i,i ). Lastly i will forego the unilateral transfer from g , 1 . Against these costs, the
bene t of default consists in not repaying the outstanding debt to foreign investors, both inside the
monetary union and in the rest of the world: bi            i,i
                                                  1 (1 -  ). Intuitively, default is more likely if the direct
cost of default  is low, the recovery rate  is low, transfers  are low, and a larger fraction of the public
debt is held abroad (low i,i ).
    Condition (17) de nes the minimum transfer  1 necessary to avoid a default:

                                 1  bi      i,i   i         i,i
                                     1 (1 -  ) - y1  + (1 -  ) .                                         (18)

                                                     24
   Since transfers are voluntary (i.e. 1  0), equation (18) de nes a minimum realization of the output
shock i
      1 , which we denote ¯, such that repayment is optimal even in the absence of transfer when  ¯:


                                                     (1 - i,i )bi
                                                                1 /y
                                                                   ¯1i
                                               ¯                       .                                           (19)
                                                      + (1 - i,i )
    Intuitively, ¯ increases, i.e. default without bailout becomes more likely, with the amount of debt
owed to foreigners relative to expected resources, (1 - i,i ) bi
                                                               1 /y
                                                                  ¯1i
                                                                      , and decreases with the cost of default
 or the recovery rate . A larger fraction of i-debt held by i-investors makes default less appealing
to i's government since a default becomes a neutral transfer from domestic bondholders to domestic
taxpayers. In the limit where i-debt is entirely held domestically, i,i = 1, and there is never any
incentive to default regardless of the realization of output: ¯ = 0 < min .
       is result indicates one important bene t of the `re-nationalization' of bond markets: everything
else equal, it decreases the ex-post incentive to default as emphasized by Tenreyro (2019). In our model
there is no deadly embrace or doom-loop between sovereigns and bondholders, unlike Farhi and Tirole
(2018). In that paper, the deadly embrace arises from the distorted incentives of domestic banks to hold
debt issued by their own sovereign, creating an enhanced contagion channel from banks to sovereigns
and vice-versa. is channel is absent in our model.
    Let's now consider the choice of optimal ex-post transfers 1 by g 's government. When i       1 < ¯,
a transfer becomes necessary to avoid default. Given our assumptions, g will make the minimum
transfer required to avoid a default: 1 =  1 .41 Substituting  1 from Eq. (18) into g 's consolidated
budget constraint Eqs. (6) and (10), g 's government prefers to make a transfer as long as:

                                           i    g
                                          y1 + y1  i,u bi    i
                                                        1 - y1 .                                                   (20)

     e le hand side of Eq. (20) measures the output loss from default for the monetary union as a
                                                     i                                 g
whole. It consists of the sum of the direct cost y1    for i and the contagion cost y1   for g . e right
hand side measures the overall bene t of default: from the point of view of the monetary union, the
bene ts of default consists in not repaying the rest of the world, a gain of i,u (bi     i
                                                                                   1 - y1 ).

    Eq. (20) makes clear that g 's ex-post bailout restores joint ex-post e ciency from the perspective
of the monetary union. e di erence between the le and right hand side of Eq. (20) represents the
surplus from avoiding a default. Moreover, under our assumption that g makes a unilateral take-it-or-
leave-it o er to i, g is able to appropriate the entirety of this ex-post surplus.42
                                                                      i
       We can solve Eq. (20) for the minimum realization of           1    such that a transfer (and no-default) is
  41
    We assume that if i is indi erent between default and no-default, it chooses not to default.
  42
    An alternative arrangement is to assume that i and g bargain over the surplus from avoiding default. We analyze this
extension in Section 6.1.



                                                          25
                                                                                                i
optimal.     is de nes a threshold, , such that a default is jointly optimal when               1    :
                                                                   g
                                                    i,u bi
                                                         1 /y
                                                            ¯1i
                                                                - y1  ¯1
                                                                     /y i
                                                                           .                                          (21)
                                                          + i,u
     Based on the discussion above, we can make the following observations about equation Eq. (21).
First, it can be immediately checked that  ¯ as long as i,g  0 and/or   0. In other words, as
long as g is exposed directly (through its portfolio) or indirectly (through contagion) to i's default, it
has an incentive to o er ex-post bailouts to i. It follows immediately that an ex-ante no-transfer policy
- such as a no-bailout clause- is not renegotiation proof and therefore may prove di cult to enforce. It
is also immediate from Eq. (21) that g will always be willing to bailout i regardless of its debt level if
i,u = 0 since in that case  0 < min . In other words, if all of i's debt is held within the monetary
union and i's default is costly for either country, it is ex-post e cient for g to o er a full bailout.43
   e threat of collateral and direct damage to g from i's default relaxes ex-post i's budget constraint,
a point emphasized also by Tirole (2015). Lastly, because g o ers the minimum transfer  1 to avoid a
default, i receives a positive transfer but achieves the same utility as under default. When  i    1 < ¯,
i's consumption in period t = 1 is given by:

                                                                          s,i
                                            ci    i               i,i
                                             1 = y1 (1 - ( + (1 -  ))) + b1 .                                         (22)

      is result captures what we call the Southern view of the crisis: the ex-post support that i receives
from g does not make i be er o , relative to default. It avoids the deadweight losses imposed by
a default, but g captures all the corresponding e ciency gains. We summarize these results in the
following proposition.

Proposition 2 (Optimal ex-post bailout under discretion). Given debt level bi      1 , the following output
thresholds fully characterize the optimal ex-post bailout and default policy under discretion:
                                                    g
                                     i,u bi
                                          1 /y
                                             ¯1i
                                                 - y1 /y
                                                       ¯1i
                                                                (1 - i,i )bi  ¯1
                                                                           1 /y
                                                                                i
                                   =                        ¯ =
                                           + i,u                 + (1 - i,i )

                                        i
   1. When output is high, i.e.         1    ¯, country i does not default and receives no bailout, 1 = 0

   2. When output is intermediate, i.e.  i1 < ¯, country i receives the minimal bailout  1 to avoid a
      default:
                              1 =  1  bi         i,i   i
                                        1 (1 -  ) - y1  + (1 -  )
                                                                        i,i


                                    i
   3. When output is low, i.e.      1   < , country i defaults and receives no transfer, 1 = 0.
  43
    Of course, anticipating on the results from the next section, in that case i would want to issue so much debt in period
t = 0 that this would eventually threaten g 's own scal capacity. In what follows we always assume that i,u > 0 and that
g has su cient scal capacity to make the necessary transfers.

                                                             26
Proof. See text.

    Observe that the optimal bailout 1 is non-monotonous in i's output: there is no bailout when either
output is very low or very high. e optimal bailout is also discontinuous at i     1 = .   e reason is that
i's gain from default is stronger at lower levels of output, and therefore avoiding a default requires a
larger transfer. At the lower threshold , the joint surplus from avoiding default falls to zero, while the
incentive to default is strongest for i, requiring the largest possible transfer.


4.1    Debt Re-Nationalization, Concentration Limits and Conditionality
   e size and thresholds of bailouts are a ected by the decisions of European institutions. For example,
reforms of collateral rules by the ECB during the crisis changed the liquidity services provided by cri-
sis government bonds to banks in the eurozone. In our framework, this can be modeled as a change
of parameters i,i and i,g which themselves a ect bond portfolio shares according to Proposition 1.
As described by Bindseil et al. (2017) "Greece (2010), Ireland (2011), Portugal (2011) and Cyprus (2013)
saw the suspension of the rating threshold for debt instruments issued or guaranteed by the respective
governments, based on the positive assessment of the EU/IMF programs that were ongoing at the time.
However, once developments had not hinted at the successful conclusion of the program, such waivers
were li ed, as in the case of Greece and Cyprus on several occasions." e waiver allowed Eurozone
banks to pledge the sovereign bonds of these countries, despite a below-investment grade credit rating.
Intuitively, this increases the a ractiveness of i bonds for i and g investors, relative to u investors and
translates, according to Eq. (13), into a decrease in the equilibrium share of i bonds held outside the
union, i,u . In turn, the decrease in i,u lowers , reducing the possibility of default according to Propo-
sition 2. is is intuitive: as more i bonds are held inside the union, there is less of a bene t to default
on u investors. is results illustrates that -with discretionary bailout- the degree of re-nationalization
of debt within the union, i.e. the distribution of i,i and i,g for a given i,u , is irrelevant to default
outcomes. e la er are in uenced by the concentration of debt holdings between the monetary union
and the rest of the world as measured by i,u .
       e degree of home bias of bond holdings within the union does ma er for the size of the bailout
 1 and the probability of bailouts, according to Proposition 2. Some ECB measures, such as the Long
Term Re nancing Operations of December 2011 and February 2012 were designed to provide long-
term liquidity support to eurozone bank lending.         ey signi cantly increased the liquidity services
                                              i,i
of domestic debt to domestic banks, i.e.  (see Acharya and Ste en, 2015). Under Propositions 1
and 2, this increases i,i , lowering ¯ and  1 : it reduces both the probability and the size of a bailout.
Conversely, the waiver of the rating threshold described in Bindseil et al. (2017) could have contributed
to a larger increase in i,g than i,i , especially if domestic banks could already obtain liquidity against



                                                    27
below-grade domestic sovereign bonds via Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA).44 e waiver would
decrease i,i relative to i,g , increasing both the probability and size of a bailout. Similar e ects obtain
if a policy -such as concentration limits- mandates an increase in g 's holdings of i's debt.
       We summarize these results in the following corollary.

Corollary 1 (Debt Re-Nationalization and Concentration Limit). For a given debt level bi
                                                                                       1,


       · [Debt Re-nationalization] Higher liquidity services of domestic debt for domestic residents, i,i : (a)
         increase the share of i debt held by i investors, i,i , while reducing i,g and i,u ; (b) lowers the ex-
         post default threshold , reducing the probability of default; (c) lowers the ex-post bailout threshold
         ¯, reducing the probability of a bailout and (d) reduces the size of the bailout  1 .

       · [Concentration Limit] Higher liquidity services of i debt for g residents, or concentration limits: (a)
         increase the share of i debt held by g investors, i,g , while decreasing i,u and i,i ; (b) lowers the ex-
         post default threshold , reducing the probability of default; (c) increases the ex-post bailout threshold
         ¯, increasing the probability of a bailout and (d) increases the size of the bailout  1 .


Proof. Immediate from Propositions 1 and 2

       e quote from Bindseil et al. (2017) states that the li ing of the rating thresholds was linked to
the negotiation of the terms of the bailout. is suggests a trade-o between more generous support
and stricter conditionality. is trade-o is potentially complex since the bene ts of reform e orts can
be diluted by excessive debt (debt overhang) but also stimulated, if they allow the country to escape
default altogether. We analyse this question with the following variation on our main model. Suppose,
to simplify things, that there is no recovery in case of default ( = 0). Further, assume that, at the
beginning of period 1 once debt bi                                                      i
                                      1 has been issued but before the output shocks 1 is realized, the
government of country i can implement a `reform' e ort e1 that increases average output according to
  i
y
¯1  = f (e1 ) where f (.) is increasing and concave, i.e. f (.) > 0 and f (.) < 0. e cost of this e ort is
 (e1 ), which is convex to the origin with  (.) > 0 and  (.) > 0. Country i, in choosing its reform
e ort internalizes the likelihood of default and bailouts.45 Substituting the optimal default and bailout
  44
      From Bindseil et al. (2017), "Euro area credit institutions can receive central bank credit not only through monetary
policy operations but exceptionally also through emergency liquidity assistance (ELA). ELA means the provision by a Eu-
rosystem national central bank (NCB) of: (a) central bank money and/or (b) any other assistance that may lead to an increase
in central bank money to a solvent nancial institution, or group of solvent nancial institutions, that is facing temporary
liquidity problems, without such operation being part of the single monetary policy. Responsibility for the provision of ELA
lies with the NCB(s) concerned. is means that any costs of, and the risks arising from, the provision of ELA are incurred
by the relevant NCB."
   45
      Note here we are considering an ex-ante reform e ort, before the decision to default/bailout is made. If country i could
choose its reform e ort a er output is observed, all the bene ts from additional reform e orts would be captured by country
g in the form of a lower transfer.



                                                             28
decisions from Proposition 2, and the de nition of ¯ from Eq. (19) into Eq. (4), reform e ort solves:
                                                     ¯
                           max f (e1 ) 1 -                dG( ) + ¯(1 - G(¯)) -  (e1 ).                                  (23)
                             e1
                                                    min



       e term in bracket represents the impact of the debt overhang on net output. When default or
a bailout occurs, the country loses a fraction  of output. Instead, when it repays its debts, it loses
(1 - ii )b1 . Importantly, because optimal bailouts leave the country indi erent between default or
repayment, the debt overhang is the same in both cases (i.e. as long as < ¯). Another way to see this
                                                                                                 i
is to observe that, according to Eq. (18), the optimal bailout  1 decreases in the output level y1 at rate
, i.e. the same dilution rate as under default. e optimal choice of e ort e1 satis es:
                                                            ¯
                                        f (e1 ) 1 -               dG( ) =  (e1 )                                         (24)
                                                            min


    Denote J (¯) the term in brackets. It captures the dilution of the reform e ort induced by the
prospect of default or bailout.46 Under the assumption that the second order condition of Eq. (23) is
satis ed, the e ect of bond portfolios, or debt levels, on reform e ort are summarized by J ( ), which
satis es:47 J ( ) = - g ( )  0. A higher ¯, meaning a higher likelihood of default or bailout, is
associated with a lower J , i.e. higher dilution, which reduces reform e ort levels. is is a standard
debt-overhang e ect. When ¯ < min , default or bailouts cannot occur and there is no dilution, J = 1,
and country i chooses the rst-best reform e ort e                             
                                                    1 such that f (e1 ) =  (e1 ). When min < ¯, defaults
or bailouts are possible, reform bene ts are diluted, J < 1 and the reform e ort level declines: e1 < e1.

    As mentioned above, the optimal reform e ort is una ected by the bailout policy. Another way
to state this same result is that bailouts do not, per se, increase the bene t of a reform for country i,
despite the fact that country i receives nancial assistance that helps it avoid default.      is captures
another aspect of the `Southern' view: despite receiving nancial assistance, the marginal bene t of
reforms is unchanged. At the margin, reforms are seen as bene ting the creditor country.
    A second implication is that the optimal reform e ort varies with the distribution of i's debt in-
side the monetary union, as captured by ¯. Debt-renationalization, interpreted as an increase in i,i ,
increases i,i , reducing ¯ and the likelihood of default. is increases the optimal e ort level e1 . Con-
versely, the waiver of rating thresholds (interpreted as an increase in i,g ), concentration limits (inter-
preted as a oor on i,g ), or increases in outstanding debt levels have the opposite e ects: they reduce
  46
      Note that the e ect of the reform e ort on the bailout cuto ¯ does not appear in this expression because of the envelope
theorem: ¯ is chosen optimally by country i.
   47
        e second-order condition is satis ed if S (e1 )  f (e1 ) -  (e) + f (e1 )J (¯) ¯/e1 < 0. Since  ¯/e1 < 0,
and J (.) < 0, the second-order condition can always be satis ed by assuming su cient concavity (resp. convexity) of
f (.) (resp. (.)). Full di erentiation then implies that a change x that a ects ¯ will impact e1 according to de1 /dx =
(-1/S (e1 ))f (e1 )J (¯) ¯/x.


                                                             29
reform e ort by exacerbating the debt overhang e ect. In both cases, part of the reform e ort bene ts
g since it reduces the optimal bailout 1 . We summarize these results in the following corollary.

Corollary 2 (Optimal Reform E ort, Debt Overhang and Home Bias). Given a reform bene t function
f (e1 ) and cost  (e1 ) as speci ed above,

       ·      e output cost of default  creates a debt overhang, reducing reform e orts below their rst-best
           level when min < ¯: e1 < e  1.


       · Optimal ex-post bailouts do not a ect the optimal reform e ort which remains ine ciently low: the
         bene ts of reform are diluted via lower expected bailouts (Southern view).

       · Optimal reform e ort depends on the extent of portfolio home bias. Collateral or liquidity policies that
         increase debt re-nationalization increase reform e orts. Conversely, concentration limits or liquidity
         policies that reduce debt home bias reduce reform e ort.


Proof. See the text.

      ese results help understand why the ECB may have conditioned the waiver of rating thresholds
with the continued implementation of reforms. In the absence of such conditionality, Corollaries 1
and 2 indicate that waving the rating thresholds could have simultaneously reduces the probability of
default, increased the likelihood and size of a bailout, but also reduced reform e ort in country i.


4.2        No-Bailout Clauses
We already noted that the transfer 1 is ex-post optimal from the point of view of g . However, it is
important to recognize that it may be di cult for g to implement such transfers. For instance, the
institutional framework inside the monetary union may forbid direct transfers from one country to
another under so called `no -bailout' clauses. While direct transfers may be ruled out, indirect transfers,
via common institutions -such as the common central bank- may still be possible, albeit di cult to
implement in practice.48
      ese `no-bailout' clauses have repeatedly been invoked and played an important role in shaping the
response to the Eurozone crisis. In particular, the legality of proposed bailout programs has o en been
questioned and referred to the German federal constitutional court (commonly called the Karlsruhe
court), or the European Court of Justice. For instance, on September 12, 2012, in a landmark decision,
the Karlsruhe court ruled that the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) did not violate German law,
allowing for the ESM statutes to be signed into law by the German president. However, the German
  48
       We explore this possibility in more details in section 6.3.


                                                                30
                                                                         ¯
                                    min                                                   max

                                       default             no-default        no default
                                       no bailout          bailout           no bailout
                                                           wp. 1 - 

                                              i,u b/y
                                                    ¯1i -y g /y i              (1-i,i )b/y i
                                                          1 ¯1                           ¯1
                                          =       +i,u
                                                                         ¯=    +(1-i,i )


                                          Figure 1: Optimal Ex-Post Bailout Policy.
            e gure reports the endogenous thresholds and ¯ that separate the default, bailout, and no-default regions.


high court imposed strict conditions requiring approval by the German parliament before any extension
of the country's total exposure to the ESM.49 is judgement was re-a rmed on March 18, 2014 when
the high court ruled that constitutional challenges to the ESM were without merits.50 e legality of the
ESM was also a rmed by the European Court of Justice in the Pringle Case, on November 27, 2012.51
From our point of view, the important observation is that the political process contains a certain amount
of uncertainty, since it is not known ex-ante how the legal authorities will rule on these ma ers and
whether future developments will re-open legal challenges.
   In the rest of the paper, we capture both the political uncertainty and the a empt to achieve some
form of ex-ante commitment with an exogenous parameter 0    1, denoting the probability that
ex-post transfers will not be implemented, even when they are ex-post in the best interest of both
parties. By varying  , we nest the polar cases of full commitment ( = 1) and full discretion ( = 0).
                                                                                 i
    It follows that a default occurs either if < or when <                       1    ¯ and ex-post transfers are ruled to
be illegal. e ex-ante probability of default is then given by:

                                                d = G( ) +  (G(¯) - G( ))                                                (25)

         Fig. 1 summarizes the default and bailout decisions for the general case 0    1.


5         Debt Rollover Problem at t = 0
We now turn to the optimal debt issuance problem bi
                                                  1 at time t = 0, taking the initial transfer 0 and
                    i
initial debt level b0 as given.
    49
       See h ps://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Pressemi eilungen/EN/2012/bvg12-067.html.
    50
       See h ps://www.bundesverfassungsgericht.de/SharedDocs/Pressemi eilungen/EN/2014/bvg14-023.html.
    51
       See h p://curia.europa.eu/juris/liste.jsf?num=C-370/12#.



                                                                    31
5.1           e Debt La er Curve.
If debt with notional value bi                                                     i
                             1 has been issued at t = 0, the expected repayment P b1 is given by:

                                                                                 ¯
                             P bi            i
                                1 = (1 - d )b1 + y
                                                 ¯1i
                                                                    dG( ) +           dG( ) .           (26)
                                                             min



      is expression has three terms. First, if country i does not default (with probability 1 - d ), it
                                                                     i
repays the face value. If default occurs, investors recover instead y1 . is can happen either because
default is ex-post optimal (when 1 < ) or when a transfer is needed (when  i
                                    i
                                                                                    1 < ¯) but fails to
materialize (with probability  ).
    Substituting this expression into Eq. (15), we obtain an expression for the scal revenues D(bi
                                                                                                 1) 
bi   i
 1 /R raised by the government of country i in period t = 0:




                                             i
                       D(bi         i
                          1 ) =  P b1 + 
                                                                                  ¯
                                                                                                i
                              = bi
                                 1 (1 - d ) + y
                                              ¯1i
                                                                    dG ( ) +          dG ( ) +          (27)
                                                              min



      e function D(b) de nes a La er curve that plays an important role in the analysis of the optimal
choice of debt issuance. Fig. 2 illustrates the shape of this La er curve in the bondless limit and shows
how it varies with the no-bailout probability  .52 Heuristically, we can consider the following cases:53

       · When 0  bi                i           i,i
                       1  b  ymin (/(1 -  ) + ), the debt level is so low that i will always prefer
         to repay, without bailout and regardless of the realization of the output shock. e debt is safe,
         there is no default risk and D(b) = b/R = b +    ¯ i . is corresponds to the le part of the graph,
         labelled `Safe Debt'.

       · When b < bi       ¯             i,u i         g   i,u
                       1  b  (( +  )ymin + y1 )/ , the level of debt is su ciently low that it is
         optimal for g to bailout i when output is too low. Default might occur if bailouts are not allowed,
         i.e. with probability  > 0. In that region, the La er curve with discretionary bailout ( = 0,
         in blue on the gure) is linear and lies strictly above the La er curve under no bailout ( = 1,
         in red on the gure): this is a consequence of the so budget constraint that is induced by the
         transfers. Under the assumptions speci ed in Appendix B, the La er curve is increasing (at a
         decreasing rate) over that range. is corresponds to the middle part of the graph, labelled `Risky
         if no bailout.'
  52
         is gure is drawn under the assumption that the shocks are uniformly distributed.
  53
       Appendix B provides a full analysis of the La er curve.




                                                            32
D(b) for  = 0 (discretion),  = 0.5 and  = 1 (no bailout).
[ e gure is drawn in the bondless limit under the assumption that i
                                                                  1 is distributed uniformly with  = 0.6,  = 0.2,
                                                   g
 = 0.05, min = 0.5, max = 1.5,  = 0.95, y ¯1 = 1, y1 = 2,  = 0.4, i,g = i,u = 0.3. b = 0.47, ¯
                                           i               i,i
                                                                                                 b = 0.97 and ^
                                                                                                              b = 1.4]

               Figure 2:    e Debt-La er Curve for various values of the no-bailout probability  .


    · Since default can occur when b > ¯
                                       b, the region b > ¯
                                                         b is labelled `Risky' on Fig. 2. It consists of
      three sub-regions

          ­ When ¯  b < bi   ^    i              i,i
                         1  b  ymax (/(1 -  ) + ), it becomes optimal for g to let i default when
             i
            y1 is su ciently low, even if bailouts are allowed. is increases default risk and the yield
            on i's debt. Under the assumptions speci ed in Appendix B, the La er curve is convex in
            this region and reaches its peak at b = bmax strictly below ^
                                                                        b.
          ­ When ^ b<b~      b  (( + i,u )ymax i
                                                   + y1 g
                                                          )/i,u , we enter a region where default would
            occur with certainty in the absence of transfers. With transfers, it is possible for default to
            be avoided, if output is su ciently high. Under the assumptions in the appendix, the La er
            curve is decreasing over that region.
          ­ Finally, for b > ~
                             b, i always defaults regardless of the realization of output and bailouts are
            never optimal. ere are no transfers and investors expect a repayment y      ¯i1.


    Appendix B provides a full characterization of these debt cut-o s and a set of necessary conditions
to ensure that the La er curve D(b) is convex over the relevant range, [0, ^ b). e fact that country i
                                  i
can choose its repayment level b1 implies that it will never choose to locate itself on the `wrong side'
of the La er curve. It follows that we only need to consider levels of debt level such that b  bmax .
   is eliminates Calvo (1988)-like rollover crises and multiple equilibria. Over the relevant range, the
La er curve is convex, continuous and exhibits two non-di erentiable points, b and ¯  b, where it admits


                                                         33
R(b) = ( P (b))-1 for  = 0,  = 1 and  = 0.2.
[ e gure is drawn in the bondless limit under the assumption that i
                                                                  1 is distributed uniformly with  = 0.6,  = 0.2,
                                                    g
 = 0.05, min = 0.5, max = 1.5,  = 0.95, y ¯1 = 1, y1 = 2,  = 0.4, i,g = i,u = 0.3. b = 0.47 and ¯
                                           i               i,i
                                                                                                    b = 0.97]

                  Figure 3: Contractual Yields for various values of the no-bailout probability 


le and right di erentials, which we denote D- (b) and D+ (b) respectively.54
     Fig. 3 illustrates how the contractual yield Ri varies with i's debt levels and with the probability
of enforcement of no-bailout clause  . e interesting range is for b < b  ¯     b where the yield remains
             
equal to R if bailouts are allowed, since the debt remains safe with bailouts, but increases very rapidly
­together with the ex-post probability of default­ when bailouts are prohibited. is gure illustrates
one possible channel for the rapid surge in yields when the crisis erupted: the perception that implicit
bailout guarantees were removed (i.e. a switch from  = 0 to  > 0). Similarly, one can interpret the
decline in yields following President Draghi's famous pronouncement that the ECB would do `whatever
it takes' to preserve the Euro, as a sign that bailout guarantees would be reinstated, i.e. a switch from
 > 0 to  = 0.55
       We summarize these results in the following proposition.

Proposition 3 (Debt La er Curve). Under the regularity conditions stated in Appendix B, the La er curve
D(b) has the following characteristics:

   1. For low levels of debt, b  b, the debt is safe there is no transfer, hence D(b) = b/R = b + ¯i.
  54
     Since D(b) is convex, D- (b)  D+ (b) with equality, denoted D (b), whenever D(b) is di erentiable.
  55
     `Within our mandate, the ECB is ready to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro. And believe me, it will be enough.'
July 26, 2012. See h ps://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html.


                                                            34
   2. For intermediate levels of debt b < b  ¯
                                             b, the debt is risky and a default occurs only if there is no
      ex-post transfer ( > 0).

   3. For high levels of debt, b > ¯
                                   b, the debt is risky even when ex-post transfers are possible.

   4.      e La er curve is convex over the range [0, ^
                                                      b) where ^
                                                               b>¯  b denotes the level of debt such that an
         ex-post default becomes unavoidable in the absence of transfers.

   5.       e La er curve reaches a maximum ¯
                                            b  bmax < ^
                                                      b

   6. Country i always chooses a debt level on the `correct' side of the La er curve, i.e. 0  b  bmax .

Proof. See appendix B and text.


5.2       Optimal Debt Issuance
We now consider the optimal choice of debt bi  1 in the bondless limit.  is allows us to ignore the direct
impact of the debt level on the utility of the agents via liquidity services. Recall that bond portfolios
remain pinned down and invariant to the level of debt so we can take the portfolio shares j,k as given.
   Consolidating the budget constraints of country i's representative household Eqs. (3) and (4) and
government Eqs. (7) and (8), and substituting the optimal transfer 1 from Proposition 2, we can express
country i's aggregate consumption in both periods as a function of the face value of the debt issued in
period 0 bi
          1:


                                                                                  
                  ci   i       i            i,i i  s,i s        i,i   i     s,i s
                   0 (b1 ) = (y0 + 0 - (1 -  )b0 +  b0 ) + (1 -  )D (b1 ) -  b1 /R ,


while

          ci   i      i    i      i,i  s,i s
           1 (b1 ) = y1 - b1 (1 -  ) +  b1                                         if   i
                                                                                        1    ¯ (i repays, no transfer)
          ci   i      i           i      i,i  i,s s
           1 (b1 ) = y1 (1 - ) - y1 (1 -  ) +  b1                  if   i
                                                                        1   < ¯ (i defaults or receives a transfer).

         e optimal debt issuance solves the following program:56
                                                         ¯                              max

                    max
                     i
                              U (bi      i i
                                  1 ) = c0 (b1 ) +             ci   i
                                                                1 (b1 )dG( ) +                ci   i
                                                                                               1 (b1 )dG( )
                      b1                                 min                       ¯
                      s.t.    ci   i
                               0 (b1 )    0,
                              0  bi
                                  1  bmax ,

                              c1   i        i i
                               0 (b1 ) and c1 (b1 ) de ned above.

  56
       We do not need to impose the constraint that ci
                                                     1  0: it is always satis ed under the assumption that  +   1.




                                                             35
   Denoting 0 the multiplier on period 0 consumption and µ1 the multiplier on bi
                                                                               1  0, the rst-order
condition and complementary slackness conditions are:

                        0  µ1 + (1 - i,i ) D(bi                             i,i
                                              1 )(1 + 0 ) -  (1 - G(¯))(1 -  ),

                                 0 ci   i
                                    0 (b1 ) = 0,

                                 µ1 b i
                                      1 = 0.


   where  D(b) denotes the sub-di erential of D(b).57 Consider rst an interior solution (ci
                                                                                          0 > 0 and
 i
b1 > 0) where the revenue curve is di erentiable. e rst-order condition becomes:

                                                 D (bi
                                                     1 ) =  (1 - G(¯)) .                                                   (28)

       is condition equates the marginal gain from one additional unit of debt (at face value), D (bi
                                                                                                    1 ), with
its marginal cost. Eq. (28) establishes that this marginal cost is equal to the probability of repayment
without transfer 1 - G(¯), discounted back at the risk free rate 1/R =  . In other words, country
i only considers as relevant the states of the world where it is repaying the debt without default or
bailout. In case of default, the repayment is proportional to output, and therefore independent of the
debt level. In case of a bailout, the debt is -at the margin- repaid by country g .58
   Substituting the general expression for D (bi
                                               1 ) from Eq. (27) into Eq. (28) we can rewrite the opti-
mality condition as:

                                                                              d                     d¯
                 (G(¯) - G( )) (1 -  ) = (bi
                                           1 - y
                                               ¯1i
                                                   )(1 -  )g ( )                 + (bi
                                                                                     1 - y
                                                                                         ¯1i
                                                                                             ¯)g (¯) .                     (29)
                                                                              db                    db

       e le hand side of this equation has a very natural interpretation. It represents the likelihood of
a bailout, i.e. the likelihood that an extra unit of debt borrowed today is not repaid by i while avoiding
default. is is a direct bene t to i. e right hand side represents the cost of issuing more debt via
an increase in the contractual yield Ri . It has two components. e rst term captures the cost of an
increase in debt due to a change in . Recall that i defaults below , and receives no bailout. An increase
in bi                                                                           i
    1 increases , making outright default more likely. If = , lenders lose b1 and receive instead y1 ,
                                                                                                        i

with probability g ( )(1 -  ). ey correspondingly ask for a higher contractual yield as compensation.
   e second term captures the cost of an increase in debt due to a change in ¯. Recall that, above ¯, i
repays its debts and default does not occur while below ¯, a default can occur when bailouts are not
allowed. An increase in debt increases ¯, again making default more likely. At = ¯, lenders are now at
  57
        e sub-di erential is the derivative D (b) where that derivative exists. It is the convex set [D+ (b), D- (b)] where that
derivative does not exist, at b and ¯
                                    b. See Rockafellar (1972). e constraint b  bmax does not need to be imposed.
   58
      From Proposition 2, the thresholds ¯ and are also a ected by the optimal debt level. However, since these thresholds
are themselves optimally chosen, the envelope theorem ensures that i does not need to consider their variation.


                                                              36
risk of losing bi                           i
                 1 and receiving instead y1 ¯, in case a bailout does not materialize, i.e. with probability
g (¯) . Eq. (29) highlights that i trades o the increased riskiness of debt ­and therefore higher yields­
against the likelihood of a bailout, i.e. non-repayment.
    Under a no-bailout clause ( = 1) the le hand side of Eq. (29) is identically equal to zero.        e
only interior solution is ¯  min , so that g (¯) = g ( ) = 0: country i has no incentives to issue risky
debt. By contrast, once  > 0, country i may choose to issue risky debt (i.e. ¯ > min ) in order to
maximize the chance of a bailout in period 1. Eq. (29) makes clear that the possibility of a bailout in
period 1 induces country i to choose excessively elevated debt levels in period 0.      is risk shi ing
result is a common feature of moral hazard models. Ex-post bailouts partially shield borrowers from
the scal consequences of excessive borrowing. Not surprisingly, this provides an incentive to borrow
excessively. We call this the Northern view of the crisis.
    Note also that a lower collateral cost of default for g , i.e. a lower , increases . is reduces the
probability i will receive a transfer from g (the le hand side of Eq. (29)) and therefore the incentive
to issue debt. Hence, reducing  has a direct positive impact on g but also serves to discipline i. is
resonates with proposals to introduce orderly restructuring in case of a default in a monetary union.
   ese proposals can be interpreted in the context of our model as lower collateral costs of default that
shield the rest of the monetary union, but also reduce risk-shi ing (see B´  enassy- e ´ r´
                                                                                          e et al. (2018)).
     Appendix C provides a full description of the optimal level of debt issued in period 0. In particular,
we show that, under some mild regularity conditions, the optimal choice of debt is either b  b, i.e.
a safe level of debt, or bopt  b  bmax , where bopt denotes the unique optimal level of risky debt
that obtains when the funding needs are smaller than D(bopt ). e following proposition summarizes
the optimal debt level, as a function of the funding needs of country i in period 0, de ned as xi     0 
  i       i,i    s,i s        i         s,i        i,i
(b0 (1 -  ) +  b1 /R - y0 - 0 - b0 )/(1 -  ).

Proposition 4 (Optimal Debt Issuance in period 0). Under the regularity conditions speci ed in Ap-
pendix C, the optimal choice of debt as a function of the initial funding needs xi
                                                                                 0 satis es:


    · For xi
           0 > D (bmax ), country i is insolvent in period 0 and must default. No level of debt can ensure
      solvency.

    · For D(bmax )  xi                                                                      i
                       0 > D (bopt ), country i issues b  [bmax , bopt ) such that D (b) = x0 and there is no
      consumption in period 0. ere is no risk shi ing in the sense that debt issuance is fully constrained
      by country i's funding needs in period 0.

    · For D(bopt )  xi  0 > b, i chooses to issue bopt . In that range, the possibility of a bailout leads i to
      risk shiting in the sense that D(bopt ) > xi
                                                 0.     e probability of default is higher than necessary to
      cover i's funding needs.

                                                      37
Optimal Debt Issuance for  = 0.5.
                                                                             i       g
Uniform distribution with  = 0.6,  = 0.2,  = 0.05,   min   = 0.5,  = 0.95, y
                                                                           ¯1  = 1, y1 = 2, i,i = 0.4,
i,g = i,u = 0.3. b = 0.47, ¯
                           b = 0.97 and ^
                                        b = 1.4

                                Figure 4: Optimal Debt Issuance: Risk Shi ing


    · For xi                                                                       i
             0 < b, country i can choose to issue either a safe amount of debt x0 / < b or the risky amount
      bopt . If country i prefers to issue risky debt, then the amount of risk shi ing is maximal. is will be
      the case if i achieves a higher level of utility at bopt then by keeping the debt safe, i.e. if:

            U (bopt ) - U (xi           i,i
                            0 / ) =(1 -  ) (1 -  ) (G(¯) - G( )) bopt - y
                                                                        ¯1i
                                                                            E [ |   ¯]                   (30)
                                            i
                                    -  G(¯)¯
                                           y1 E [ | < ¯] > 0


Proof. See Appendix C.
                                                                                                       i
      e rst term of Eq. (30) represents the expected net gain from the bailout. Since bopt > y        ¯1 ¯, it
                       i
follows that bopt > y ¯1 E [ | < < ¯].      e second term represents the expected discounted cost of
default for i. is cost is borne by i as soon as < ¯ since the bailout does not a ect i's utility. It is
immediate that there is no risk shi ing when  = 1 or when i holds most of its own debt (i,i  1).
                                                                                  i
Risk shi ing is more likely the higher is the optimal debt output ratio bopt /y ¯1  and the lower the cost
of default . Fig. 4 reports the La er curve and the optimal debt levels. It illustrates the extent of risk
shi ing that occurs when i chooses to issue at bopt instead of a safe level b < b for low levels of funding
needs.




                                                           38
5.3   Making i's Debt Safe or Gambling for Resurrection?
   e previous analysis makes clear that the extent of risk shi ing depends on the likelihood of a bailout,
1 -  . When bailouts are very likely (  0), and under the regularity conditions described in Appen-
dices B and C, bopt is larger than ¯b. In other words, i chooses a level of risky debt su ciently high so
that there might be a possibility of default, even when ex-posts bailouts are almost guaranteed. In that
case, the extent of risk shi ing is maximal.
     As  increases, so that bailouts become less certain, the optimal level of risky debt decreases until
it reaches ¯
           b. Appendix C shows that there is a critical level of  , denoted c such that for  > c , the
optimal level of debt falls discontinuously from ¯ b to b  b and debt becomes safe. is indicates that it
is not necessary for g to enforce a strict no-bailout policy ( = 1) to eliminate risk shi ing in period 0.
Any level  superior to c will result either in a safe debt level, or the minimum level of debt necessary
to cover funding needs, i.e. D(bi        i
                                 1 ) = x0 .

    Suppose g can choose a commitment technology  in period 0. A higher  reduces the amount of
risk shi ing and for  > c risk shi ing is eliminated entirely. However, this also reduces resources
available to country i in t = 1 and therefore makes a default more likely. It also makes country i less
solvent in t = 0, by shi ing down the La er curve. If the initial fundings needs xi0 are su ciently high,
it could force country i to default in period 0, with direct and indirect costs for g . We now establish
formally that it can be in the interest of g to choose  < c , i.e. to allow the possibility of a bailout
in period 1, even if it leads to risk shi ing in period 0.     e reason is that g prefers to gamble for
resurrection: under certain conditions, a possible default tomorrow is preferable to a certain default
today.
   In the bondless limit, g 's utility can be expressed as a function of the optimal debt b( ) issued by i
under no-bailout policy  :

                      Ug (b( ),  )  cg       g
                                     0 + E [c1 ]
                                       g
                                    = y0 - bg    i,g  s,g  g
                                            0 + b0 + b0 + y1 + (b( );  ).


where (b;  ) denotes the net utility gain to g from i's sovereign default decision and is de ned as:

                              g
                   (b,  ) = -y1 G (¯)
                                - (1 -  ) ig b (G (¯) - G ( ))
                                               ¯
                                                    i
                                + (1 -  )          y1  +  1 - ii       - iu b dG ( )
                                           g
                                + (1 -  ) y1 (G (¯) - G ( )) .



                                                    39
        e term on the rst line represents the expected utility loss to g due to collateral damage when i
defaults and there is no bailout ( = 1). Notice that this loss is not baked into the borrowing rate Ri
since it is not a private loss for g investors. e next three lines represent the gains/losses when  is
di erent from 1, i.e. in the presence of bailouts. e second line represents the cost of g 's transfer to
i. e third line represents the fact that g captures the e ciency gains from avoiding a default and the
last line captures the gain from avoiding collateral damage. It is immediate to check that if i's debt is
safe, then (b;  ) = 0.
      e optimal choice of commitment technology maximizes g 's utility and satis es:

                            d(b( );  )    (b( );  )  (b( );  ) db
                                       =           +              = 0.
                               d                       b       d

       e appendix provides a full discussion of the optimal choice of commitment technology and estab-
lishes that g always prefers to choose a level of commitment that rules out risk shi ing, i.e.   c . e
intuition is simple: when   c , the optimal debt level does not depend on  : db/d = 0. It follows
that the optimal choice of  over that range is controlled by the sign of  / . But since i's debt is
safe  = 0 then therefore g is indi erent. For lower levels of commitment, if a default with transfer is
possible, it must lower the utility of g . Hence it is strictly preferable to eliminate risk shi ing, to the
extent possible.
       is analysis is only valid as long as i remains solvent. Denote Dmax ( ) the maximum of the La er
curve under commitment level  . It is immediate that dDmax ( )/d  0. If Dmax (c ) < xi               0 , country i
cannot honor its debts and is forced to default in the initial period if g insists ruling out risk shi ing.
                                   g
   is has a direct cost for g , y0   , and an indirect cost, i,g (bi       i
                                                                    0 - y0 ). Assume further that, in the event
of a default in the initial period, i is unable to borrow, so bi  1 = 0. It follows that g will choose either the
maximum level of commitment  consistent with avoiding a default in the current period, i.e. such that
Dmax ( ) = xi  0 , or it will choose  > c and let i default in the initial period. It will prefer the former if
the following condition is satis ed:

                                    g   i,g i     i
                                   y0 + 0  (b0 - y0 ) + (bmax ,  )  0.                                       (31)

    Eq. (31) states that it can be optimal ex-ante for g to allow ex-post bailouts if these allow i to avoid an
immediate default. e logic is quite intuitive: by allowing the possibility of a future bailout, g gambles
for resurrection: in the event that i's output is su ciently hight in period 1, debts will be repaid and
a default will be avoided in both periods. Even if a bailout is required, the cost to g as of period 0 is
less than one for one. is condition is more easily satis ed the higher is g 's output, and the higher its
exposure to i's debt. We summarize these results with the following proposition.

Proposition 5 (Insulation and Gambling for Resurrection). Suppose g can choose a commitment policy

                                                       40
 in period 0.    en:

    · If xi
          0  Dmax (c ), country i's initial funding needs are su ciently low so country g optimally adopts
      a rm commitment policy:  = c . is rules out risk-shi ing and makes i s debt safe if xi     0 < b/ .


    · If xi
          0 > Dmax (c ), country g prefers to gamble for resurrection if Eq. (31) is satis ed. In that case, it
      chooses  such that Dmax ( ) = xi  0 , i.e. it provides just enough resources in expectation to cover i's
      funding needs. While this eliminates risk shi ing, i's debt remains risky and i may receive a bailout
      in t = 1.

        is discussion highlights that g is more likely to adopt an ex-ante lenient position on future bailouts
(i.e. a low  ) when i has initially a high debt level or a low output level. e proposition also highlights
that g can always eliminate risk shi ing, even if it does not adhere to a strict no-bailout policy. is
proposition provides an interesting interpretation of the early years following the creation of the Euro-
zone. Countries were allowed to join the Eurozone with vastly di erent levels of initial public debt. e
strict imposition of a no-bailout guarantee could have pushed these countries towards an immediate
default and debt restructuring. Instead, it may well have been optimal to allow countries to rollover
their debt on the conditional belief that a bailout might occur in the future. e scal cost to g of an
immediate default may have exceeded the expected costs from possible future bailouts.

We now summarize the main points of the baseline model:

    · When  is su ciently high, the probability of a bailout (1 -  ) is small and there is no risk-
      shi ing. When rollover needs are low, country i issues safe debt. When rollover needs are high,
      country i issues exactly the amount necessary to roll over the debt (i.e. ci
                                                                                 0 = 0).


    · When  is su ciently small, and funding needs are not too high, country i chooses a unique level
      of debt bopt regardless of its funding needs. is optimal level of debt satis es ¯
                                                                                      b  bopt < bmax ,
      i.e. it is su ciently elevated that default might occur in the second period.


6    Extensions
In the baseline model, we excluded the possibility that (i) the countries could bargain over the surplus;
(ii) a country could default but still remain a member of the eurozone and that (iii) a third institution,
for instance the European Central Bank, could intervene to alter the real value of public debt. We now
analyze these three possibilities separately.




                                                      41
6.1   Bargaining over the surplus
In the main model, we assumed that all the bargaining power was in the hands of the creditor country.
Even though it is plausible that the creditor country has a larger bargaining weight, our assumption
of a `take it or leave it' o er may be too strong. Hence, in this section we relax it and assume that the
bargaining weight of i is 0 <  < 1, and that of country g is 1 -  . e baseline case corresponds to
 = 0. is changes the size of the transfer that i receives as it can obtain a share  of the total surplus
generated by avoiding the default. e transfer to i is now:

                                                          g
            1 ( ) = bi
                     1 1-
                          i,i    i
                              - y1                   i
                                    + (1 - i,i ) +  y1 + y1 - i,u (bi    i
                                                                    1 - y1 ) .                        (32)

       e rst two terms on the right hand side corresponds to the previous expression for the transfer,
                                                                                               i      g
i.e. when i has no bargaining power. e last term represents the share of the total surplus y1    + y1   -
   i     i,u
(b1 -  ) that goes to country i. It increases with the collateral damage  in icted on g in case of
default. While the transfer increases with  , the threshold levels and remain unchanged. At the
surplus is zero, hence there is no transfer and default becomes optimal. At , country i unilaterally
prefers not to default even without transfers. As long as income realizations are observable, no transfer
is needed. is implies a downward discontinuity in consumption for i at = : a slight increase in
income makes default non-credible and therefore eliminates the transfer.
      e expectation that i has some strictly positive bargaining weight in period 1 also modi es the
incentive to issue debt in period 0. Because the thresholds are unchanged, the probability of default
is una ected. Hence the La er curve is unchanged. However, the level of debt issued, bi  1 , a ects the
expected transfer along two margins. In comparison to Eq. (29), the rst-order condition for optimal
debt has two addtional terms :


                                         i          g                            d¯
            (G(¯) - G( )) +       i,i
                                      y1   (¯) + y1   - i,u bi      i
                                                             1 - y1 (¯)    g (¯)    (1 -  )
                           (1 -  )                                               db
                               d                       d¯      
      = (bi
          1 - y
              ¯1i
                  )(1 -  )g ( ) + (bi 1 - y
                                              i
                                             ¯1 ¯)g (¯) +        i,i
                                                                      i,u [G(¯) - G( )] (1 -  ) .
                               db                      db (1 -  )

    On the le hand side (marginal gain of issuing debt), in addition to the expectation that marginal
debt is paid by the transfer, an additional term (the second one in the bracket) is related to the discon-
tinuity in consumption at : increasing the level of debt raises and therefore makes it more likely that
a transfer will be needed. A share  of the surplus is now captured by i and this additional marginal
gain of debt increases risk shi ing.     ere is however also an additional term on the right hand side
(marginal cost of issuing debt). In addition to the cost of increasing debt due to higher thresholds (
and ) and therefore borrowing costs, the last term on the right hand side reduces the incentive to issue


                                                   42
debt. is is because higher debt reduces the total surplus from not defaulting on the rest of the world
(as measured by the share of debt held outside the eurozone i,u ). Country i captures a share  of that
surplus, hence this reduces the incentive to issue debt. e net e ect on debt issuance is ambiguous.
    Relaxing the assumption that all the bargaining power is in the hand of the creditor country leaves
the thresholds for default or bailout unchanged compared to our baseline case. Instead, it shares the
bene ts of the bailout with the debtor country, and has an ambiguous e ect on the incentive to issue
debt.


6.2     Default vs. Exit
In July 2012, Greece restructured its debt, implementing one of the largest sovereign haircuts in modern
history. Yet, the country remained in the eurozone, and agreed to the terms of a bailout that was
described in Section 2. In our baseline model, in the event that the borrower defaults, it should not
receive any bailout. To make this point explicitly, Fig. 5 reports the timeline of NPV transfers to Greece,
estimated between 2010 and 2018 using the methodology of Section 2 and using the planned sequence
of disbursements and repayments at each point in time. e gure indicates that the transfers to Greece
were minimal between 2010 and 2012 and jumped to 20% of GDP in 2012, precisely at the time at which
Greece defaulted on its sovereign debt. rough the lens of the model, Greece should have received a
transfer in 2010-11 and no transfer post-default. We now extend the model to account for the pa ern
we see in the data. To do so, we consider an extension of the model were a country can decide to
default and/or exit the monetary union altogether. In this extension, members of a monetary union
may now nd it in their interest to support nancially one of their neighbors, so as to avoid a default,
an exit from the currency union, or both. In particular, we characterize the conditions under which it
is optimal to let a country default, yet provide a transfer so as to avoid an exit from the currency union.
We provide a characterization of the optimal transfers and discuss the implications of the model in the
context of the recent Eurozone crisis. A direct implication of our analysis is that any transfer from
European institutions to Greece post 2012 must have served to prevent an implosion of the Eurozone.
However, as in the baseline model, our model still implies that the surplus from these ex-post transfers
are mostly captured by the rest of the monetary union.
      e extended model di erentiates between the direct cost of a default for country i, denoted d ,
and that of an exit, denoted e . Similarly, we di erentiate between the collateral cost for country g in
the event of a default, denoted d , and that in the event of an exit, denoted e . As in the baseline model,
these costs represent the net economic disruption associated with a default, and an exit respectively on
i and g . We also assume that a decision to simultaneously default and exit the currency union imposes
additive costs d +e on i and d +e on g .59 e decision to exit the currency union brings in additional
  59
       is assumption is made mostly for simplicity. An alternative assumption which we do not explore in this paper is that

                                                            43
                                                                           Combined
                                            60%
                                                           Restructuring
                                                   Programme 1
                                            50%


                                            40%




                        Percentage of GDP
                                            30%


                                            20%


                                            10%


                                             0%


                                            -10%


                                            -20%
                                              2008-Q1 2009-Q4 2011-Q3 2013-Q3 2015-Q2 2017-Q1 2019-Q1 2020-Q4


  e gure reports the timeline of combined transfers in present value from the GLF, the EFSF, the ESM and the IFM to
Greece, between 2010 and 2018, were the NPV at each point in time depend on the planned sequence of disbursements and
repayments in place at that time. Fraction of 2010 Greek GDP. Source: Authors calculations from ESM, IFM data. See
online appendix for details.

                      Figure 5:                        e Time Line of Greek Transfers. Percent of 2010 Greek GDP


bene ts to i. Most importantly, it allows i to regain some monetary autonomy, and debase the value
of local currency debt held externally.60 We assume that this additional bene t is proportional to the
outstanding stock of debt held abroad and express it as bi      ii
                                                         1 (1 - 1 ) where  > 0, with a corresponding
loss for g of bi  i,g 61
               1  . Nevertheless, we restrict the parameters so that i always prefers to default before
exiting the currency union. is is summarized in the following assumption.62

Assumption 1. : Country i always prefers to default before exiting.

                                                                                1
                                                                             <      .
                                                                           e   d + 
the cost function is superadditive in default and exit.
   60
      While the debt is initially issued in the common currency, part of it may be re-denominated in local currency in the
event of an exit.
   61
      Monetary autonomy may also confer bene ts to i that are proportional to its output, but these are already subsumed in
e . Although an exiting country would be responsible for indemnifying the ECB for any net claims on Target2 imbalances
that remained at the time of separation, one can imagine that exit could also lead to default on Target2 balances. is can
be treated as additional default conditional on exit. In addition, one could imagine that exiting the currency union would
also confer some exibility to g . However, we consider in what follows that the gains from this increased autonomy are
negligible from g 's perspective, possibly because g has more control over the currency union's policies, including monetary
policy.
   62
        e alternative assumptions, that i would either default and exit jointly or always prefer to exit before defaulting, strike
us as counterfactual. A er all, Greece defaulted in 2012, yet remained in the Eurozone.




                                                                               44
      is condition is satis ed if the cost of exit per unit of output e is large, and or the bene ts per
unit of debt held abroad  are small.
    In period 1, country i decides whether to repay or default and whether to stay or exit the currency
union. Country g can then decide to make a unilateral transfer conditional on i's decision and the
realization of i's output. We further assume that g cannot commit to a no-bailout clause, so i and g will
always achieve ex-post e ciency.63 We begin by characterizing the decision choices of country i in the
absence of transfers. is is summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 6 (Optimal Default and Exit Decisions without Bailouts). Under Assumption 1, and in the
absence of transfers, country i's default and exit decisions in period t = 1 are characterized by a default
threshold ¯d and an exit threshold ¯e such that ¯d > ¯e and:

   1. i repays and stays in the currency union if and only if:

                                                  i           (1 - i,i )bi
                                                                         1 /y
                                                                            ¯1i
                                                  1    ¯d                       .
                                                              d + (1 - i,i )

   2. i defaults but remains in the currency union if and only if:

                                                                   (1 - i,i )bi
                                                                              1 /y
                                                                                 ¯1i
                                             ¯d >     i
                                                      1    ¯e                        .
                                                                        e

   3. i defaults and exits the currency union if and only if:

                                                              ¯e >    i
                                                                      1.



Proof. See the Appendix.

       e intuition for the result is as follows. First, because the gains and costs of default and exit are
additive, it is easy to check that default is preferred whenever ¯d > i 1 , independently of the decision to
                                          e     i
exit, while exit is preferred whenever ¯ > 1 , regardless of the decision to repay. Second, Assumption 1
ensures that ¯d > ¯e so that the country always prefers to default rst, for a given initial debt level, as
domestic economic conditions deteriorate.
    Fig. 6 provides a graphical illustration of i's decision to default and/or exit, as a function of the ratio
of debt to potential output, bi
                              1 /y
                                 ¯1i
                                     , on the horizontal axis, and the output gap i1 on the vertical axis.    e
cut-o s ¯d and ¯e represent rays through the origin that partition the state space into the three regions
described in the proposition. Higher realizations of output and lower initial debt levels make it more
likely that debts will be repaid and that the country will remain in the currency union.
  63
       In terms of the baseline model, we assume that  = 0.

                                                              45
    Next, we consider the optimal transfers from g to i. As before, we assume that g makes the minimal
transfer needed to avoid default and/or exit from i. Given the additivity assumption, we can consider
three possible transfers: a transfer  d                                       e
                                      1 to avoid a default, another transfer  1 to avoid an exit, and a
transfer  de     d    e
          1 =  1 +  1 , to avoid both default and exit.


Proposition 7 (Optimal Ex-post Transfers and Default/Exit Decisions). Under Assumption 1, country
g implements the following optimal ex-post bailout policy:
               i
   1. When     1    ¯d , there is no bailout: 1 = 0; Country i repays and stays in the currency union;

   2. When ¯d >        i
                       1       d
                                   , where
                                                                      g
                                              d     i,u bi
                                                         1 /y
                                                            ¯1i
                                                                - d y1  /y
                                                                         ¯1i
                                                  =               i,u
                                                                             < ¯d ,
                                                         d + 
       country g makes a transfer to avoid default and exit. Country i repays and stays in the currency
       union;
               d       i       e
   3. When         >   1           , where
                                                                           g
                                                  e       i,u bi
                                                               1 /y
                                                                  ¯1i
                                                                      - e y1 /y
                                                                              ¯1i
                                                      =                           ,
                                                                   e
       country g makes a minimal transfer to avoid exit. Country i defaults and stays in the currency union;
               e       i
   4. When         >   1,   country g does not make any transfer: 1 = 0; Country i defaults and exits.

Proof. See the Appendix.

       e intuition for the result is as follows. First, when i               d
                                                                       1  ¯ , country i prefers to repay and stay
in the currency union even in the absence of transfer. erefore, 1 = 0. When i                            d
                                                                                                   1 = ¯ , country i is
indi erent between defaulting and repaying, but prefers to stay in the currency union. Yet, because
a default in icts collateral damage on g , the la er is willing to make a minimal transfer  d                1 as long
as ¯d > i  1 
                  d
                    .       e intuition is the same as in the baseline model: g prefers to make an ex-post
transfer as long as the joint surplus from not-defaulting remains positive. ere is one di erence with
the previous case. When ¯d > i              e                                 d
                                      1  ¯ , it is su cient to transfer  1 since i prefers not to exit. However,
when ¯e > i   1 >
                      d
                        , g must transfer  d       e
                                              1 +  1 . Finally, when
                                                                         d
                                                                           > i 1 , g is not willing to make a transfer
to avoid repayment. However, as long as i         1 >
                                                         e
                                                           , it will make a transfer  e  1 to avoid exit.
    Proposition 7 illustrates an important result: it is possible for g to make transfers to avoid a default,
or an exit, or both. Fig. 6 illustrates the optimal choice of default and exit in the presence of the optimal
transfers. e transfers are also not monotonic in output. For moderate levels of debt, it is optimal to
make transfers so that i never defaults or exits. However, the transfers vary non-monotonically with
the level of output. As output decreases, i's preference for a joint default and exit forces g to increase



                                                               46
                          Figure 6: Optimal Ex-Post Bailout and Default vs. Exit Decisions


discretely its transfer from  d     d     e 64
                              1 to  1 +  1 .   For higher levels of debt, transfers go through two phases
                                             d
as a function of output. A rst transfer  1 is implemented when output is moderately high, to avoid
a default. For moderate levels of output, it becomes optimal to let i default and remain in the union.
However, as output decreases, g then initiates transfers  e    1 to avoid an exit from the currency union.
Finally, if output becomes really low, it is optimal to let i default and exit.
      is extension allows us to think about the determinants of ex-post bailouts both prior to a default
episode, or, in the case of Greece a er 2012, post default, but before an exit.


6.3     Debt monetization
Debt monetization is an alternative to default which we have excluded so far. Even though article 123
of the Treaty of the European Union forbids ECB direct purchase of public debt, debt monetization can
still take place through in ation and euro depreciation. In this section, we analyze in a very simpli ed
framework how the interaction of transfers and debt monetization a ects the probability of default
and how the ECB may be overburdened when transfers are excluded. To facilitate the analysis of this
  64
       is discontinuity is a consequence of the fact that output is perfectly observed by g .



                                                              47
extension we simplify the model by assuming a zero recovery rate ( = 0) and by focusing on two
polar cases where transfers are always possible ( = 0) and where transfers are excluded ( = 1).
      ere are now three players: i, g and the ECB . In addition to g 's decision on the transfer, i's
decision on default, the ECB decides how much and whether to monetize the debt. We assume the ECB
can choose the in ation rate for the monetary union as a whole. is would be the case for example
with antitative Easing (QE) which generates higher in ation and euro depreciation that both reduce
the real value of public debt. Importantly, all public debts are in ated away at the same rate in the
monetary union so that g also stands to bene t from it. We follow Aguiar et al. (2015) and assume that
the ECB trades o distortionary costs of in ation against the scal bene ts of debt reduction65 . If z is
                                            h
the in ation rate, the distortion cost is zy1 for h = i, g . We also assume as in Aguiar et al. (2015) that
the in ation rate is between 0 and a maximum rate z above which distortion costs are in nite.
       e ECB can also implement targeted purchases of public debt. In this case, it would be possible to
buy public debt of a speci c country without any in ation cost for example if it was sterilized by sales
of other eurozone countries debt. e Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) program announced in
September 2012 (but never put into place) is close to such a description. e Securities Markets Program
(SMP) program was put into place in May 2010 by the ECB and terminated in September 2012 to be
replaced by OMT. e aim was to purchase sovereign bonds on the secondary markets. At its peak, the
program's volume totaled around 210 bn euros. In the case of Greece, the Eurogroup decided in 2018
to transfer (via the ESM) part of the pro ts made through SMP back to the country. Such a decision
can therefore be interpreted in the context of our model as similar to transfers that we analyzed above.
Debt monetization at the in ation rate z is of a di erent nature and resembles a partial default, except
                                            i    g                            i    g
that the total cost for the eurozone is z (y1 + y1 ) in case of in ation and y1 + y1 in case of a standard
default. We also reasonably assume that  and  are larger than z , so that,in proportion to output, the
costs of default are both larger than the marginal distortionary cost of in ation.

6.3.1       e case with transfers

We rst analyze the case where transfers by g are possible and not subject to political risk i.e.  = 0.
Remember that in presence of transfers by g to i, g captures the entire surplus of i not defaulting: g 's
transfers are ex-post e cient from the joint perspective of g and i. is implies that the objective of
the ECB and g are perfectly aligned if, as we assume, the ECB maximizes the whole EMU welfare. e
ECB will choose either zero or maximum in ation rate z depending whether the marginal bene t of
in ating the eurozone debt held in the rest of the world is below or above its marginal distortion cost.
Without default, the ECB will choose not to in ate the debt if the gain from in ating debt held outside
  65
     An alternative is de Ferra and Romei (2019) who analyze the interaction between sovereign default risk and monetary
policy in a monetary union where debt is denominated in real terms. In their model, a looser stance of monetary policy
increases debtors' incentive to repay debt.

                                                          48
the eurozone is lower than the distortion costs of in ation.     e ECB chooses a zero in ation rate if i's
output realization is high enough such that:

                                      i     bi
                                             1
                                               i,u
                                                   + bg1
                                                         g,u   g
                                                              y1
                                      1   >                  - i                                       (33)
                                                   y i
                                                     1        y1

We exclude situations such that the ECB in ates even in case of default of i (which we call scal dom-
inance) which apply when g debts are very high and situations where the ECB never in ates (which
we call monetary dominance) which apply when distortion costs  are very high.           is la er case is
identical to the main model. e conditions on parameters are detailed in Appendix E. Hence, we con-
centrate on the interesting case where the ECB may in ate the debt for low levels of i output (below )
                                                                                               bi (1-i,i )
which we call "weak scal dominance". When the ECB decides not to monetize the debt, = 1 yi
                                                                                                     1
de nes the threshold level of shock above which i does not require any transfer and does not default.
In the case of monetization, the transfer necessary to make i indi erent between default and no default
becomes:
                                           i,i                          g g,i
                           1 = bi                        i
                                  1 1 - 1 (1 - z ) - y1 [ - z ] + zb1                                (34)

    We can compare the transfer with and without monetization (z = 0). e rst element on the right
hand side reduces the required transfer because debt monetization weakens the incentive of i to default
                                                                                                  i
on debt held outside of i. e in ation distortion in the second term, proportional to output, y1     must
be compensated by a higher transfer given that in default there is no such in ation distortion. e last
term is the in ation tax on the g debt held by i which also must be compensated by a higher transfer.
Hence, debt monetization allows to reduce the transfer for low levels of g debt and high levels of i debt
which is the case we concentrate on.
     e threshold level of i output below which g prefers a default is also a ected by the possibility of
ECB monetization:                                 gu g     g
                             i   iu bi
                                     1 (1 - z ) -  b1 z - y1 ( - z )
                             1 <                                                                    (35)
                                               ( - z ) y i
                                                         1

It can be shown that ECB monetization, if it takes place, always reduces the likelihood of default in the
sense that  z
              < 0, i.e. the output realization below which i defaults falls with debt monetization.
       e intuition is that the net gain of in ating the debt for the eurozone is eliminated when default
occurs. Hence, monetization, because it taxes agents from outside the eurozone, produces an additional
incentive for g not to let i default. Another result is that the whole bene t of debt monetization (on the
part of debt held outside the eurozone), if it occurs, is captured by g . e increase in consumption by
g due to debt monetization can be shown to be: z [bi     1
                                                           i,u
                                                               + bg
                                                                  1
                                                                    g,u      i
                                                                        -  (y1    g
                                                                               + y1 )] which represents the
entire surplus of monetization of eurozone debt held by the rest of the world (net of distortion costs).
   e intuition is that any increase in net income (through debt monetization or through an increase in


                                                    49
                      min                            ¯                ¯                max

                       default        no-default         no-default       no default
                       no bailout     bailout            bailout          no bailout
                       no in a-       in ation           no in a-         no in a-
                       tion                              tion             tion

                        Figure 7: Bailout and In ation under Weak Fiscal Dominance

 i
 1)of i serves to lower the necessary transfer to avoid default.
    Under reasonable parameters (see appendix) Fig. 7 depicts how the equilibrium changes with i
output realizations. As they deteriorate, the equilibrium moves from a situation with 1) no default, no
transfer, no in ation, ; 2) no default, transfer, no in ation; 3) no default, in ation, transfer; 4) default,
no in ation, no transfer. is case applies in particular for low levels of g debt.

6.3.2   When transfers are excluded: the overburdened ECB

  e situation we described is one where a scal union or a strong cooperative agreement exists such
that scal transfers are possible with full discretion ( = 0). is meant that two instruments exist for
two objectives: transfers to avoid default and in ation to monetize the debt held outside the eurozone.
  is is an e cient use of these two instruments.
      ese transfers may actually be hard to implement for political and legal reasons which we captured
in the previous analysis with  > 0. We analyze the simplest version of this situation with  = 1.
Because ex-post e cient transfers to avert a default are not possible, the ECB may now use monetary
policy to avert a costly default. To make the analysis as simple and as stark as possible we assume that
the ECB may choose positive in ation only because transfers are not possible and in order to avoid a
default of i. In addition, we assume that bg
                                           1 = 0 as we concentrate on the incentive to avert a default of
i. e minimum in ation rate necessary to avoid a default is the one that leaves i indi erent between
default and no default:
                                              bi (1 - i,i ) - y1i
                                        z~= 1                                                       (36)
                                              bi       i,i
                                               1 (1 -  ) - y1
                                                               i


Note that as long as  >  (which we assume), the in ation rate necessary to avert default increases as
                                                                                                bi (1-i,i )
the output shock in i deteriorates. is equation also de nes a threshold level of shock = 1 yi
                                                                                                      1
above which i does not require any monetization and does not default. It can be shown that for  >
 >  the ECB is willing to accept such monetization at rate z ~ to avert a default but the constraint that
it is below the maximum rate z¯ de nes a level of shock below which the ECB prefers to let the country




                                                     50
                      min                        ~                   ¯                max

                              default                no-default          no default
                              no in a-               in ation            no bailout
                              tion                                       no in a-
                                                                         tion
                             Figure 8: Bailout with Overburdened Central Bank


default rather than monetize it:

                                            (1 - i,i ) bi
                                                        1 (1 - z )
                                       ~
                                                ( - z ) y i 1


    Fig. 8 shows that when transfers are impossible, the ECB in ates the debt for intermediate levels of
output realizations to avoid default. e in ation rate is maximum just above the threshold ~. Contrary
to transfers, in ation generates distortion costs. Hence, using in ation rather than transfers to avoid
default, a situation where the ECB is "overburdened", is ine cient.


7    Conclusion and policy debates
Our paper proposes a view that reconciles the "Northern" and "Southern" narratives of the crisis. e
former focuses on the collateral damage of default in the EMU that reduces the credibility of the no-
bailout commitment and induces excessive borrowing by scally fragile countries.               e later stresses
that the e ciency bene ts of transfers and debt monetization that prevent a default are entirely cap-
tured by the creditor country. ere is no "solidarity" in the transfers o ered to prevent a default. We
show that these two views are two sides of the same coin and are necessary to understand the dynam-
ics of the crisis at play. Our paper can also shed light on some discussions on eurozone reforms and
why these reforms need to carefully balance these two sides by improving both market discipline and
risk sharing. Proposals (see B´  enassy- e  ´ r´
                                               e et al. (2018)) to introduce orderly restructuring in case of
default in the eurozone can be interpreted as lowering the collateral cost of default and also decreasing
the probability of a bailout. In our model, these should reduce risk shi ing, excessive borrowing and
should be welcome by creditor countries. However, these proposals have been criticised (see Tabellini
(2018)) as potentially destabilizing for high debt countries. is concern is indeed validated in our model
because a strengthening of the no bailout commitment or any policy that increases the probability of a
future default may precipitate an immediate default due to the spike in the cost of debt rollover. "kick-
ing the can down the road" may have some merit a er all and improving market discipline should be
done very carefully and gradually especially for high debt countries. e controversy on the possible
introduction a parallel currency in Italy (the so-called mini-BOTs) can also be interpreted in the light of

                                                     51
our model. Such an introduction should reduce the cost of a potential exit with several consequences:
the size of the necessary transfer to avoid exit increases but this is also the case for the probability of
exit and the cost of borrowing. Such a move has therefore an ambiguous impact for a scally fragile
country.
    Our model can also speak to the debate on the creation of a scal capacity with macroeconomic sta-
bilization objectives (see Kenen (1969) for the rst proposal and Farhi and Werning (2017) and B´   enassy-
    ´ r´
    e  e et al. (2018) more recent ones) as well as in response to large asymmetric shocks such as COVID-
19 (B´ enassy- e    ´ r´
                       e et al., 2020) . One criticism of such a eurozone budget is that it would generate
transfers to scally fragile countries with insu cient scal space to use national scal policy during
a downturn. Our model shows that these transfers are indeed ex-post e cient in case of a shock that
threatens the repayment and integrity of the eurozone. One message of our paper is that these transfers
can be substantial in a monetary union with collateral damage.




                                                    52
References
Acharya, Viral V, and Sascha Ste en. 2015. " e "greatest" carry trade ever? Understanding euro-
  zone bank risks." Journal of Financial Economics, 115(2): 215­236.

Aguiar, Mark, Manuel Amador, Emmanuel Farhi, and Gita Gopinath. 2015. "Coordination and
 Crisis in Monetary Unions." arterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1727­1779.

B´
 enassy- e  ´ r´
               e, Agn`es, Giancarlo Corsetti, Antonio Fat´  as, Gabriel J Febelmayr, Marcel
  Fratzscher, Clemens Fuest, Francesco Giavazzi, Ramon Marimon, Philippe Martin, Jean
  Pisani-Ferry, et al. 2020. "COVID-19 economic crisis: Europe needs more than one instrument."
  CEPR Vox-EU.

B´
 enassy- e   ´ r´
                e, Agn`
                      es, Markus Brunnermeier, Henrik Enderlein, Emmanuel Farhi, Mar-
  cel Fratzscher, Clemens Fuest, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Philippe Martin, Jean Pisani-
  Ferry, H´el`
             ene Rey, Isabel Schnabel, Nicolas Veron, Beatrice Weder di Mauro, and Jeromin
  Zettelmeyer. 2018. "Reconciling Risk Sharing With Market Discipline: A Constructive Approach to
  Euro Area Reform." CEPR Policy Insights, , (91).

Bindseil, Ulrich, Marco Corsi, Benjamin Sahel, and Ad Visser. 2017. " e Eurosystem Collateral
  Framework Explained." European Central Bank ECB Occasional Paper 189.

Blustein, Paul. 2015. "Laid low:   e IMF, the euro zone and the rst rescue of Greece." Centre for
  International Governance Innovation CIGI Paper Series 61.

Broner, Fernando, Aitor Erce, Alberto Martin, and Jaume Ventura. 2014. "Sovereign Debt Mar-
  kets in Turbulent Times: Creditor Discrimination and Crowding-out E ects." Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 61: 143­147.

Buiter, Willem H, and Anne Sibert. 2005. "How the Eurosystem's Treatment of Collateral in its
  Open Market Operations Weakens Fiscal Discipline in the Eurozone (and what to do about it)." CEPR
  Discussion Paper 5387.

Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogo . 1989a. "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt."
  Journal of Political Economy, 97(1): 155­178.

Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogo . 1989b. "Sovereign Debt: Is to Forgive to Forget?" American
  Economic Review, 79(1): 43­50.

Bulow, Jeremy, and Kenneth Rogo . 2015. "Why Sovereigns Repay Debts to External Creditors and
  Why It Ma ers." CEPR Vox-EU.

                                                53
Calvo, Guillermo. 1988. "Servicing the Public Debt:       e Role of Expectations." American Economic
  Review, 78(4): 647­661.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Rohan Kekre. 2019. "                    e macroeco-
 nomics of the Greek Depression." NBER Working Paper 25900.

Cohen, Daniel, and Je rey Sachs. 1986. "Growth and External Debt under Risk of Debt Repudiation."
 European Economic Review, 30: 529­60.

Cole, Harold, and Timothy Kehoe. 2000. "Self-Ful lling Debt Crises."      e Review of Economic Studies,,
 67(1): 91­11§.

Const^ancio, V´
              itor. 2012. "Contagion and the European debt crisis." Financial Stability Review, 16: 109­
 121.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Aitor Erce, and Timothy Uy. 2017. "O cial Sector Lending Strategies During
 the Euro Area Crisis." Centre for Macroeconomics (CFM) Discussion Papers 1720.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Aitor Erce, and Timothy Uy. 2018. "Debt Sustainability and the Terms of Of-
   cial Support." CEPR Discussion Paper 13292.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, and Luca Dedola. 2016. " e mystery of the printing press: Monetary policy
 and self-ful lling debt crises." Journal of the European Economic Association, 14(6): 1329­1371.

de Ferra, Sergio, and Federica Romei. 2019. "Sovereign Default in a Monetary Union." CEPR Dis-
  cussion Paper 12976.

de Grauwe, Paul. 2012. "    e governance of a fragile Eurozone." Australian Economic Review, 45(3): 255­
  268.

Dellas, Harris, and Dirk Niepelt. 2016. "Sovereign debt with heterogeneous creditors." Journal of
  International Economics, 99: S16­S26.

Dovis, Alessandro, and Rishabh Kirpalani. 2020. "Fiscal rules, bailouts, and reputation in federal
 governments." American Economic Review, 110(3): 860­88.

Du, Wenxin, Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger. 2018. "        e U.S. Treasury Premium." Journal of Interna-
 tional Economics, 112(C): 167­181.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Mark Gersovitz. 1981. "Debt with Potential Repudiation:          eoretical and Em-
  pirical Analysis." e Review of Economic Studies, 48(2): 289­309.



                                                  54
EC. 2010. " e Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece - First Review." European Commission
  Occasional Papers 68.

EC. 2012a. " e Financial Sector Adjustment Programme for Spain." European Commission Occasional
  Papers 118.

EC. 2012b. " e Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece." European Commission Occa-
  sional Papers 94.

EC. 2012c. " e Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece - First Review." European Com-
  mission Occasional Papers 123.

EC. 2014. " e Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece - Fourth Review." European Com-
  mission Occasional Papers 192.

EC. 2016. "Ex Post Evaluation of the Economic Adjustment Programme - Portugal 2011-2014." European
  Commission Institutional Papers 40.

EFSF. 2010. "Financial Assistance Facility Agreement between European Stability Mechanism and e
  Republic of Cyprus as the Bene ciary Member State and Central Bank of Cyprus as Central Bank."
  European Financial Stability Facility.

EFSF. 2012a. "Master Financial Assistance Facility Agreement between European Financial Stability
  Facility and Central Bank of Ireland." European Financial Stability Facility.

EFSF. 2012b. "Master Financial Assistance Facility Agreement between European Financial Stability
  Facility, e Portuguese Republic as Bene ciary Member State, and Banco De Portugal." European
  Financial Stability Facility.

EFSF. 2013a. "Amend Agreement Relating to the Loan Facility Agreement, Financial Assistance Facil-
  ity Agreement, and Master Financial Assistance Facility Agreement." European Financial Stability
  Facility.

EFSF. 2013b. "Amendment Agreement Relating to the Loan Facility Agreement, First Financial As-
  sistance Facility Agreement, Second Financial Assitance Facility agreement, and Master Financial
  Assistance Facility Agreement." European Financial Stability Facility.

EFSF. 2014. "Second Amendment Agreement." European Financial Stability Fund.

EFSF. 2015. "   ird Amendment Agreement." European Financial Stability Fund.

ESM. 2014. "Annual Report European Stability Mechanism 2013." European Stability Mechanism.

                                               55
ESM. 2015. "Annual Report European Stability Mechanism 2014." European Stability Mechanism.

ESM. 2017. "Short-Term Debt Measures for Greece, Explainer." European Stability Mechanism.

ESM. 2019a. "EFSF approves reimbursement and reduction of step-up interest margin for Greece." Eu-
  ropean Stability Mechanism.

ESM. 2019b. "Lending Rates." h ps://www.esm.europa.eu/lending-rates, European Stability Mechanism,
  Accessed: 2019-07-29.

EU. 2011a. "Council regulation (EU) no 323/2013." Council of European Union.

EU. 2011b. "Council regulation (EU) no 344/2011." Council of European Union.

EU. 2011c. "Council regulation (EU) no 682/2011." Council of European Union.

EU. 2011d. "Council regulation (EU) no 683/2011." Council of European Union.

EU. 2011e. "Council regulation (EU) no 77/2011." Council of European Union.

EU. 2012a. "Treaty on the European Stability Mechanism." European Union, European Union.

EU. 2012b. "Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union." European Union, European Union.

EU. 2013. "Council regulation (EU) no 313/2013." Council of European Union.

European Commission. 2012. "Parliamentary questions - Answer given by Mr Rehn on behalf of the
  Commission." 29 June 2012.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning. 2017. "Fiscal Unions." American Economic Review,
  12(107): 3788­3834.

Farhi, Emmanuel, and Jean Tirole. 2018. "Deadly embrace: Sovereign and nancial balance sheets
  doom loops." e Review of Economic Studies, 85(3): 1781­1823.

Fernandez, Raquel, and Robert Rosenthal. 1990. "Strategic Models of Sovereign-Debt Renegotia-
  tions." e Review of Economic Studies, 57(3): 331­349.

Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza, Huw Pill, and Lucrezia Reichlin. 2012. "         e ECB and the
  Interbank Market." Economic Journal, 122(564): 467­486.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, omas Philippon, and Dimitri Vayanos. 2017. "         e Analytics of the
 Greek Crisis." NBER Macroeconomics Annual.



                                                56
IMF. 2013. "Twel h Review under the Extended Arrangement and Proposal for Post-Program Moni-
  toring." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2014. "Fi h Review under the Extended Arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility, and Re-
  quest for Waiver of Nonobservance of Performance Criterion and Rephasing of Access." International
  Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2016a. "Conditionality Factsheet." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2016b. "IMF Stand-By Arrangement." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2017. "   e IMF's Extended Fund Facility." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2018a. "IMF Financial Operations." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2018b. "Second Post-Program Monitoring Discussions." International Monetary Fund.

Joshi, Priyadarshani, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2005. "Implicit Transfers in IMF Lending, 1973-
  2003." IMF Working Paper 05/8.

Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L Violante. 2018. "Microeconomic heterogeneity and macroeconomic
  shocks." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32(3): 167­94.

Kenen, Peter. 1969. "Monetary Problems of the International Economy." , ed. R.A. Mundell and A.K.
  Swoboda, Chapter he eory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic View. University of Chicago
  Press.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. "              e aggregate demand for trea-
  sury debt." Journal of Political Economy, 120(2): 233­267.

Mengus, Eric. 2014. "International Bailouts: Why Did Banks' Collective Bet Lead Europe to Rescue
 Greece?" Banque de France Working Paper 502.

Niepmann, Friederike, and Tim Schmidt-Eisenlohr. 2013. "Bank Bailouts, International Linkages,
  and Cooperation." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(4): 270­305.

Reuters.     2009.    "EU's     Almunia:no     chance    Greece    default,   euro     zone    exit."
  h ps://uk.reuters.com/article/davos-almunia/davos-eus-almuniano-chance-greece-default-euro-zone-
  exit-idUSLAE00004520100129, (Last Accessed: Nov. 11 2019).

Reuters. 2010. "EU visit starts in Greece, Stark says no bailout." h ps://www.reuters.com/article/us-ecb-
  stark/eu-visit-starts-in-greece-stark-says-no-bailout-idUSTRE60519Q20100106, (Last Accessed: Nov. 11
  2019).

                                                   57
Reuters. 2013. "Bailout loans to Cyprus to have maximum average maturity of 15 years: ESM."
  h ps://www.reuters.com/article/us-cyprus-loans-maturity/bailout-loans-to-cyprus-to-have-maximum-
  average-maturity-of-15-years-esm-idUSBRE9390Q220130410, Last Accessed: June 12, 2018.

Rockafellar, Ralph Tyrell. 1972. Convex analysis. Princeton university press.

Rose, Andrew K. 2005. "One Reason Countries Pay their Debts: Renegotiation and International
 Trade." Journal of Development Economics, 77(1): 189­206.

Schumacher, Julian, and Beatrice Weder di Mauro. 2015. "Greek Debt Sustainability and O cial
  Crisis Lending." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 46(2 (Fall)): 279­305.

Shambaugh, Jay C. 2012. "      e Euro's    ree Crises." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 43(1
  (Spring): 157­231.

Tabellini, Guido. 2018. "Risk Sharing and Market Discipline: Finding the Right Mix." CEPR Vox-EU.

Tenreyro, Silvana. 2019. "Monetary policy and open questions in international macroeconomics."
  Speech John Flemming Memorial Lecture.

  e    Financial   Times.     2009.    "Germany      ready   to    help    eurozone     members."
  h ps://www. .com/content/825af89a-fe02-11dd-932e-000077b07658, (Last Accessed: Nov. 11 2019).

Tirole, Jean. 2015. "Country Solidarity in Sovereign Crises." American Economic Review, 105(8): 2333­
  63.

Uhlig, Harald. 2014. "Sovereign default risk and banks in a monetary union." German Economic Review,
 15(1): 23­41.

Woodford, Michael. 1998. "Doing without money: controlling in ation in a post-monetary world."
 Review of Economic Dynamics, 1(1): 173­219.

Zettelmeyer, Jeromin, Christoph Trebesch, and Mitu Gulati. 2013. "        e Greek debt restructuring:
  an autopsy." Economic Policy, 28(75): 513­563.




                                                 58
                                                Appendices

A      Construction of the Dataset
A detailed description of the data construction is available on a not-for-publication online appendix to the paper.

    · IMF Data for Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, and Portugal comes from the IMF website (h ps://www.imf.org/), which
      reports actual and projected disbursements, repayments of principal, and interest payments. Spain did not receive
      IMF assistance.

    · EFSF and ESM Disbursements and Repayment schedules for Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and are available from
      the ESM website (h ps://www.esm.europa.eu/). For interest payments, we apply the blended rate for December 2019
      to the series of outstanding debt over the lifetime of the lending cycle. We are grateful to Corse i, Erce and Uy (2017)
      for initially sharing this data, which we have extended via the ESM website.

    · EFSM data for Ireland come from the Irish Treasury website. EFSM data for Portugal come from the European
      Commission website (h ps://ec.europa.eu/info/). Realized interest payments are calculated by applying lending rates
      from European Commission (2012). For future interest payments, we include a term premium calculated using
      euribor OIS rates relative to the last observed euribor 3-month rate. We use the Bloomberg Tickers as in Du, Im and
      Schreger (2018).

    · Data for the Greek Lending Facility (GLF) for Greece comes from the European Commission website and various
      reports therein. To calculate interest rates, we add the reported margins to the end of period 3-month Euribor rate.
      To forecast 3-month Euribor rates, we again use the euribor OIS rates from Du, Im and Schreger (2018) to calculate
      a term premium.

    · Although we do not calculate the transfer, our information on bilateral loan data to Ireland come from the United
      Kingdom Treasury and the Sweden, and Denmark Ministry of Finances:

           ­ h ps://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/hm-treasury
           ­ h ps://www.government.se/government-of-sweden/ministry-of- nance/
           ­ h ps://m.fm.dk/ministryo nance/home




B      Characterizing the La er Curve
  is appendix provides a full characterization of the La er curve in the basic model.
       e La er curve satis es :

                                                                  ¯(b)               (b)
                                                   i                                                    i
                       D(b)    = b (1 - d (b)) + y
                                                 ¯1                      dG ( ) +          dG ( )   +
                                                                  (b)               min




where the cut-o s are de ned as:

                                                          (1 - i,i )b/y
                                                                      ¯1i
                                              ¯(b)   =                i,i
                                                           + (1 -  )

                                                             59
                                  Borrower Lender              Start Date
                                  Cyprus   ESM                 May, 2013
                                  Cyprus   IMF                 May, 2013
                                  Greece   EC                  May, 2010
                                  Greece   EFSF              March, 2012
                                  Greece   ESM               August, 2015
                                  Greece   IMF                 May, 2010
                                  Hungary BoP             December, 2008
                                  Hungary IMF             November, 2008
                                  Ireland  EFSF            February, 2011
                                  Ireland  EFSM             January, 2011
                                  Ireland  IMF              January, 2011
                                  Latvia   BoP             February, 2009
                                  Latvia   IMF            December, 2008
                                  Portugal EFSF                June, 2011
                                  Portugal EFSM                May, 2011
                                  Portugal IMF                 May, 2011
                                  Romania BoP                   July, 2009
                                  Romania IMF                  May, 2009
                                  Spain    ESM            December, 2012

Table A.1: Starting Date by Programme.
Note that in the case of Greece, we treat both IMF Programs as one lending cycle. Programme 2 o cially begins
in May 2012.




                              Borrower                  ota Share of     ota
                              Cyprus                    140            567%
                              Greece                    823          3,374%
                              Hungary                 1,038            735%
                              Ireland                   838          2,322%
                              Latvia, Republic of       127            775%
                              Portugal                  867          2,645%
                              Romania                 1,030          1,026%

Table A.2: IMF  otas (in thousands of SDR) and Share of    otas.
Note: Share of otas de ned as Total IMF disbursements divided by total quota as of January 2010. Source: IMF.




                                                     60
                                                                             g
                                                                i,u b/y
                                                                      ¯1i
                                                                          - y1 /y
                                                                                ¯1i
                                                 (b)    =
                                                                     + i,u

and the probability of default is:
                                          d (b) = G( (b)) +  (G(¯(b)) - G( (b)))

       ere are a number of cases to consider:
                       i
     · When b  b  ymin     /(1 - i,i ) +  . In that case ¯  min and i's output is always su ciently high that i prefers
       to repay even without any transfer from g . is makes i's debt riskless and

                                                                D (b) = b + ¯i


                               g
     · If ¯
          b  (( + i,u )ymin
                        i
                            + y1 )/i,u  ^   i
                                        b  ymax /(1 - i,i ) +  .                          is is a condition on the parameters. It can
       be rewri en as:

                            g    i
                           y1  ¯1
                              /y    i,u (     max   -   min )   + /(1 - i,i )(i,u     max   -    min (
                                                                                                         i,u
                                                                                                               + i,g ))

           ­ When b < b  ¯  b<^b. In that case, we have  min < ¯ < max . When b = ¯ b, =                           min   < ¯<   max .   Default
                          i
             can occur if 1  ¯ and ex-post transfers are forbidden. It follows that

                                                                                      ¯
                                          D (b1 ) =  [b1 (1 - G (¯)) + y
                                                                       ¯1i
                                                                                            dG ( )] + ¯i
                                                                                      min



              and the slope of the La er curve is given by

                                                                                    ¯g (¯) 
                                                D (b1 ) =  1 - G (¯) -
                                                                                  + (1 - i,i )

              For these intermediate debt levels, default is a direct consequence of the commitment not to bail-out country
              i in period t = 1. e derivative of the La er curve is discontinuous at b = b if the distribution of shocks is
              such that g ( min ) > 0 and the can write the discontinuity as:

                                                                                                        d¯
                                        D (b+ ) - D (b- )                  i
                                                                  =  -b + ymin g (              min )
                                                                                                        db   b=b
                                                                           min g ( min )
                                                                  = -                    0
                                                                           + (1 - i,i )

                e intuition for the discontinuity is that at b = b, a small increase in debt increases the threshold ¯ beyond
               min , so a default is now possible.     is happens with probability g ( min )d¯. In that case, investors' dis-
                                             i
              counted net loss is  (-b + ymin ).


              It is possible for the La er curve to decrease to the right of b if  min g ( min )/( + (1 - i,i )) > 1. In that
              case the increase in default risk is so rapid that the interest rate rises rapidly and i's revenues D(b) decline as
              soon as b > b. Given that i can always choose to be on the le side of the La er curve by choosing a lower
              bi
               1 , there would never be any default or bailout. We view this case as largely uninteresting.




                                                                  61
                 is case can be ruled out my making the following assumption su cient to ensure D (b+ ) > 0:
              Assumption 2. We assume the following restriction on the pdf of the shocks and the probability of bailout

                                                                  min g ( min )   <1


              [Note: (a) this condition cannot be satis ed with a power law and  = 1 (i.e. no transfers); (b) this condi-
              tion is satis ed for a uniform distribution if  < max / min - 1. A su cient condition for this is min < 2/3.66 ]


                 e second derivative of the La er curve is:

                                                        d¯              
                                          D (b) = -        g (¯) +               (g (¯) + ¯g (¯))
                                                        db          + (1 - i,i )

              If we want to ensure that D (b) < 0 a su cient condition is:
              Assumption 3. We assume that g satis es
                                                                   g( )
                                                                        > -2
                                                                   g( )

              [Note: we can replace this condition by a condition on the slope of the monotone ratio: g ( )/(1 - G( )).]
              [Note: (a) that su cient condition is not satis ed for  = 0 and a power law; (b) it is always satis ed for a
              uniform distribution since g ( ) = 0. ]
                e value of D (¯b- ) is:
                                                                           ¯(¯ b)g ¯(¯
                                                                                     b)
                                            D (¯b- ) =  1 - G ¯(¯    b) -
                                                                           + (1 - i,i )

              We can ensure that this is positive (so that the peak of the La er curve has not been reached) by assuming
              that:

                                                                        ¯(¯b)g ¯(¯
                                                                                 b)
                                                    1/ > G ¯(¯
                                                             b) +
                                                                         + (1 - i,i )

                 is condition is always satis ed when there is no default ( = 0). Otherwise, a su cient condition is:
              Assumption 4. We assume that the distribution of shocks satis es:

                                                       1 > G ¯(¯
                                                               b) + ¯(¯
                                                                      b)g ¯(¯
                                                                            b)


              [Note: with a uniform distribution, the condition above becomes ¯(¯
                                                                                b) <       max /2.   Substituting for ¯(¯
                                                                                                                        b), this
              can be ensured by choosing min such that

                                                                     g
                                         1 - i,i    ( + i,u ) min + y1 /y
                                                                        ¯1i
                                                                                min
                                                i,i              i,u
                                                                            <1-
                                        + (1 -  )        +                      2

                                                                                                            g
                 is can be ensured with   min   su ciently small, provided (+(1-i,i ))i,u > (+i,u )(1-i,i )y1 /y
                                                                                                               ¯1i
                                                                                                                   .]


66
     To see this, observe that since E [ ] = 1 we can solve for   min   < 2/(2 +  ).


                                                              62
  Under assumptions 2 -4, the La er curve is upward sloping, decreasing in b, discontinuous at b and has not
  yet reached its maximum at ¯
                             b.
­ When ¯b<b^     b then we have       min   < < ¯      max .   It's now possible to default even with optimal transfers
  and the La er curve satis es

                                                                                 ¯
         D (b1 ) =  b1 (1 - G ( ) -  (G (¯) - G ( ))) + y
                                                        ¯1i
                                                                                     dG ( ) +              dG ( )   +¯i
                                                                                                     min



  with slope:

                                                                                    g    i
                                                     g (¯)¯                      + y1 /y¯1
                     D (b1 )     =  1 - d -                 i,i
                                                                - (1 -  ) g ( )      i,u
                                                    + (1 -  )                    + 

  One can check immediately that the slope of the La er curve is discontinuous at b = ¯
                                                                                      b as well, if  < 1 and
  g ( min ) > 0, with:

                                                                                                d
                            D (¯
                               b+ ) - D (¯
                                         b- )   =  -¯    i
                                                    b + ymin (1 -  )g (                 min )
                                                                                                db   b=¯
                                                                                                       b
                                                                                         g   i
                                                                                 min + y1 /y
                                                                                           ¯1
                                                = - (1 -  )g (        min )            i,u
                                                                                                      0
                                                                                  + 

     e interpretation is the following: when b = ¯
                                                 b, a small increase in debt makes default unavoidable, i.e. default
  probabilities increase from  to 1, since the debt level is too high for transfers to be optimal. e probability
  of default jumps up by (1 -  )g ( min )d . e discounted investor's loss in case of default is  (-¯ b + ymin i
                                                                                                                 ).


    e second derivative of the La er curve is:

                                         d¯               
                     D (b)      = -         g (¯) +                (g (¯) + ¯g (¯))
                                         db          + (1 - i,i )
                                                                                      g    i
                                               d                                   + y1 /y¯1
                                     - (1 -  )     g( ) +       i,u
                                                                    g ( ) + g ( )      i,u
                                               db          +                       + 

     e rst term is negative under assumption 3.          e second term is also negative under assumption 3, unless
  g ( ) becomes too negative.
  Assumption 5.           e parameters of the problem are such that D (b) < 0 for b < ^
                                                                                      b.

  [Note: with a uniform distribution, this condition is satis ed since g ( ) = 0.]


  We can check that:
                                                                                             g    i
                                                          g ( max ) max                   + y1 /y
                                                                                                ¯1
                D (^
                   b- )     =  (1 -  )(1 - G( )) -                       - (1 -  ) g ( )
                                                           + (1 - i,i )                   + i,u

                                     g
     b<b~
­ As ^  b where ~
                b  (( + i,u )ymax
                              i
                                  + y1 )/i,u , we have                        min    <      max      < ¯ and now the only way




                                                    63
for i to repay its debts is with a transfer from g .

                                                              max                    (b)
                                                   i                                                    i
              D(b) =        b(1 -  )(1 - G( )) + y
                                                 ¯1                   dG ( ) +             dG ( )   +
                                                             (b)                    min




  e derivative satis es:
                                                                                g    i
                                                                             + y1 /y
                                                                                   ¯1
                           D (b) =  (1 -  )(1 - G( )) - (1 -  )g ( )
                                                                             + i,u

Evaluating this expression at b = ^
                                  b+ , there is an upwards discontinuity in the La er curve:

                                                                                     d¯
                            D (^
                               b+ ) - D (^
                                         b-)      =  ^    i
                                                     b - ymax g (           max )
                                                                                     db    b=^
                                                                                             b
                                                     g ( max ) max
                                                  =                0
                                                      + (1 - i,i )

   is upwards discontinuity arises because, at b = ^b, an in nitesimal increase in debt pushes ¯ above max . e
increase in the threshold becomes inframarginal and does not a ect the value of the debt anymore (since the
realizations where > ¯ cannot be achieved anymore).
At b = ~b, the derivative of the La er curve satis es:

                                                                           g    i
                                                                        + y1
                                                                      max    /y
                                                                              ¯1
                             D (~
                                b- )    = - (1 -  )g (     max )                  0
                                                                       + i,u

so the peak of the La er curve occurs necessarily at or before ~
                                                               b.
  e second derivative satis es:
                                                                                 g    i
                                             d                                + y1 /y¯1
                   D (b)     = - (1 -  )        g( ) +     i,u
                                                               g ( ) + g ( )      i,u
                                             db         +                     + 

which is still negative under assumption 5.
   e discontinuity at ^
                      b could be problematic for our optimization problem. Consequently, we make assumptions
to ensure that the peak of the La er curve occurs at or before ^ b. A su cient assumption is that D (^
                                                                                                     b+ ) < 0.
Assumption 6. We assume that the parameters of the problem are such that

                                                                    g    i
                                                                 + y1 /y¯1
                            D (^
                               b+ ) =  (1 -  ) 1 - G( ) - g ( )      i,u
                                                                           <0
                                                                 + 


Under this assumption, the La er curve reaches its maximum at 0 < bmax < ^    b such that 0  D(bmax ),
where D(b) is the sub-di erential of the La er curve at b. e peak of the La er curve cannot be reached at
^
b or beyond since D (^
                     b- ) < D (^
                               b+ ) < 0, so 0 / D(^b) and D (b) < 0 for b < ~
                                                                            b. It follows immediately that
        ^
bmax < b.


  e economic interpretation of this assumption is that we restrict the problem so that the maximum revenues
that i can generate by issuing debt in period 0 do not correspond to levels of debt so elevated that no realization

                                                  64
             of would allow i to repay on its own. In other words, the implicit transfer and the recovery value of debt are
             limited.
           ­ As b > ~
                    b we have    max   < so that default is inevitable, even with transfers and the La er curve becomes:

                                                                      i          i
                                                             D(b) = y
                                                                    ¯1  +

             which does not depend on the debt level. Note that there is an upwards discontinuity at ~
                                                                                                     b since D (b) = 0 for
                 ~
             b > b.

       To summarize, under assumptions 2-6, the La er curve reaches its peak at bmax with ¯     b  bmax < ^   b.   e La er
       curve is continuous, convex and exhibits two (downward) discontinuities of D (b) on the interval [0, bmax ]. Since i
       will never locate itself on the `wrong side' of the La er curve (b > bmax ), we can safely ignore the non-convexity
       associated with the upward discontinuities of the D (b) at ^b and ~
                                                                         b.

     · For the sake of completeness, the remaining discussion describes what happens if ¯  b>^   b (the reverse condition on
       the parameters). In that case, as b increases, the country stops being able to repay on its own rst. is leads to a
       somewhat implausible case where the only reason debts are repaid is because of the transfer. We would argue that
       this is not a very interesting or realistic case.

           ­ When b < b  ^  b<¯b. In that case, we have < min  ¯ < max . When b = ^ b, <                   min   < ¯=   max .   Default
                          i
             can occur if 1  ¯ and ex-post transfers are forbidden. It follows that

                                                                                     ¯
                                          D (b1 ) =  [b1 (1 - G (¯)) + y
                                                                       ¯1i
                                                                                           dG ( )] + ¯i
                                                                                     min



             and the slope of the La er curve is given by

                                                                              ¯g (¯) 
                                               D (b) =  1 - G (¯) -
                                                                            + (1 - i,i )

             As before, default is a direct consequence of the commitment not to bail-out country i in period t = 1. e
             derivative of the La er curve is discontinuous at b = b if the distribution of shocks is such that g ( min ) > 0
             and  > 0.67
             Under the same assumptions as before, the La er curve slopes up at b = b.
                e second derivative of the La er curve is:

                                                      d¯              
                                        D (b) = -        g (¯) +               (g (¯) + ¯g (¯))
                                                      db          + (1 - i,i )

             and we can to ensure that D (b) < 0 with:
                                                                   g( )
                                                                        > -2
                                                                   g( )
                                                  min g ( min )
67
     To see this, observe that: D (b+ ) =  1 -   +(1-i,i )         <  when g (   min )     > 0 and  > 0.




                                                              65
­ When ^
       b<b<¯
           b, we have                min   <    max   < ¯. It follows that

                                                                     i                 i
                                           D(b)       = b(1 -  ) + y
                                                                   ¯1  +

  which has a constant positive slope  (1 -  ). At b = ^
                                                       b the slope is discontinuous, with


                                               ^             max g ( max ) 
                                       D       b- =  1 -  -
                                                             + (1 - i,i )

  so there is an upwards discontinuity in the slope at b = ^
                                                           b.
­ for ¯
      b<~ b we have min <        <      max    < ¯ and it is now possible to default even with optimal transfers.          e
  La er curve satis es
                                                                          max

                D (b1 ) =  b1 ((1 -  )(1 - G ( )) + y
                                                    ¯1i
                                                                                  dG ( ) +         dG ( )   +¯i
                                                                                             min



  with slope:

                                                                                        g    i
                                                                                     + y1 /y
                                                                                           ¯1
                              D (b1 )      =  (1 -  ) (1 - G( ) - g ( )
                                                                                     + i,u

  One can check that the slope of the La er curve is discontinuous also at b = ¯
                                                                               b as long as  < 1 and g (          min )   >0
  with:                                                                         g    i
                                                                    min + y1      /y
                                                                                   ¯1
                          D (¯
                             b+ ) - D (¯ b- ) = - (1 -  )g ( min )                     <0
                                                                       + i,u

  At b = ~
         b, the derivative satis es:

                                                                                       g    i
                                                                             max   + y1  /y
                                                                                          ¯1
                               D (~
                                  b- )     = - (1 -  )g (         max )              i,u
                                                                                              <0
                                                                                  + 

  so the peak of the La er curve needs to occur before ~
                                                       b.
    e second derivative satis es:
                                                                                      g    i
                                                   d                               + y1 /y
                                                                                         ¯1
                     D (b)    = - (1 -  )             g( ) +        g ( ) + g ( )
                                                   db         + i,u                + i,u

  which is still negative as long as g ( ) is not too negative.
­ As b > ~
         b we have    max   < so that default is inevitable, even with transfers and the La er curve becomes:

                                                                i            i
                                                       D(b) = y
                                                              ¯1  +

  which does not depend on the debt level.




                                                        66
C      Optimal Debt
Let's consider the rollover problem of country i.      e rst order condition is

                             0  µ1 + (1 - i,i )D(bi                             i,i
                                                  1 )(1 + 0 ) -  (1 - G(¯))(1 -  )

                                     0 ci
                                        0 =0

                                     µ1 bi
                                         1 =0


We consider rst an interior solution and ignore the non-continuity of D (b) at b and ¯
                                                                                     b.      e rst-order condition becomes:

                                                    D (bi
                                                        1 ) =  (1 - G(¯))                                                 (C.1)

    Both sides of this equation are decreasing in b.

    · Consider rst the region 0  bi      1 < b. Over that range, debt is safe: D (b) =  and G(¯) = 0.             e rst order
      condition is trivially satis ed: since debt is safe, risk neutral agents price the debt at  and i is indi erent as to the
      amount of debt it issues as long as it can ensure positive consumption.

    · Consider now the interval b < bi   ¯
                                     1 < b. We need to consider two cases.


          ­ when  = 0, g always bails out i and i's debt is safe.       is implies D (bi
                                                                                       1 ) =  and


                                                    D (b) -  (1 - G(¯)) = G(¯) > 0

             so there is no solution in that interval: i would always want to issue more debt.
          ­ when  = 1, i defaults when b > b. Going back to the de nition of D (bi
                                                                                 1 ) and ¯ we can check that


                                                                            
                                         D (b) -  (1 - G(¯)) = -                      g (¯)¯ < 0
                                                                         + (1 - i,i )

             from which it follows that there is no solution in that interval: i would always want to issue less debt to remain
             safe.
          ­ In the intermediate case where 0 <  < 1, it is possible to nd a solution to the rst-order condition.
            However, under reasonable conditions the second-order condition of the optimization problem will not be
            satis ed.   is will be the case if D (b) -  (1 - G(¯) is increasing. A su cient condition is that g/G is
            monotonously decreasing. To see this, observe that for b < b  ¯ b, we have < min and therefore we can
            write:
                                                                                       i    g (¯) d¯
                               D (b) -  (1 - G(¯)) =  (1 -  )G(¯) 1 -           (b - y
                                                                                     ¯1  ¯)
                                                                          1-                G(¯) db
                e term in brackets is increasing in ¯ when g/G is decreasing. If this condition is satis ed, then there is no
             solution in the interval (b, ¯
                                          b). [Note: this condition is satis ed for a uniform distribution.]

    · Consider next the interval ¯bb<^      b. We already know under the assumptions laid out in section B that we only
      need to consider the subinterval (¯b, bmax ) where bmax is the value of the debt that maximizes period 1 revenues.
      Let's consider the various values of  again:


                                                               67
           ­ for  = 0, we have D (¯    b- ) =  and D (bmax ) = 0. Since D (b) -  (1 - G(¯)) is continuous over that
             interval, then there is at least one solution to the rst-order condition, possibly at b = ¯  b.    is solution is
             unique if D (b) -  (1 - G(¯)) is strictly decreasing over that interval. Recall that over that interval we have:



                                                                                             id
                                      D (b) -  (1 - G(¯))       =  G(¯) - G( ) - g ( )(b - y
                                                                                           ¯1  )
                                                                                              db
                                                                                           g    i
                                                                                        + y1 /y
                                                                                              ¯1
                                                                =  G(¯) - G( ) - g ( )
                                                                                        + i , u

                e condition that D (b) -  (1 - G(¯)) is decreasing over this range is satis ed for a uniform distribution if
                i,g
               is not too high.
              Let's denote the unique solution bopt . If D (¯
                                                            b+ ) <  (1 - G(¯)) then the solution is bopt = ¯
                                                                                                           b.
           ­ for  = 1 (no bailout), we can check that in that interval we can write

                                                                                  i           d¯
                                               D (b) -  (1 - G(¯)) = -g (¯)(b - y
                                                                                ¯1  ¯)           <0
                                                                                              db

              Since D (¯+ ) <  (1 - G(¯)), it follows that there is no solution over that interval.
           ­ For intermediate values of  , as long as  is not too high, we will have a unique solution bopt as before. bopt
             is decreasing in  for  < c . Above this critical value, this equilibrium disappears and the only remaining
             solutions are for b  b. c is characterized by the condition that D (¯  b- ) =  (1 - G(¯)). Substituting, we
             obtain:
                                                                    G(¯)
                                                      c =
                                                            G(¯) + +     g (¯)¯
                                                                        (1-i,i )

              In the case where there is no recovery, the formula for c simpli es to

                                                                              1
                                                              c =
                                                                      1 + g (¯)¯/G(¯)

   ese results are summarized in Fig. 9. e gure reports, for the case of a uniform distribution the function  (1 - G(¯(b)))
(in black) and the function D (b) (in blue). ere are two discontinuities of the function D (b) at b = b and b = ¯       b. In red, the
  gure reports the possible optimal equilibrium debt levels. For b  b the debt is safe and any level -if su cient to rollover
the debt­ provides equivalent level of utility; bopt  ¯
                                                      b is the optimal level of risky debt when the rollover constraint (ci    0  0)
does not bind. Finally, bopt < b  bmax obtains when the rollover constraint binds (i.e. ci   0 = 0 and  D ( b ) = x i 68
                                                                                                                    0 .


  68
    As can be seen on the gure, there is another solution to the rst order condition between b and ¯
                                                                                                   b. However, this
solution does not satisfy the second-order conditions.




                                                                 68
D (b) and  (1 - G(¯)) for  = 0.5.
                                                                                     i       g
[Uniform distribution with  = 0.6,  = 0.2,  = 0.05,          min   = 0.5,  = 0.95, y
                                                                                   ¯1  = 1, y1 = 2, i,i = 0.4,
i,g = i,u = 0.3. b = 0.47, ¯
                           b = 0.97 and ^
                                        b = 1.4]

                                              Figure 9: Optimal Debt Issuance


D      Exit and Default
D.1     Proof of Proposition 6.
Proof. Denote D/ND the decision to default/repay and E/NE the decision to exit/stay in the currency union. Denote ^
                                                                                                                  b the
                                                         ^         i,i i
amount of debt held abroad, scaled by potential output: b = (1 -  )b1 /y  i
                                                                         ¯1 . Denote also           i,i
                                                                                          ^ = (1 -  ) the foreign debt
holder's recovery rate per unit of output. i prefers ND/NE to D/NE whenever:

                                                                                    ^
                                                                                    b
                                         -d   i
                                              1   +^
                                                   b-^   i
                                                         1    0          i
                                                                         1    ¯=
                                                                                   d + ^

    Similarly, i prefers ND/E to D/E whenever

                               -e    i
                                     1   + ^
                                           b  -(d + e ) + (1 + )^
                                                                b-^                        i
                                                                                           1    ¯d

    It follows that ¯d represents the cut-o for default decisions, regardless of exit decisions.

                                                                                                           i
    Now, by a similar reasoning, we can show that i chooses to stay in the currency union whenever         1    ¯e , regardless of
the decision to default.
Under the assumption /e > 1/(d + ), we have ¯d > ¯e for all ^       b and the proposition follows.




                                                               69
D.2      Proof of Proposition 7
Proof. Let's de ne the minimal transfer to avoid a default  d                                            e
                                                            1 and the minimal transfer to avoid an exit  1 .           ey satisfy:

                                                    d
                                                    1      =       (bi    i       i,i     i
                                                                     1 - y1 )(1 -  ) - d y1

                                                    e
                                                    1      =       bi      i,i     i
                                                                    1 (1 -  ) - e y1




Now, de ne Ug (N D, N E, 1 ) the utility of g if there is no default (ND), no exit (NE) and transfer 1 . It satis es:

                                                    Ug (N D, N E, 1 ) = xg    i i,g
                                                                         1 + b1     - 1

where xg    g    s,g  g
       1 = y1 + b1 - b1 is constant regardless of the transfers and i's decision. Similarly, we can de ne:


                                      Ug (D, N E, 1 )      = xg      g    i i,g
                                                              1 - d y1 + y1     - 1
                                      Ug (N D, E, 1 )      = xg      g    i i,g
                                                              1 - e y1 + b1     - bi,g - 1
                                              Ug (D, E )   = xg            g    i i,g
                                                              1 - (d + e )y1 + y1     - bi,g



where we note that g will never make a transfer if i defaults and exits. Consider now the following cases:

               i
     · When    1    ¯d . Since i does not want to default or exit, no transfer is necessary: 1 = 0.

     · When ¯d > i       e                                                                         d
                    1  ¯ , i prefers to default and exit. To prevent this, g must make a transfer  1 .          is is optimal as long
       as Ug (N D, N E,  d
                         1 ) > Ug (D, N E, 0).    is condition takes the form:

                                                                  i      g
                                                               d y1 + d y1  (bi    i
                                                                              1 - y1 )
                                                                                       i,u



       or equivalently:
                                                                                              g    g
                                                               i      d      i,u bi
                                                                                  1 /y
                                                                                     ¯1i
                                                                                         - d y1 /y
                                                                                                 ¯1
                                                               1          
                                                                                  d + i,u
               d
       where       < ¯d . It follows that:

           ­ When ¯d >         i
                               1       d
                                           , g makes the transfer  i
                                                                   1 and there is no default
                       d       i
           ­ When          >   1    ¯e , g does not make a transfer (1 = 0), i defaults, but without exiting.

     · ¯e > i                                                                                           e
             1 , i prefers to default and exit without transfer. g can consider two types of transfer:  1 to avoid the exit (but
       not the default) or  d      e
                              1 +  1 to avoid both default and exit. Consider rst a transfer to avoid exit.     is is optimal as
                               e
       long as Ug (D, N E,  1 ) > Ug (D, E ). is condition takes the form:

                                                                       i      g
                                                                    e y1 + e y1 > bi,u

       or equivalently
                                                                                              g
                                                           i          e      i,u bi
                                                                                  1 /y
                                                                                     ¯1i
                                                                                         - e y1 /y
                                                                                                 ¯1i
                                                           1              
                                                                                      e

                                                                              70
               e
       where       < ¯e , and it yields the following utility for g :

                                                            g      g
                                        Ug (D, N E,  e                  i i,g
                                                     1 ) = x1 - d y1 + y1     - bi      i,i     i
                                                                                 1 (1 -  ) + e y1


       Now, within that region, g prefers to make a transfer  d   e                                                            d
                                                              1 + 1 , to avoid both default and exit as long as Ug (N D, N E,  1 +
       e                   e
        1 )  Ug (D, N E,  1 ) which takes the form:


                                                                    i      g
                                                                 d y1 + d y1  (bi    i
                                                                                1 - y1 )
                                                                                         i,u



       or equivalently:
                                                                                  i      d
                                                                                  1   

       It follows that:

           ­ When ¯e >         i
                               1    >   e
                                            and   i
                                                  1       d
                                                              , g prefers to make the transfer  d    e
                                                                                                1 +  1 to avoid default and exit.

           ­ When ¯e >         i
                               1    >   e
                                            and   i
                                                  1   <   d
                                                              , g makes the transfer  e
                                                                                      1 , i defaults but stays in the currency union
                       e       i
           ­ When      1   >   1,   g makes no transfer (1 = 0), i defaults and exits.




E      Debt Monetization
   is appendix provides a full characterization of the di erent cases that arise with possible debt monetization within a
monetary union.        ey depend on the output shock realization i   1 and on the ranking of the output thresholds. We rst
analyze the decision to default of i for a given transfer and in ation/monetization rate. If i repays the ECB chooses the rate
z and if i defaults it chooses the rate z
                                        ^. e budget constraint in period 1 of the i households becomes:

                                   ci
                                    1
                                           i
                                        = y1    i
                                             - T1 + bi,i  g,i
                                                     1 + b1
                                                                           i
                                                              (1 - z ) - zy1 + bu,i
                                                                                1                            if i repays
                                   ci
                                    1
                                           i
                                        = y1           i
                                             (1 - ) - T1 +               bg,i
                                                                          1          ^) -  z
                                                                                (1 - z       i
                                                                                           ^y1 +     bu,i
                                                                                                      1     if i defaults

    Government i constraint in t = 1 is:

                                                       i
                                                      T1 + 1         = bi
                                                                        1 (1 - z )           if i repays
                                                                 i
                                                                T1   =     0 if i defaults

    Consolidating the private and public budget constraints, we again proceed by backward induction. At t = 1, i can
decide to default a er the shock i                                                         i
                                 1 has been revealed and the transfer 1 announced. Taking b1 and 1 as given, i repays if
and only if:

                                     i
                                    y1           ^)]  bi
                                       [ -  (z - z     1 1-
                                                            i,i
                                                                                ^) bg
                                                                (1 - z ) + (z - z   1
                                                                                      g,i
                                                                                          - 1                                          (E.1)

    For g , the budget constraint is:

                               cg
                                1
                                           g
                                        = y1    g
                                             - T1 + bi,g  g,g
                                                     1 + b1
                                                                           g
                                                              (1 - z ) - zy1 + bu,g
                                                                                1                             if i repays


                                                                                71
                             cg
                              1
                                      g
                                   = y1           g
                                        (1 - ) - T1 + bg,g
                                                       1 (1 - z
                                                              ^) -  z g
                                                                    ^y1 + bu,g
                                                                           1               if i defaults

and g government constraint in t = 1 is:

                                              g
                                             T1 - 1    = bg
                                                          1 (1 - z )       if i repays
                                                   g
                                                  T1   =    bg
                                                             1   (1 - z
                                                                      ^)   if i defaults

    We now detail the di erent relevant thresholds:

    · No default, no monetization, no transfer. Comparison made when z = 0 in no default and default. Necessary
      conditions on output shock:

                                          g
                     i       bi iu
                              1  - y1
                     1   >                         ECB and g prefer no default to default with z = 0 in both cases
                                 y i
                                   1
                                       g gu       g
                     i       bi iu
                              1  + b1            y1
                     1   >           i
                                             -             ECB prefers z = 0 in no default
                                   y 1           yi
                                                  1

                     i       gu bg
                                 1 - y1
                                          g

                     1   >         i
                                            ^     ECB chooses z = 0 in case of default
                                 y 1
                     i       bi
                              1 1-
                                       ii
                     1   >                        i repays with zero transfer and z = 0
                                y i1


    · No default, no monetization, positive transfer Necessary conditions on output shock:



                             i
                             1     >       ECB and g prefer no default to default with z = 0 in both cases
                             i
                             1     >      ECB prefers z = 0 in case of no default
                             i
                             1     <       i repays only with transfer and z = 0


    · No default, monetization at maximum rate, no transfer Comparison made when z = z in no default and z = 0
      in case of default.



                         i
                         1   <         ECB prefers z = z in no default
                                                            gi g
                         i           1 - ii bi1 (1 - z ) +  b1 z
                         1   >                                     ~ i repays with zero transfer with z = z
                                            ( - z ) y i 1


    · No default, monetization at maximum rate, positive transfer Comparison made when z = z in no default and
      z = 0 in case of default.



                 i
                 1       <        ECB prefers z = z in no default
                 i           iu bi
                                 1  (1 - z ) - gu bg      g
                                                   1 z - y1 ( - z )
                 1       >                                                    g prefers no default, transfer and z = z
                                            ( - z ) y i1


                                                                 72
                                                  gi g
                  i         1 - i,i bi
                                     1 (1 - z ) +  b1 z
                  1   <                                  ~ i repays only with transfer with z = z
                                   ( - z ) y i 1


       In this case, the transfer is the minimum that leaves i indi erent between default and no default (see equation 34).

     · Default, no monetization, no transfer
       Comparison made when z = z in no default and z = 0 in case of default.

                        i
                        1   <    ECB prefers z = z in no default
                        i       iu bi
                                    1 (1 - z ) - gu bg      g
                                                     1 z - y1 ( - z )
                        1   <                                             g prefers default, no transfer
                                              ( - z ) y i1

                        i       gu bg
                                    1 - y1
                                           g

                        1   >                  ^ ECB chooses z = 0 in default
                                    y i1


     · Default, monetization, no transfer
       Comparison made with z = z in both cases:

                                                      g
                            i       iu bi
                                        1 (1 - z ) - y1
                            1   <                            g prefers default, no transfer and z = z
                                             y i
                                               1

                            i       g,u bg1 - y1
                                                 g

                            1   <                   ^ ECB chooses z = z in default
                                        y i 1



        ere are therefore 7 thresholds for output realizations: ; ; ; ^; ~; ; . In addition, we assume there is a minimum
and maximum output realization max and min .
     We can rank some of them under the assumption that  >  >  : < ; < ; ^ < ; < ; ~ >
     To simplify the analysis, we focus on parameter con gurations that are most interesting and most plausible for the
situation of the eurozone, we rank these thresholds based on the following general assumptions : bg                      g
                                                                                                    1 is small relative y1 and
to bi
    1.
     Assumptions on parameters: We can compare di erent cases with di erent degrees of scal dominance. Fiscal
dominance would apply if the ECB in ates the eurozone debt even if i defaults so that only g debt remains. is is not
a very interesting or plausible case so we ignore it and assume ^ < min which means that we concentrate as before on
relatively low levels of debt to GDP levels in g and relatively high levels of the distortion costs  . Another polar case is
one of monetary dominance.           is is a situation with low levels of g debt relative to GDP and high distortion costs  .
A su cient condition is: < min .           e ECB never in ates the debt in a situation where transfers are possible because
transfers are su cient and the ECB would never want to avert a default if it was not in g interest which is also the interest
of the Eurozone as whole. is case is identical to the one analyzed in section (4) where the role of the ECB was ignored.

     · ^ < min which insures that the ECB will choose a zero in ation rate in the case of default.       is excludes the case
       of strong scal dominance.



                                                  bg
                                                   1                 i
                                                                    y1   min
                                                   g < gu      1+    g
                                                  y1                y1


          e condition on parameters is such that the debt to GDP ratio for g is small enough.

                                                             73
                          min                                                   ¯                max

                             default                    no-default                  no default
                             no bailout                 bailout                     no bailout
                             no in a-                   no in a-                    no in a-
                             tion                       tion                        tion
                                    Figure 10: Bailout under Monetary Dominance


       We then examine two cases: monetary dominance and weak scal dominance/.

     · Monetary dominance: If < , then when transfers are possible, the ECB never chooses positive in ation.              is case
                           g
       is valid with high y1 and  , and low bg
                                             1.


     · Weak scal dominance: If > > , then when transfers are possible, the ECB may choose positive in ation.                   is
                                                g
       is the case with intermediate levels of y1 and  , and low bg
                                                                  1.


    Under monetary dominance, the possible equilibria are shown in gure 10. Only binding thresholds are indicated.
Monetary policy does not a ect transfers and the decision whether to default or not.
    Under weak scal dominance, possible equilibria are shown in gure 7. In this case, when output realization in i is
su ciently high ( i1 > ), there is no default, no in ation and no transfer. If it is lower, i requires a transfer in order not to
default ( > 1 > ) but there is no in ation. For > i
               i
                                                          1 > ), the ECB partly in ates the debt, g makes a transfer to avoid
the default. For i
                 1 <    , the default is optimal and there is no more incentive to in ate the debt.
       ere are several conditions on output realizations and parameters for such a situation to exist:

                                     i
                                     1   <
                                              i,u i            gu g      g
                                     i        1  b1 (1 - z ) - 1 b1 z - y1 ( - z )
                                     1   >                                         
                                                           ( - z ) y i
                                                                     1
                                                   i,i               g,i g
                                               1 - 1   bi
                                                        1 (1 - z ) + 1 b1 z
                                     i
                                     1   <                                      ~
                                                        ( - z ) y i
                                                                  1
                                              min
                                     ^ <            <   < <~

   e rst condition says that the output realization is such that the ECB sets z = z , the second that g prefers no default and
transfer and the third that indeed i requires a transfer when z = z . ese conditions apply for intermediate levels of the
output realization i. e last condition on the ranking of thresholds requires in particular intermediate levels of debt (see
appendix for details).
    Finally, when transfers are excluded (and < so that monetary dominance applies with zero in ation in presence of
transfers) the possible equilibria are shown in gure 8. When output realization in i is su ciently high ( i   1 > ), there is
no default and no in ation. If it is lower, i requires a positive in ation rate in order not to default ( > i
                                                                                                            1 > ~). For i
                                                                                                                        1 < ~,
the default is optimal and there is no more incentive to in ate the debt.




                                                               74
ONLINE DATA APPENDIX. Not for
Publication
   e outline of this appendix is as follows. Section F documents how the data was constructed. Section G presents a historical
overview of the bailouts for Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain. Section I presents details regarding the "rolling"
estimate of the size of the transfer for Greece over time.



F     Construction of the Dataset
Depending on the o cial lender (e.g., IMF, ESM, etc.), the level of detail regarding the timing of disbursements, the repay-
ment projections, and the estimated interest payments varies. Here, we report broadly how we construct disbursements,
repayments, and interest payments by lender, and relegate speci c details to Section G.
     IMF Data for Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Hungary, Latvia, and Romania comes from the IMF website, which
reports actual disbursements, actual and projected repayments of principal, and actual and projected interest payments.
We use the listed SDR amounts for disbursements, repayments, and interest payments and convert these amounts to Euros
by using the average realized EUR/SDR exchange rate prevailing during the month of the disbursement. For forecasted
payments, we use the last observed date for the SDR/EUR exchange rate of October 2018.69
     Realized ows come from the "Flows" database. Disbursements are those listed as "GRA Purchases," repayments are
those listed as "GRA Repurchases," and interest payments are those listed as "GRA Charges."            ese include both GRA
                                             70
Charges and GRA Burden Sharing Charges. Projections come from the "Projections" database. Projected repayments are
those listed as "GRA Repurchase." Interest payments are those listed as "GRA Charges".71
     EFSF and ESM Data for Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, and Portugal are available from the ESM website (the EFSF data is
kept updated on this website as well). Actual disbursements and actual and projected repayment schedules are typically
reported. In our baseline speci cation, we use the actual numbers and projections as of December 2019 to calculate the size
of the transfer. For interest payments, we apply the historical blended rates as of December 2019, one each for EFSF and
ESM loans, to the outstanding level of debt. We go into more detail on this interest rate in the Historical Overview section.
     EFSM Data for disbursements and repayments, both realized and projected, for Ireland and Portugal come from the
European Commission website.72 For interest payments, we apply the average cost of funding as of 2012. Realized interest
payments are calculated by applying lending rates from European Commission (2012). For future interest payments, we
include a term premium calculated using euribor OIS rates relative to the last observed euribor 3-month rate. We use the
Bloomberg Tickers as in Du, Im and Schreger (2018).
     GLF Data for Greece comes from the European Commission website and various reports therein. Data on disburse-
ments and repayment schedules are available. To calculate interest rates, we add the reported margins to the end of period
3-month Euribor rate. To forecast 3-month Euribor rates, we again use the euribor OIS rates used in Du, Im and Schreger
   69
      Since around 2008, there has been a secular depreciation of the Euro. To the extent that the Euro continues to depreciate,
this would increase the size of the transfer payments. We therefore view our estimates as a lower bound with respect to
this source of bias.
   70
         is also includes one GRA SCA-1 Charge, which is listed as -1.
   71
         is excludes "SDR Assessments," which are levied annually to reimburse the IMF SDR department, and "Net SDR
Charges," which are charges if a member holds too few SDRs.
   72
      Note that Greece also bene ed from a one-month bridge loan from the EFSM in August 2015. However, due to the
short nature of the loan, we do not model its transfer component.


                                                              75
(2018) to calculate the term premium.
    GDP Data for all countries comes from the Eurostat annual national accounts.
    In ation Data for all countries comes from the World Bank



G      Historical Overview
  e European Sovereign Debt Crisis dates back to at least March 2010, when Greece formally requested assistance from
the rest of Europe. However, nancial assistance to countries within Europe occurred earlier, during the Global Financial
Crisis, at least since 2008. In this section, we follow the main text and discuss the details of the the lenders and borrowers
during this time period, with an emphasis on the construction of our dataset. We begin by documenting broadly how the
major lenders structured nancial assistance during the European debt crisis. We then give a broad overview of the lending
programmes for the Eurozone borrowers (Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain).73 Finally, we discuss the lending
programmes for the Non-Eurozone borrowers.


G.1          e Lenders
Established in 1945, the IMF's primary purpose is to "ensure the stability of the international monetary system."74 e IMF's
lending structure is discussed at length in Joshi and Ze elmeyer (2005). e countries involved in the Eurocrisis are not
low-income countries, which means their lending came through non-concessional facilities. e shorter programme avail-
able was the Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) where repayment is typically due within 3-5 years. However, most borrowing
eventually came through the Extended Fund Facility (EFF), which allows for repayment within 4.5-10 years. Both of these
facilities come with conditionality on achieving structural improvements.(IMF, 2016a)
         e maximum amount a country can borrow through either the SBA or the EFF is 145% of their quota annually or 435%
over the lifetime of a programme. During the European debt crisis, countries typically went over this amount by being
given "exceptional access". e interest rate on these loans is a oating rate based on the SDR interest rate. e base rate
is the standard rate of charge, which is given by the weekly SDR rate plus a margin (currently 100bp). On top of this, there
is a surcharge for equal to 200bp on amounts greater than 187.5% of quota, and a higher surcharge of 300bp if the amount
above 187.5% of quota is outstanding for at least 51 months.(IMF, 2017)
      In addition to this variable rate, there are also two important fees. First, there is a one-time service charge of 50bp when
ever a disbursement is drawn. Additionally, there is an upfront commitment fee based on the size of the programme (15bp
if less than 115% of quota, 30bp if at least 115% but less than 575%, and 60bp if greater than 575%). is commitment fee is
refunded over the lifetime of the programme. (IMF, 2018a)
      Other than the IMF, the European community as the largest source of nancial aid to distressed countries during the
European debt crisis.        e European Commission provided direct aid to Greece through the Greek Loan Facility and to
Latvia, Hungary,a nd Romania through the Balance of Payments nancial assistance facility. By direct aid, we refer to aid
given not through the special purpose vehicles of the EFSF or the ESM, which we consider as separate loans. We discuss
the Greek Loan Facility at length in Section I.
         ese loans carried similar interest rate schemes across the di erence loan facilities. Interest rates for EFSF and ESM
loans are equal to the cost of funding plus a margin. e cost of funding is typically given as a weighted average of interest
rates on outstanding borrowing from investors. As discussed in this appendix, the margin was gradually reduced over time
  73
     For another treatment of this history, see Corse i, Erce and Uy (2017).
  74
     See the "IMF at a Glance" on the IMF website. Note that since 2012 its mandate was updated to expand beyond exchange
rates and balance of payments and include all macroeconomic and nancial sector issues that bear on global stability.


                                                               76
until, in most cases, it was equal to 0. Just like in the case of the IMF, there is also a commitment fee and an upfront service
fee of 50bp.75
        e Medium-term Balance of Payments nancial assistance facility was established on February 18, 2002 by EC No.
332/2002, and subsequently updated by EC No. 431/2009.              is facility is for states who have not adopted the Euro.   is
lending is concessionary, which means a memorandum of understanding listing the required structural reforms is a precon-
dition for aid, as well as monitoring during and a er the country receives funds. Post-programme surveillance is required
until at least 70% of the loan is repaid.76 Lending through the balance of payments nancial assistance facility can be one of
two types. In our sample, we study almost exclusively loans, however precautionary loans were also available for countries
like Romania.


G.2      Eurozone Programmes
G.2.1     Greece
Greece entered three di erent programmes. e rst programme came in the form of a series of bilateral loans from other
Europea countries via the newly created Greek Loan Facility (GLF) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) between
2010-2011. A second round of bailouts (Programme 2) came from the European Financial Stability Fund (EFSF) and the IMF
between 2012-2015. Finally, a third round of bailouts (Programme 3), came from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM)
between 2015-2018.      is last programme ended in August 2018. In this section, we outline the state of the three Greek
programmes as of August 2018. In Section I, we go into detail about the evolution of the Greek programmes in order to
calculate the change in the NPV of the transfer over time.
       e buildup to programme 1 involved substantial debate regarding its form, size, and participation. Although Greek's
economic position was in dire straights by the end of 2009, it was not until March 2010 that the EC and ECB included the IMF
due to the EC's inability to provide the amount of funding and expertise necessary for Greece. Programme 1 therefore in-
volved disbursements by the IMF and the GLF. Disbursements by the IMF totaled e20.1 Billion over six tranches.7778 e Eu-
ropean Member states commi ed a total of e80 bn to Programme 1, although not all was disbursed. (EC (2012b),Eurogroup
(2010)) e rst disbursement of Programme 1 was in May 2010, with the sixth and nal disbursement of Programme 1
coming in December 2011. Programme 1 disbursements totaled e52.9 bn by the European Members, with Germany (e15.17
Billion), France (e11.39 Billion), and Italy (e10.00 Billion) contributing the most. (EC (2012c)) Originally, Ireland and Por-
tugal were slated to contribute to Programme 1. However, their own scal struggles caused them to eventually drop out.
Of the remaining members, Slovakia was the only to never participate.
       e original loan agreement between Greece and the European Commission stipulated the structure of principal re-
payment and interest. is original loan agreement was o cially amended three times: in June 2011, February 2012, and
December 2012. (EFSF (2014), EFSF (2015), ESM (2017)) e December 2012 agreement extended the maximum weighted
average maturity to 30 years. e February 2012 agreement lowered the interest rate margin to only 50 basis points each
  75
        ere are also a number of other fees. For example, in the initial FFA for Greece, there exited a guarantee commission
fee of 10bp, that was later cancelled in the case of Greece. ere was also an annual service fee of 0.5bp
   76
        e statistic varies according to the source. e 70% statistic is taken from EC (2017a). However, 75% can be seen in
Article 15 of EU (2013a)
   77
        e IMF lends in Special Drawing Rights (SDRs). roughout, we convert the SDR value to Euros using the prevailing
SDR/EUR exchange rate at the time of the disbursement. For realized interest payments, we use the prevailing SDR/EUR
exchange rate. For forecasted interest payments, we use the last observed value of the exchange rate.
   78
      Whenever possible, we use the net disbursement amount, which is the nancial assistance amount less the sum of
issuance costs, upfront service fees, and negative carry costs. e exact details are stipulated in the FFAs for each country.
   ese are the amounts expressed on the o cial websites.



                                                               77
year.79 . In calculating interest rates, we follow the amendments closely by using the prevailing margin at the time of the
interest payment. We use the 3-month annualized Euribor as the base rate and add a 50bp margin. Interest is calculated as
a quarterly rate derived from the annualized rate and paid in March, June, September, and December until outstanding debt
is equal to zero.
         e IMF's lending structure is discussed at length in Joshi and Ze elmeyer (2005). e countries involved in the Euro-
crisis are not low-income countries, which means their lending came through non-concessional facilities. Greece originally
borrowed through a Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) where repayment is typically due within 3-5 years. However, eventually
all of their borrowing came through the Extended Fund Facility (EFF), which allows for repayment within 4.5-10 years. Both
of these facilities come with conditionality on achieving structural improvements. (IMF (2016a)) e maximum amount a
country can borrow through the EFF is typically 145% of a their quota annually or 435% over the lifetime of a programme.
Programme 1, with e30 bn commi ed, was around 3,200% of Greece's total               ota. Greece was permi ed to go over the
                                                      80
quota limit due to the IMF's special circumstances.         e lending rate on all non-concessional facilities is tied to the Basic
Rate of Charge, which is the SDR rate plus a premium that depends on the size of the loan relative to a country's quota.
   e margin is 100bp for loans less than 187.5% of ota, 200bp for credit above 187.5% of ota, and 300bp for credit above
187.5% of      ota for more than 51 months. (IMF (2017))
     Programme 2 still involved the IMF, however the Eurogroup operated through the newly created EFSF. e EFSF com-
mi ed a total of e144.7 Billion to Programme 2 over 2012-2014. (EC (2012b)) A total of approximately e141.8 Billion was
disbursed, although e10.9 Billion was returned, leaving a net outstanding as of June 2018 of e130.9 Billion.81 Details on
lending rates and maturties are given in the Master Financial Facility Agreement (FFA). Lending rates were calculated as
the EFSF cost of funding plus some margin, although currently all margins are eliminated. e weighted average maturity
of the loans, which had fallen to approximately 28 years, was lengthened to "update" the weighted average maturity back to
the maximum permi ed 32.5 years. e agreement also reduced interest rate risk via bond exchanges, swap arrangements,
and matched funding. In June 2018, this agreement was modi ed again. While the o cial repayment schemes have not
yet been determined, the maximum weighted average maturity was extended to 42.5 years, and interest payments were
deferred by twenty years.82
     In calculating interest payments, we set interest payments to begin in 2033. All interest payments prior to this time
period, with the exception of the PSI loans, are rolled forward into a new loan set to be disbursed at that time. We set the
annualized interest rate to be equal to the last value available from the ESM in August 2018 of 135bp.             is interest paid
annually in March. Our assumption implies both that all loans amortize at the same rate and that interest rates will not
rise over the lifetime of the loans. is la er assumption is most likely false, as the base rate is tied to the cost of funding
by the EFSF plus a margin, where the cost of funding includes borrowing rates by the EFSF. However, given the current
very low interest rate environment, it is probable that interest rates will rise, implying that our interest payments are an
upper bound on the size of the transfer in this respect. In robustness checks, we use market expectations of future interest
rates. Note that as part of two debt relief agreements, interest payments were deferred for 10 years each. Hence, interest
payments will be accumulated through 2033, at which point they will be amortized. We therefore treat the twenty years
  79
      Note that, because Portugal and Ireland were also receiving assistance, the interest rate was not lowered for their
loans that had already been disbursed. However, due to the di cult nature of disentangling payments and because their
contributions were relatively small, we simply lower all the margins on all loans to 50bp.
   80
        e "No More Argentinas Rule" was put in place following the Argentinean defaulted, when the IMF a empted rescue
of Argentina led to default a short time later. is rule stipulated that a country's debt would need to be sustainable in order
to warrant a large loan. For a discussion of the IMF eventually overcame this rule, see Blustein (2015).
   81
        e e10.9 Billion consisted of bonds that were to be used to recapitalize Greek banks through the Hellenic Financial
Stability Fund.
   82
        is includes ten years from the December 2012 agreement plus ten years in this agreement.



                                                                78
of deferred interest as an additional disbursement in January 2033 that is to be repaid over constant amortisation over 20
years.
     Disbursements by the IMF for the second programme totalled e8.33 Billion over four tranches, although they planned
to contribute e28 Billion. e rst loan was in 2010 and the last loan was in May 2010 from the SBA. e last loan listed from
the IMF was on June 3, 2014 from the EFF. Greece received one bridge loan from the European Finacial Stability Mechanism
(EFSM) when it missed a payment on its loans to the IMF in July 2015. is was a three-month loan for e7.16 Billion given
to allow Greece time to transition to the third Programme and receive assistance from the ESM. is loan was repaid when
ESM assistance was given. Because of the short-term nature of this loan, we do not model it.
     Programme 3 began in August 2015 and ran through August 2018. is programme consisted of new loans by the ESM
only (although debt relief on earlier loans by other o cials has also occurred). e ESM commi ed e86 Billion to Greece
but only disbursed e61.9 Billion.83
     In calculating interest payments for the ESM, interest is paid annually in, we assume, March of each year. We calculate
the outstanding level of debt for each year and multiply this value by the annualized interest rate equal to the last value
available from the ESM in August 2018 of 163bp.
     Figure 11 shows the realized and projected disbursements and realizations as of August 2018. We include our forecast
of repayments under the June 2018 extension of the WAM. Recall that we treat the deferred interest payments as a new
disbursement in the year following the end of the deferral.


G.2.2     Ireland
Ireland's bailout programme ran from 2010-2013, although disbursements did not begin until 2011. Total commitments were
e85 Billion, comprised of e17.7 Billion from the EFSF, e22.5 Billion from the EFSM, e22.5 Billion from the IMF, and e4.8
Billion from Bilateral Loans (United Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark)84 (EU (2011e)) erefore, e67.5 Billion was commi ed
externally. All of this was eventually disbursed.
     IMF disbursements amounted to around 2,322% of Ireland's quota. IMF assistance to Ireland was under the EFF. (IMF
(2010b)) ese loans were via the EFF, described above in the section on Greece.
     EFSF disbursements occurred between February 2011 and December 2013, when the programme was concluded. EFSF
lending rates were equal to the EFSF funding costs plus a margin. e original FFA had a margin of 247bp with a maximum
weighted average maturity of 7.5 years. In July 2011, the maximum weighted average maturity of 15 years and margins
were reduced to 0. Finally, in June 2013, the maximum weighted average maturity was o cially extended to 22 years.
        e EFSM disbursed its rst tranche of funding in January 2011, and their last tranche was disbursed in March 2014.
Interest Rates for the EFSM loans were originally equal to cost of funding for the European Union plus 292.5bp. (EU (2011e))
In October 2011, all EFSM margins were set to 0 and the maximum weighted average maturities were extended to 12.5
years. (EU (2011c)) In June 2013, the maximum weighted average maturity was extended to 19.5 years. (EU (2013)) is
last decision also extended the maturity of the initial disbursement by spli ing this disbursement into three tranches and
extending each one. We set the interest rate on the EFSM loans to Ireland equal to 3.10.85
     Finally, there were also bilateral loans to Ireland. Sweden commi ed and disbursed e600 Million in four tranches in
2012 and 2013. e United Kingdom commi ed e3,830 Million (£3.23) in December 2010 and disbursed this amount between
October 2011 and September 2013 in 8 disbursements of £403,370,000 each. Denmark o ered a loan of e400 Million in four
  83
         ere was one cashless loan for bank recapitalization of e5.4 Billion. For this loan, originally there was supposed to be
a e2.2 Billion has an interim maturity in 2018.
   84
      Ireland also had to commit e17.5 Billion itself. is money was taken from, among other sources, their pension program.
   85
         is number comes from a parliamentary question by the European Union to Olli Rehn in 2012, where he states that
the average interest rate on Irish loans is 3.1%.


                                                              79
                                                                                                     Greece
                                                                                                        IMF




                                                    10
                                                    5
                                               Billions EUR
                                                    -50
                                                    -10
                                                                2010             2020            2030                 2040         2050          2060
                                                                                                        datey

                                                                                         Disbursement                        Repayment
                                                              NOTE: First red line denotes Programme 1, Second red line denotes Programme 2



                                                                                                (a) IMF

                                     Greece                                                                                                             Greece
                                          EC                                                                                                                ESM
     10




                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                  0
     0
Billions EUR




                                                                                                             Billions EUR
                                                                                                                       -5
       -10




                                                                                                                -10
     -20




                                                                                                                  -15
                                                                                                                  -20
     -30




               2010   2020        2030                  2040               2050            2060                             2010         2020        2030           2040        2050   2060
                                         datey                                                                                                              datey

                             Disbursement                         Repayment                                                                     Disbursement               Repayment



                                  (b) EC                                                                                                            (c) ESM

                                     Greece                                                                                                             Greece
                                         EFSF                                                                                                        EFSF_PreJune
     0




                                                                                                                  0
Billions EUR




                                                                                                             Billions EUR
      -50




                                                                                                                   -50
     -100




                                                                                                                  -100




               2010   2020        2030                  2040               2050            2060                             2010         2020        2030           2040        2050   2060
                                         datey                                                                                                              datey

                             Disbursement                         Repayment                                                                     Disbursement               Repayment



                                (d) EFSF                                                                                           (e) EFSF (Pre June Agreement)

                                                                       Figure 11: Greece Programmes




                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                Ireland
                                                                                                    IMF




                                                          10
                                                          5
                                                     Billions EUR
                                                      -5  -10
                                                          -15  0
                                                                    2010         2020        2030                  2040         2050          2060
                                                                                                    datey

                                                                                        Disbursement                      Repayment



                                                                                            (a) IMF

                                             Ireland                                                                                                 Ireland
                                              EFSM                                                                                                       EFSF
            5




                                                                                                              5
            0




                                                                                                                     0
       Billions EUR




                                                                                                         Billions EUR
             -5




                                                                                                        -5
            -10
            -15




                                                                                                              -10




                       2010   2020        2030                2040          2050         2060                            2010         2020        2030           2040        2050   2060
                                                 datey                                                                                                   datey

                                     Disbursement                    Repayment                                                               Disbursement               Repayment



                                        (b) EFSM                                                                                                 (c) EFSF

                                                                           Figure 12: Irish Programmes


tranches between March 2012 and November 2013. Sweden o ered a loan of e600 Million in four tranches between June
2012 and November 2013. We do not calculate the size of the transfer for these loans because they are relatively small and
becuase details regarding interest payments are di cult to nd.86
    Figure 12 plots the disbursements and repayment schedules for Ireland.


G.2.3                 Portugal
Portugal requested aid from the EFSF, the IMF, and the European Union via the EFSM in April 2011 and was approved for a
programme in May 2011. Portugal o cially exited in June 2014 when they allowed the programme to lapse without taking
the last available tranche of funding.   e three groups each commi ed approximately e26 Billion out of a total of e78
  86
       ere is detailed information for the United kingdom. For bilateral loans, the interest rate for the UK loans was the "the
semi-annual swap rate for Sterling swap transactions..." plus a margin of 229bp per annum. (UK Treasury (2010)) In 2012,
the interest rate was reduced to a service fee of 18bp per annum plus the cost of funding. (UK Treasury (2012)) £7,668,903.59
was rebated to Ireland as a consequence by reducing the interest payment due at the following interest payment date. From
other testimonies, we can piece together that the interest rate on Sweden and Denmark loans was tied to the 3-month
Euribor rate plus a margin of 100bp. However, there is li le other information publicly available at this time.


                                                                                                81
Billion. (EC (2016))
     IMF disbursements amounted to around 2,306% of Portugal's quota, and were disbursed through the EFF. (IMF (2011a))
Interest payments for IMF loans are provided by the IMF.
     EFSF disbursements began in 2011 and ended in 2014.          e initial FFA in April 2011 set the terms of the loans, in
particular the lending rates and the maximum weighted average maturities. e lending rates for the EFSF were equal to
the EFSF Cost of Funding plus a Margin, which in the beginning of the programme (May 2011) was equal to 208bp. e
initial maximum weighted average maturity at this time was 7.5 years. In July 2011, the margin was reduced to 0bp and the
maximum weighted average maturity was lengthened to 15 years. In June 2013, the maximum weighted average maturity
was o cially extended to 22 years.
     For EFSF loans, the month of annual interest payments for each disbursement is given at the time of the disbursement.
To simplify the analysis, we assume that all interest payments are made in March. We set the interest payment for in-
terest periods prior to and including September 2018 equal to the prevailing blended rate of 176bp multiplied by the total
outstanding level of debt.
     Lending rates for the EFSM were equal to the EU's cost of funding plus, originally in May 2011, a 215bp margin. Initially,
the weighted average maturity was 7.5 years. In November 2011 Portugal the average maturities of Portugal's EFSM loan
were extended to 12.5 years and margins were eliminated. (EU (2011b)) In 2013, the average maturities were again extended
to 19.5 years. (EU (2011a)) We use 3% as the average cost of funding.87
     Figure 13 plots the disbursements and repayment schedules for Portugal.          e programmes are relatively similar in
size, however the repayment schedule is much more front-loaded for the IMF programme relative to the EFSM and EFSF
repayment schedules. For the IMF, full repayment is expected by 2025, however the EFSM and EFSF repayment schedules
now extend through 2040.


G.2.4     Cyprus
Cyprus o cially asked for assistance in 2012 and was approved for a programme in May 2013. Cyprus o cially exited its
programme in March 2016. e program's total nancing envelope was e10 Billion, with the ESM commi ing e9 Billion
and the IMF commi ing approximately e1 Billion through . In total, e ESM disbursed e6.3 Billion between May 2013 -
October 2015, while the IMF disbursed all of its commitment. (ESM (2016))
       e ESM loans were not amortized, with the lump sum owed at the date of maturity. Interest rates were equal to the
cost of funding plus some margin. We use the blended rate taken from the ESM in August 2018 of 91bp applied to the
outstanding principal. IMF lending terms are described above.
    Cyprus's post-programme surveillance began in September.          ere have been ve such surveillance missions as of
October 2018, although as of this time the h PPS report has not been released.
    Figure 14 plots the disbursements and repayment schedules for Cyprus. e IMF loans are scheduled to be repaid over
the period 2020 to 2025, while the ESM loans don't start to be repaid until closer to 2025. e approximately e0.26 billion
early repayment was done in a bid to reduce debt servicing costs, as Cyprus was able to issue debt a lower interest rate.
(CNA News Service (2017))


G.2.5     Spain
Spain received assistance from only the ESM. Loans were approved in July 2012, with two disbursements in December 2012
and February 2013.     e ESM commi ed e100 Billion, although only e41.3 Billion was used.       e assistance came in the
form of bonds, which were used to recapitalize the banking sector. Spain has made some voluntary early repayments on
  87
        is number comes from the same statement by Olli Rehn in 2012 as the number for Ireland.


                                                              82
                                                                                          Portugal
                                                                                              IMF




                                                    10
                                                    5
                                               Billions EUR
                                                -5  -10
                                                    -15  0
                                                              2010         2020        2030                2040         2050          2060
                                                                                              datey

                                                                                  Disbursement                    Repayment



                                                                                      (a) IMF

                                      Portugal                                                                                               Portugal
                                        EFSM                                                                                                     EFSF




                                                                                                       5
      5




                                                                                                       0
             0
Billions EUR




                                                                                                  Billions EUR
                                                                                                        -5
     -5




                                                                                                       -10
      -10
      -15




                                                                                                       -15




                 2010   2020        2030                2040         2050          2060                          2010         2020        2030           2040        2050   2060
                                           datey                                                                                                 datey

                               Disbursement                    Repayment                                                             Disbursement               Repayment



                                  (b) EFSM                                                                                               (c) EFSF

                                                                Figure 13: Portugal Programmes



                                       Cyprus                                                                                                Cyprus
                                           IMF                                                                                                   ESM
      .4




                                                                                                       2
      .2




                                                                                                       0
Billions EUR




                                                                                                  Billions EUR
                                                                                                        -2
       0
      -.2




                                                                                                       -4
      -.4




                                                                                                       -6




                 2010   2020        2030                2040         2050          2060                          2010         2020        2030           2040        2050   2060
                                           datey                                                                                                 datey

                               Disbursement                    Repayment                                                             Disbursement               Repayment



                                   (a) IMF                                                                                               (b) ESM

                                                                 Figure 14: Cyprus Programmes


                                                                                          83
                                                                             Spain
                                                                                ESM




                                         10
                                         0
                                    Billions EUR
                                     -20 -30
                                         -40 -10
                                                   2010      2020        2030           2040        2050   2060
                                                                                datey

                                                                    Disbursement               Repayment



                                                                        (a) ESM

                                                          Figure 15: Spain Programme


these loans. (ESM (2013)) Otherwise, we use the blended rate taken from the ESM in August 2018 of 111bp applied to the
outstanding principal. Figure 15 plots the ESM assistance to Spain as of August 2018.
    Spain's post-programme surveillance began in March 2014. ere have been ten such surveillance missions as of Oc-
tober 2018, with the eleventh scheduled for Spring 2019.


G.3      Other European Programmes
G.3.1    Hungary
Talks regarding nancial assistance to Hungary began as early as October 2008, when IMF Director Dominique Strauss-
Kahn issued a statement discussing the issues facing Hungary. By the end of the month, both the IMF and the EC issued
press releases and formal recommendations for Hungary to receive medium-term assistance. (IMF (2008c),EU (2008a)) is
assistance was formally granted whith the IMF Executive Board's approval of a maximum of SDR10.5 bn (approximately
e12.5 bn) the EC's decision providing a maximum of e6.5, both in Early November. (IMF (2008a), EU (2008b)) ese loans
were conditional on Hungary implementing a number of structural policies, such as expenditure ceilings and expanded
deposit insurance programs.
     Assistance from the EC was under its medium-term balance of payments program.88 e realized EC loans were com-
prised of three installments given over the course of December 2008 to July 2009, each with a maturity between three and
six years.89 For the IMF, approximately SDR7.6 bn was disbursed through the SBA between November 2008 and September
2009 and was repaid between February 2012 and August 2013.
     From the IMF, Hungary received approximately e8.2 billion (SDR 7.6 billion) through the SBA. As explained above,
these loans are typically around three years, have interest payments tied to the basic rate of charge, and are conditional
on structural reforms occurring. Repayment was on schedule through August 2013, at which point Hungary chose to
repay early obligations due in 2013 and 2014 in order to generate interest savings. e data series for IMF disbursements,
repayment, and interest come from the IMF website.         is data is in SDR, and are converted to EUR at the prevailing
  88
      We focus on actual disbursements, so the second round of assistance in July 2012, which did not result in any assistance,
is excluded from our analysis.
   89
        e original agreement stipulated a maximum of ve installments over at most two years with a weighted average
maturity of 5 years. e MoU only mentioned four installments.


                                                                            84
                                               Hungary                                                                         Hungary
                                                    BoP                                                                             IMF
             2




                                                                                                5
                    0
        Billions EUR




                                                                                           Billions EUR
                                                                                                  0
       -2    -4




                                                                                                -5
                         2010    2020        2030           2040        2050   2060                       2010   2020        2030           2040        2050   2060
                                                    datey                                                                           datey

                                        Disbursement               Repayment                                            Disbursement               Repayment



                                            (a) BoP                                                                         (b) IMF

                                                                    Figure 16: Hungary Programme


monthly exchange rate using an average of the daily rates. As Hungary repaid its loans by the end of 2013, no projections
of repayment/interest or forecasted exchange rates are used.
     Although e1 billion of loans were authorized from the World Bank, none were realized.
     Post-programme assistance began in April 2011 and ended in November 2014. ere were six review missions in total.
As of November 2014, Hungary had repaid more than 70% of its EU loan, and hence was not subject to post-programme
surveillance.
     Figure 16 plots the disbursement and repayment schedules for Hungary. e repayment schedule for Hungary ended
in 2013, while the Balance of Payment programme ran through 2016. Note that Hungary's rst repayment was


G.3.2                   Latvia
Latvia came under nancial pressure around the same time as Hungary. As early as November 2008, Latvia had requested
aid from the EC and other lending institutions. (IMF (2008d)) Such assistance was formalized in January 2009 when a total
of e7.5 bn was made available. is programme was in large part designed to maintain the exchange rate peg between the
Latvian Lat (LVL) and the Euro. Of this amount, e3.1bn came from the EC, SDR1.5 bn (approximately e1.7 bn) came from
the IMF through the SBA, e1.9 bn came from the Nordic countries (Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Estonia, and Norway), and
the remainder came from the World Bank, the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development, the Czech Republic, and
Poland. (EU (2009a,b)) For the EC, nancial assistance came in four installments for a total of e2.9 bn between February
2009 and October 2010. For the IMF, approximately SDR1 bn was disbursed between 2008 and 2010 and was repaid in 2013.
        e repayment schedule for the EC is constructed using the PPS mission reviews and information from the EC website.
We set the repayment date of the rst disbursement to be March 2014 and the repayment date of the second disbursement
to be January 2015 to match the information from the EC website.90 For the third disbursement, we assume it will be repaid
in lump sum in March 2019. For the fourth and nal disbursement, we assume a constant amortization over the period
2020-2025. ese last two disbursements match the information provided in the PPS mission reports.91
     Interest payments for the EC BoP programme are calculated using an interest rate of 3.2% on the outstanding balance
  90
    See Financial assistance to Latvia
  91
       ese reports document repayment in LVL until PPS 4 in January 2014, when Latvia formally joined the Eurozone and
replaced its currency with the Euro. As usual, we report all results in Euro using prevailing exchange rates.


                                                                                      85
                                             Latvia                                                                           Latvia
                                                BoP                                                                              IMF
            1




                                                                                             1    .5
       Billions EUR




                                                                                       Billions EUR
       -1         0




                                                                                       0     -.5
            -2




                      2010   2020        2030           2040        2050   2060                        2010   2020        2030           2040        2050   2060
                                                datey                                                                            datey

                                    Disbursement               Repayment                                             Disbursement               Repayment



                                        (a) BoP                                                                          (b) IMF

                                                                  Figure 17: Latvia Programme


until repayment. We use the values in EUR to calculate the levels of outstanding debt.
     For the IMF, there were six planned series of disbursements, however only the rst four were actually released. ese
disbursements occurred in December 2008 (the initial agreement), August 2009, February 2010, and August 2010. (IMF
(2008d), IMF (2008b), IMF (2009), IMF (2010c), IMF (2010d), IMF (2011b), IMF (2011c)) As for repayments, Latvia made a
series of early repayments to the IMF in 2012. In September 2012, Latvia made an early repayment of obligations due in
2012-14. (IMF (2012b)) Latvia repaid its obligations early by announcing in December 2012 its intent to repay in 2013 the
obligations that would have been due in 2015. (IMF (2012a)) O cially, these loans were repaid in December 2012, and as
such all IMF reimbursals are in 2012. As Latvia repaid its loans by the end of 2012, no projections of repayment/interest or
forecasted exchange rates are used.
     Figure 17 plots the disbursement and repayment schedules for Latvia. For the Balance of Payments programme, most
repayment was in 2014 and 2015, although there are some minor payments scheduled through 2025. For Latvia, as mentioned
above, all repayment was o cially complete by 2012.


G.3.3                 Romania
Romania, the nal Non-Eurozone country we study, also experienced nancial pressures in mid-2009. Assistance was
formalized in May 2009 when a maximum of e20 was made available, with e5 bn from the EC through the balance of
payments programme, SDR11.443 bn (approximately e12.95 bn) from the IMF through the SBA, e1 bn from the World Bank,
and e0.5 bn each from the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD).92 (EU (2009c)) We focus in this paper on the Balance of Payments programme and the IMF.
     Romania entered three BoP programmes between 2009-2015, however only the rst programme of 2009-2011 saw real-
ized disbursements. Post-programme surveillance commenced in October 2015 and consisted of three surveillance missions
(May 2016, March 2017, and November 2017). Romania exited post-programme surveillance in April 2018 following re-
payment of 70% of its EU loan. We set the repayment and interest rate schedule according to the EC's post-programme
  92
    Note that this is technically only Programme 1, with two more programmes (2011-2013 and 2013-2015) later. However,
the 2011-2013 and 2013-2015 programmes were approved on a precautionary basis, and featured no disbursements by the
IMF or the EC. e disbursements by the EIB and EBRD continued through 2012, but are small and not taken into account
in our analysis. We also do not calculate the transfer from the World Bank.



                                                                                  86
                                             Romania                                                                             Romania
                                                  BoP                                                                                 IMF
             2




                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                  2
                    0
        Billions EUR




                                                                                             Billions EUR
                                                                                                -2     0
       -2




                                                                                                  -4
                                                                                                  -6
             -4




                        2010   2020        2030           2040        2050   2060                           2010   2020        2030           2040        2050   2060
                                                  datey                                                                               datey

                                      Disbursement               Repayment                                                Disbursement               Repayment



                                          (a) BoP                                                                             (b) IMF

                                                                   Figure 18: Romania Programme


evaluation. (EC (2015)) e interest rate is approximately 3%. We set the repayment dates to be the same as the issuance
date for each loan. For interest, we assume interest is paid in same quarter the loan is disbursed beginning the following year
until, and including, the repayment date. Interest payments are calculated using an interest rate of 3.2% on the outstanding
balance.
     Romania was approved for assistance from the IMF in May 2009 through the SBA.93 Romania received nancial as-
sistance over six disbursements including May 2009 (the initial agreement), September 2009, February 2010, July 2010,
September 2010, and January 2011.94 In March 2011, Romania was approved for the seventh disbursement and a new SBA,
however these were precautionary and never drawn upon. IMF Lending terms for the SBA are described above in the sec-
tion on Greece. e data series for IMF disbursements, repayment, and interest come from the IMF website. is data is in
SDR, and are converted to EUR at the prevailing monthly exchange rate using an average of the daily rates. As Romania
repaid its loans by the end of 2016, no projections of repayment/interest or forecasted exchange rates are used.
     Figure 18 plots the disbursement and repayment schedules for Romania.              e balance of payment programme has
slightly longer durations, with repayment between 2014 and 2019, while the IMF only ran through 2016.



H               Methodology
                               i,j
To estimate total transfers T rt   for lender i to borrower j at time t, we calculate the di erence between the present value
of the sequence of net transfers discounted at some benchmark internal rate of return and the present value of the sequence
of net transfers discounted at its actual internal rate of return. By de nition, this la er term is zero, and so we can write
the transfer as
                                                             T
                                                      i,j          1
                                                   T rt   =             t
                                                                          N Tti,j                                       (H.1)
                                                        0
                                                            t=t
                                                                (1 + r )
                                                                                    0


where T is the date of the last net transfer ow (always a repayment). r is the (risk-free) discount or reference rate at time t.
In practice, we set this discount rate to the internal rate of return on the IMF's lending for borrower j during the Eurozone
  93
     Romania is no stranger to using the SBA programme via the IMF. In particular, Romania received assistance via the
SBA between October 2001 and October 2003, and a precautionary SBA ending in June 2006. (IMF (2007))
  94
       e February 2010 combined both the second and third disbursements.


                                                                                        87
crisis. N Tti,j are net transfers from lender i to borrower j at time t.
     We follow Joshi and Ze elmeyer (2005) and construct net transfers as

                                              i,j
                                 - N Tti,j = Rt      i,j
                                                  - Dt   + ii,j   o i,j            i,j  o i,j
                                                            t-1 (D )t-1 + . . . + it- (D )t-                                (H.2)

where  denotes the maturity of each disbursement. Do is the outstanding balance remaining on each disbursement. en,
the internal rate of return irri,j is the value that sets the sequence of net transfers to zero. e series of net transfers N Tti,j
is also used to calculate the size of the present discounted value of the transfer.
     To calculate the internal rate of return, we follow Joshi and Ze elmeyer (2005). We begin by establishing a lending cycle
for each country-lender pair. A lending cycle is a sequence of disbursements, repayments, and interest payments between
a lender and a borrower during which the level of outstanding debt is positive. Unlike Joshi and Ze elmeyer (2005), who in
some cases have multiple lending cycles per country-IMF pair, we only have one lending cycle for each country as, once a
country requested assistance, they have since maintained an outstanding balance.
     We make two key assumptions when calculating the internal rates of return.                 e rst key assumption is that the
current speci cation of repayments and interest rates will coincide with the realized outcome, and there will be no more
debt renegotiations. Any changes to the current agreement that makes the terms more favorable for Greece, such as delaying
interest payments or extending the overall maturity, would result in a larger transfer than we calculate.             e second key
assumption is that for loans with variable interest rates that depend on the international institutions borrowing rate, we
assume that they can roll over debt at the same interest rate. Whether the current environment featuring low global interest
rates is here to stay is beyond the scope of this paper, but if global interest rates were to rise, both the IMF and the Europeans
lenders would most likely be a ected similarly. Hence, it is unlikely that these changes in the interest rate are a source of
concern in our estimation.



I     Time-Varying NPV for Greece
In this section, we outline the evolution of the Greek debt programmes by rescue fund.                 is provides the background
information regarding why the NPV for Greece had changed so much over time. It also provides sources for where we take
forecasts of repayment from.
       In calculating the NPV over time, we use equation H.1 and calculate the size of the transfer for each s  {tstart , tstart +
1, . . . , T - 1, T }, where tstart is de ned as the quarter of the start of each programme and T is de ned as 2018Q3. Expanding
on Equation H.1, we therefore write the size of the net present value of the series of as of time s:

                                         T
                               i,j                 1         i,j
                            T rs     =                    N Ts,t ,   s  {tstart , tstart + 1, . . . , T - 1, T }             (I.1)
                                         t=s
                                               (1 + rs )t

where N Ts,t denotes the expected net transfer of the series as of time s:

                                            i,j    i,j
                               N Ts,t = Es Rt   - Dt   + ii,j   o i,j            i,j  o i,j
                                                          t-1 (D )t-1 + . . . + it- (D )t-


By using this notation, note that for t > s, then we use the realized disbursements, repayments, and interest payments at
time t.
        e "risk-free" rate rs in Equation I.1 is the internal rate of return for the expected sequence of net transfers to the IMF
as of time s. Hence, the risk-free rate we use to discount the sequence of transfers is time varying as well.


                                                                      88
    To further understand this exercise, consider the following example. In December 2012, there was an o cial debt relief
agreement reached between the EFSF and Greece that included, among other things, a smoothing of the repayment pro le
by Greece to extend the weighted average maturity of the programme (this agreement is discussed in more detail below).
  is change a ects the expectation of future repayments by shi ing repayment schedules R further into the future. As an
example, assume away interest payments and suppose that all disbursements have been made. Suppose a repayment of e1
bn that was originally set for January 2030 is now moved to January 2040. In the language above, this means that initially,
we have95 :
               N T2012Q4,Jan2030 = E2012Q4 [RJan2030 ] = 1N T2012Q4,Jan2040 = E2012Q4 [RJan2040 ] = 0

In the next quarter, following the release of details regarding the repayment schemes, we now have

                N T2013Q1,Jan2030 = E2013Q1 [RJan2030 ] = 0N T2013Q1,Jan2040 = E2013Q1 [RJan2040 ] = 1

Hence, the sequence of net transfers used to calculate the size of the transfer has been adjusted.


I.1    Greek Loan Facility
While assistance was formally requested in April 2010, no funds were disbursed at this time. On May 9, 2010 the IMF agreed
to a Stand-By Agreement (SBA) with Greece. On May 18, 2010, the euro-area Member states disburse the rst installment
of their pooled loans to Greece. From the beginning, the full amount of the programme was expected to be disbursed.
   erefore, we assume that, beginning in May 2010, investors expected the programme to run its fully scheduled course.
   is implies that, for our quarterly NPV series, Q2 of 2010 is the rst observation.
        e full schedule of disbursements is set out on page 27 of Occasional Papers 61 (EC (2010a)). In each subsequent review
(Occasional Papers 68, 72, 77, 81, 87) there is a similar table that lists the expected disbursement schedul (EC (2010,a,c,
2011a,b,c)). For all quarters up to and including Q3 of 2011, we use this table to forecast future disbursements. However,
with the introduction of the EFSF in mid-2011, occasional paper 87 only lists the rst six tranches as planned disbursements.
As these reviews were quarterly, we assume in October 2011 the EFSF is expected to take over all future loans, and that only
the rst six tranches are expected to be part of the the GLF package to Greece. erefore, we use this abbreviated forecast
beginning in Q4 of 2011.
     As for repayments and interest, we use the realized repayment schedule as soon as the loan is disbursed. However, for
loans not yet disbursed, we begin by using the requirements set out in the Euro Loan Facility Act and its amendments. Under
the original terms, the repayment schedule was to mirror that of the IMF's SBA with a three year grace period followed by
repayment of constant maturity over eight quarters. According to the original Euro Area Loan Facility Act (dated in May
2010), the loan terms were ve years. We therefore assume that for each disbursement, the loans are amortized over the
eight quarters beginning a er the three year grace period. Interest payments for this period are tied to the 3-month Euribor
rate with a margin of 300bp for the rst three years and 400bp for the last two years. is a ects the forecasts up to and
including 2011Q2.
     In the Euro Area Loan Facility Act of June 2011, the grace period was extended to four years and six months.            e
term of each loan was also extended to ten years. We therefore assume that, following this period, future loans have a
constant amortization over the ve and a half years (22 quarters) a er each grace period.96 As for realized loans, a detailed
amended schedule is included in the Act. Additionally, the margin was lowered to 200bp for the rst three years and 300bp
  95
    I suppress the i, for the EFSF, and j , for Greece for clarity
  96
    For the 2011Q3, 2011Q4, and 2012Q1 forecasts, this only a ects the forecasted disbursements of e8.7 bn in July 2011
and e5.8 bn in November 2011.


                                                             89
following. ese two changes a ect calculations for loan schedules beginning in Q3 of 2011. is amendment also revises
the repayment dates for the original loans.
     In the Euro Area Loan Facility Act of February 2012, the grace period was again extended to ten years. e terms were
extended to een years. At this point, all six loans had been disbursed, and the EFSF programme was scheduled to begin
soon. Hence, we only need worry about the realized loans. As for realized loans, a detailed amended schedule is included
in the Act.    e margin was lowered to 150bp for all periods.       ese two changes a ect calculations for loan schedules
beginning in Q2 of 2012.
     In the Euro Area Loan Facility Act of December 2012, the terms were extended to thirty years. For realized loans, a
detailed amended schedule is included in the Act. e margin was lowered to 50bp for all periods. ese two changes a ect
calculations for loan schedules beginning in Q1 of 2013. Note that this was the last agreement related to GLF funding, and
so we use this forecasted repayment schedule for all future periods.


I.2    European Financial Stability Fund
   e European Financial Stability Facility Act of 2010 created the EFSF, although loans were not extended to Greece until
March 2012.
     For forecasted disbursements, beginning with EC (2012b) in March 2012, forecasts include the additional funding for
an overall e144.7 billion.97 We therefore begin our EFSF series in Q1 2012 using the series from this paper as our forecast.
We also use this paper for the Q2 and Q3 forecasts. However, note that there were actually more disbursements in Q1 and
Q2 of 2012 then expected. I subtract the di erence from the end of the forecasted time series.98 Occasional Paper 123 (the
 rst review) in December 2012 details all of the disbursements in 2012, and also forecasts the month of each tranche for
the second disbursement in Q1 2013, as well as a quarterly forecast series (EC (2012b)). is quarterly series also updates
the actual disbursements from 2012. We therefore use this series as the forecasted series for Q4 2012.99 , 100 e forecasts
for Q2 and Q3 of 2013 use the same forecast as Q1 of 2013. However, at the end of Q3 it was apparent that there would
be no disbursements that quarter even though 3.4 was expected. We simply assign this 3.4 to Q4.101 Occasional Paper 148
came out in May 2013, so we use its forecast starting in Q2 2013. Occasional Paper 159 came out in July 2013, so we use its
  97
      Table 19 on Page 56.
  98
        e rst occasional paper forecasted 74.0/29.6 in Q1/Q2. e actual disbursements were 72.1/37.5, which is e6 billion
more. For the 2012Q2 forecast, this means that the Q2, Q3, and Q4 disbursements in 2014 are reduced to zero, and the Q1
disbursement is reduced from 10.7 to 8.9.        is is repeated for the 2012 Q3 forecast. Note that the 72.1 includes the e35
billion for collateral that was returned early, as explained below, and is eliminated from our forecasts completely beginning
in 2012Q3.
   99
      Note that there is a slight di erence between this series and our series. In their series, they assign the early April
tranches to Q1, and we assign them to Q2. is accounts for the di erence between the 40.5/33.5 in Q1/Q2 in the Occasional
Paper and the 37.1/36.7 in our series.
  100
      Using the Internet Archive Wayback Machine, we can view the dates of disbursements and download the EFSF Newslet-
ters (which seem to be quarterly). is is what we use to ll the actual disbursements in Q2 and Q3 2012. e big di erence
seems to be that there was a slight delay in releasing some of the funds relative to expectations, and so the actual disburse-
ment schedule was not as frontloaded as expected. is may somewhat a ect our estimates of the internal rates of return
between 2012 Q1 and 2012 Q2, since we assume that the Q1 forecast uses the Occasional Paper's quarterly series, but the
Q2 series uses the actual disbursements as of May 2012 (the rst available date from the Wayback Machine). Recall that
when using quarterly forecasts, we assume the disbursements take place at the end of the quarter.
  101
        ere is also an error in that the 2013 Q1 disbursements are assigned to Q4 in Occasional Paper 123. We correct this
by adding the 14.8 expected in Q1 to the 4.2 forecasted in order to keep the total constant. is is somewhat corrected in
Occasional Paper 148, although at this point the realized disbursements from Q1 2013 were included, so the Q1 total is only
12.0




                                                             90
forecast beginning in Q3 2013.102 Occasional Paper 192 came out in April 2014, so we use its forecast beginning in Q1 2014.
Occasional Paper 192 is the last o cial document, and other than a redelivery of bonds, there were no new disbursements
from the EFSF a er August 2014. However, in Q1 2014, there was a forecasted e10.2 billion still to be disbursed, so we
carry this forward as before under the assumption that investors always expect the remaining money to be disbursed in the
following quarter.103 ere were two e1 billion disbursements in July and August of 2014, and so we forecast e1.9 billion
for each subsequent quarter until the programme was formally ended in July 2015. Hence, beginning in Q3 2015, we assume
there will be no further disbursements.
        ere are a number of "gray areas." One gray area is how to deal with the three disbursed tranches of the private sector
involvement (PSI) participation, which includes an approximately e29.7 billion sweetener, e4.8 billion of accrued interest,
and in particular e35 billion of ECB collateral. is is a gray area because the tranches were disbursed in March and April
while the loan modi cation at the end of 2012 bundles them all being into one loan. However, the EFSF website does state
which tranches of each disbursement were assigned to which program, so we assign repayment to be in the same month
as the disbursed tranche's month.104 , 105 A second gray area for the EFSF loans is how to handle the e35 billion given to
Greece as collateral in March 2012, but was subsequently returned in July 2012. We assume that for the Q1 and Q2 forecasts
in 2012, this e35 billion was expected to be used and paid back accordingly. en, beginning in Q3, we assume that the
sequence of transfers includes the fact that all e35 billion was repaid early. A third gray area is how to handle to handle the
e7.2 billion made available for bank recapitalization in January 2013. We do not assign this as a loan in January, as it does
not appear the Greek government called upon it at that time. is contrasts with Occasional Paper 148, which lists this 7.2
billion as a realized disbursement in Table 7 and Table 9. In Occasional Paper 159, Q1 2013 disbursements are reduced down
to 4.8 from 12.0, but it is still included in Table 7 as it was drawn upon in May 2013. We therefore list is as disbursed in May
2013. Another gray area concerns how to deal with "roll-over loans." For now, we assume that they are repaid instead of
rolled over.106
     For realized repayments, other than the e35 billion listed above, there has only been a e10.9 billion repayment. is
repayment includes e7.2 billion from the bank recapitalization listed above as well as e3.7 billion of the loan tranche in
December 2012 (e16 billion), both in February 2015.
     For forecasted repayments, we follow the EFSF's repayment scheme.107 Initially, most loans have full repayment on a
single maturity date, while others have linear amortization a er 10 year grace period. For forecasted loans that have not
yet been disbursed, we assume that they will be repaid in lump sum 15 years following disbursement.108 is assumption
is made because the initial terms of the EFSF stipulated a minimum of a 15 year repayment scheme in July 2011. As for the
month of repayment, it is unclear in most cases what the Principal Repayment Dates are. Hence, for all loans, we assume
 102
      For Q4 2013, we use Occasional paper 159. As before, we take the di erence between what is actually disbursed and
what is forecasted, and assume it will be distributed the following quarter.
  103
      In practice, this means that, because e6.3 billion was disbursed in April 2014, then we forecast e3.9 billion in Q3 2014.
  104
         e web site lists a 10 year grace period followed by a maturity. We therefore assume a linear amortization following
the grace period. is results in a 20 year amortization period for the PSI sweetener. e accrued interest is repaid in lump
sum a er 15 years.
  105
      Note again that this only a ects the 2012 forecasts, as beginning in 2013 the loans are combined into one, which we
assume to be disbursed in March (see below).
  106
      Rollover loans include Disbursement 3, Tranche 2. Beginning in 2017, this loan is fully amortized between 2051 and
2056.
  107
      When possible, we use the repayment scheme from the EFSF websites at the time of the forecasted internal rate of
return.
  108
      Some loans had longer maturities. Others, such as those to be used for bank recapitalization, did not have a schedule
for repayment. is is because they were funded with loans issued by the EFSF and such loans were scheduled to be rolled
over. We assume 15 years for these disbursement. For the e7.2 billion disbursement in 2013, it was repaid early.



                                                              91
the annual amortization on the anniversary of the disbursements.109
     Interest payments are calculated using the EFSF blended rate prevailing at that quarter.110 We apply the average blended
rate over the quarter prevailing at the time of the forecast forward until the outstanding debt balance is equal to zero. is
is equivalent to assuming that all loans have the same interest rate.
        ere were four modi cations to the original loan agreement. In December 2012, maturities were extended by 15 years.
Additionally, interest payments were deferred for 10 years and rolled into a new loan. It does not look to be have been
updated on the EFSF website until a er January 2013. Hence, we assume that this modi cation a ects the forecast being in
Q1 2013.111 In January 2017, two important changes were made.112 First, there was a smoothing of the repayment pro le.
Maturities were extended back to 32.5 years.113 Second, the step-up margin of 200 basis points on the e11.3 billion tranche
was waived. is tranche was issued in December 2012. ese two measures therefore a ect forecasts beginning in Q1 of
2017.114


I.3     European Stability Mechanism
Greece rst requested ESM support in July 2015, so we begin our series for Greek ESM assistance in 2015Q3.            e total
 nancing envelope is e86 billion. For forecasted disbursements, we begin by assuming that the total envelope will be
disbursed, although eventually the ESM reports that not all funding will be needed.
       e rst approved tranche was for e16 billion from August 2015 through the end of 2015, so we take the actual dis-
bursements as the forecasted disbursements for that year. Additionally, e25 billion was available for bank recapitalization,
however only e5.4 billion was ever drawn upon.115        is is consistent with the rst tranche proposal of August 2015,
although they only give a maximum date for which disbursements must be made by. ere is li le information about fore-
casted disbursements following this date. We therefore make assumptions on forecasted disbursements. First, of the e86
bn envelope, in 2015 e26 bn was expected to be disbursed, as explained above.        is leaves approximately e60 bn to be
disbursed in the years following. For the 2015Q3 forecast, we assume that all e25 bn of the bank recapitalization will be
disbursed eventually. We assume that the e60 bn will be disbursed evenly through 2018. is means that e5 bn is forecasted
to be disbursed each quarter for the 2015Q3 forecast. We do not assume that the e25 bn for bank recapiltalization will be
  109
      An exception occurs if the date given for the nal maturity is di erent than the disbursement. In all of these cases, we
use the listed date of the nal maturity.
  110
        is data is available from Corse i, Erce and Uy (2017), who graciously made their data available.
  111
        e following changes are made: i. the PSI and Accrued Interest are combined and amortized over 20 years through
2042.      e combined amount listed on the website is 34.6, which is a slight overestimate of the 34.5 that was actually
disbursed. We use the actual disbursement to calculate repayment so as not to overestimate repayment. (Note that this only
a ects the accrued interest, and also results in the March/April tranches being combined into one. We follow this by having
all be due in March of each year beginning in 2023.); ii. e e5.9 billion changed to 2047 from 2032; iii. e e3.3 billion
changed to 2041 from 2027; iv. e amortization period of the e25 billion for bank recapitalization changed from 2023-2032
to 2034-2039 and 2043-2046; v. e e4.2 billion changed to 2042 from 2027; vi. e e1 billion changed to 2040 from 2027.
  112
      We do not consider the reduction of interest rate risk to be as important. While this certainly would constitute a transfer
to Greece, it is not obvious how to model it.
  113
      Almost all maturities were a ected. e new maturities are the current ones listed on the EFSF website.
  114
        e modi cations were discussed as early as Q4 2016. Because the maturity extension mostly a ects the long horizon,
the Q1 2017 number would be a close approximation to the Q4 2016 number.
  115
      Note that of the e10 billion for bank recapitalization, only e5.4 billion was drawn upon in December. We assume
that the full e10 billion was forecasted to be drawn upon in December for the 2015Q3 forecast, but beginning in 2015Q4
we assume that none of this amount, nor the remaining e15 billion will be drawn. is is because, beginning in the rst
compliance report, there is no forecasted series for the disbursement of the remaining bank recapitalization funds as they
are expected to be unused.




                                                               92
disbursed for the 2015Q4 and 2016Q1 forecasts.Instead, these forecasts will only have e66.4 bn.116 We then take the e45
bn (86 - 19.6) remaining for the 2015Q4 and 2016Q1 forecasts and assume that it will be fully disbursed by the end of 2018.
   erefore, e3.75 bn for the 2015Q4 and 2016Q1 forecasts.117 We do so by assuming a constant disbursement amount for
each quarter, which seems to match the long-term forecasts of the ESM in the later compliance reports.
        e rst compliance report was completed in June 2016, and we use this as the basis for our 2016Q2 forecast (EC (2016b)).
Although Greece was originally forecasted to receive a second tranche of e11.2 billion between December 2015 and June
2016, there were no disbursements until June 2016 due to "[t]he long delay in completing the rst review."118 From the rst
compliance report in June 2016, we see that this tranche was reduced from e11.2 billion to e10.3 billion. For the forecast,
we assume that the tranches will be distributed in Q2 and Q3 of 2016 as listed in the Compliance Report.119 We then use
the compliance report to build the forecast forward through 2018. Note that now, the ESM assumes that e19.6 bn of the
original e86 bn will be unused, so we continue to not include this amount in our forecasts. We also use the forecast from
the rst compliance report as our assumed forecast for 2016Q3, 2016Q4, and 2017Q1 by applying forward the undisbursed
forecasts to the following quarter.
        e second compliance report was completed in June 2017, and we use this as the basis for our 2017Q2 forecast (EC
(2017b)).120 In this report, the ESM now assumes that e27.4 bn of the original e86 bn nancing envelope will go unused,
which gives a total forecasted disbursed amount of e58.6 bn. We also use this forecast as our assumed forecast for 2017Q3
and 2017Q4 by applying forward the undisbursed forecasts to the following quarter.
        e third compliance report was completed in March 2018, and we use this as our 2018Q1 forecast (EC (2018b)). In this
report, the ESM again assumes that e27.4 bn of the original e86 bn nancing envelope will go unused, which gives a total
forecasted disbursed amount of e58.6 bn. e ESM assumes that the remaining e11.7 bn of this amount will be disbursed
in July 2018, so we include that forecast.121
        e fourth compliance report was rst issued in June 2018 and updated in July 2018. We use this as our 2018Q2 forecast
(EC (2018a)). At this point, e46.9 bn had been disbursed. Here, the ESM anticipates lending slightly more for the nal
disbursement in August 2018 of e15 bn, which brings the total back up to around e61.9 bn. Note that this forecast is for a
disbursement of July. For the 2018Q2 forecast, we therefore assume a date of July.122 For the 2018Q3 forecast, we assume
the nal disbursement of e15 bn will be given in August 2018, which is the end of the programme.
     Repayment of disbursed amounts is given on the ESM website, and we assume that Greece will repay all debts where
listed. For undisbursed amounts, we assume that they carry 15 year maturities with no amortization, which is around 5
years less than what the disbursed amounts have, and around half of what the maximum average maturity is allowed to be
in the Financial Assistance Facility Agreement. ere was an early repayment of e2 Billion in February 2017 coming from
the sale of assets.123 Using the wayback machine, these repayments were applied to the nal tranches in 2058 and 2059 of
each disbursed loan, which we use as well.
     According to the ESM website, the blended interest rate has been rising steadily over the lifetime of the programme.
For this reason, interest payments are again calculated using the ESM blended rate prevailing at that quarter. We apply the
 116
      Recall that e5.4 bn was disbursed, so we subtract the remainder, e19.6 bn, from the envelope
 117
      Note that for the 2016Q1 forecast, we add the forecasted amount that wasn't disbursed in 2016Q1 to 2016Q2, assuming
that the ESM wants to disburse the loans as soon as possible.
  118
      First Compliance Report, Page 16.
  119
      First Compliance Report, Table 5.
  120
      Table 5 of the report displays the forecast.
  121
         is number comes from the fact that the ESM writes that the cash bu er for Greece is expected to be insu cient.
  122
         ere is some debate as to whether the forecast should be July or August, as the Eurogroup statement on June 22, 2018
forecasts August as well. We choose July to be consistent with the methodology throughout this exercise.
  123
         e National Bank of Greece had to sell a subsidiary, Finansbank, as part of the conditions for receiving bank recapi-
talization loans.


                                                             93
average blended rate over the quarter prevailing at the time of the forecast forward until the outstanding debt balance is
equal to zero. is is equivalent to assuming that all loans have the same interest rate. Note that the Corse i, Erce and Uy
(2017) data on blended rates only goes forward to August 2015, the date of the rst ESM disbursement. erefore, we use
the ESM website to approximate the increase of interest rates through the current 1.62%.
     Other than the short-term nancial assistance in January 2017, there do not seem to be any substantial revisions to
the ESM's loan agreements.      is short-term agreement mainly focused on EFSF loans, described above, but for the ESM
they included modi cations to the interest rate scheme that should reduce forecasted ESM payments. Speci cally, back-
to-back loans held by Greek banks were exchanged for long-term xed notes and cash; swap agreements by the ESM to
stabilize the cost of funding charged to Greece, and matched funding for future disbursements. As it is not immediately
clear how to factor these modi cations into our calculations, we ignore them. Additionally, the ESM exchanged oating rate
notes for cash, which a ected the repayment pro le. We implement this change beginning in 2018Q1 using the forecasted
repayment scheme from the ESM website available June 25, 2018. is does not a ect the total amount of disbursements,
only the repayment pro le by reducing interest rate risk. e forecasted repayments were not available on the ESM website
immediately, and we use the available data from June 2018.
     JUNE 2018: is is because modi cations to these loans would involve negotiations with the private sector. Second,
for the ESM programme, the step-up margin related to the debt buy-back tranche was eliminated. is step-up margin had
been temporarily waived, but now was abolished. e third major change, which is not included in our calculations, is the
transfer of approximately e2 billion in pro ts from the ESM segregated account to Greece.


I.4    International Monetary Fund
Greece rst requested IMF support in the form of a Stand-By Agreement (SBA), and was approved on May 9, 2010, so we
begin our series in 2010Q2. Beginning in March 2012, Greece moved from an SBA to an Extended Fund Facility (EFF). e
key di erence between the two is that the EFF features a longer duration of support and longer maturities for the loans
than the SBA, but the spreads over the 3-month SDR rate are identical. We end our forecast series in 2016Q1, when the EFF
was cancelled.124
     For forecasted disbursements, we mostly rely on IMF publications. For forecasts in 2010Q2, we use the forecasted
request for funding.125 For forecasts in 2010Q3, we use Occasional Paper 68 in August 2010 (EC (2010)). For forecasts in
2010Q4, we use Occasional Paper 72 (EC (2010c)). For forecasts in 2011Q1 and 2011Q2, we use Occasional Paper 77, For
forecasts in 2011Q3, we use Occasional Paper 81 (EC (2011b)).126 For forecasts in 2011Q4, we use Occasional Paper 87 (EC
(2011a)).127 However, this paper was published during the transition from Programme 1 and the GLF to Programme 2, which
involved the EFSF.
       is was also the time when the IMF switched from using the SBA to the EFF. At this point, with Programme 2 in
full e ect, the IMF was projected to make e28 bn in equally phased disbursements over four years. As with the SBA,
EFF disbursements would not be made without a round of reviews. e rst/second reviews were published in December
2012. For the rst three quarters, we use the proposed disbursement schedule from the March 2012 statement, which
 124
      In July 2017, Greece requested SBA funding. We do not include this in our forecasts.
 125
      Table 7 of the Sta Report on Request for Stand-By Arrangement (IMF (2010a)).
  126
      For this forecast, Occasional Paper 81 was wri en in July 2011 and there was also a forecasted disbursement in that
same month. e Occasional Paper was not worried about this disbursement, and it was actually disbursed in July. However,
there is also a forecasted disbursement in September, which did not actually occur. For this reason, this forecast is not as of
the end of the quarter, like the others, but more as of the middle.
  127
      Like the forecast before, this will take place in the middle of the quarter as there is a forecasted disbursement in
November which doesn't actually occur until December.



                                                              94
forecasts e1.6 bn each quarter through 2016Q1. We also use this forecast for 2012Q2 and 2012Q3. However, a er the e1.6
bn in March was disbursed, there was not another disbursement until December 2012. As there do not appear to be any
other IMF communications during this time period, we therefore "roll forward" each e1.6 bn until December under the
assumption that investors think this will be disbursed as soon as possible. For 2012Q4 we use Occasional Paper 123 to make
our forecast.128 For the 2013Q1 forecast, we use the IMF's rst/second review of the EFF, published in December 2012,
to make the forecast.      ere was a disbursement in January 2013 following completion of these reviews, and we assume
that this was forecasted in December for the 2012Q4 forecast.          ere is also a forecasted disbursement in February 2013.
We leave this one in, but note that it was never actually made. For the 2013Q2 forecast, we use the EFF ird Review in
June 2013. e forecasts did not change, but there was a disbursement of e1.8 bn For the 2013Q3 forecast, we use the EFF
Fourth Review in July 2013. Note that this is only one month later, but it resulted in the release of the next disbursement
in July. e next actual disbursement was not until June 2013, so for the 2013Q4 and 2014Q1 forecasts, we roll forward the
forecasted amounts to match this realization. For the 2014Q2 forecast, we use the EFF Fi h Review in June 2014. is June
2013 would be the nal IMF disbursement, but the EFF program was not cancelled until January 2016. As such, we maintain
the forecasts until 2016Q1 by rolling forward the anticipated amounts. e 2016Q1 forecast is the nal forecast.
     For actual repayments, we use the data available from the IMF website. Because there have been no modi cations to
the disbursements, these are accurate at the time of disbursement. To calculate projected repayments of a series not yet
disbursed, we use the fact that, up until March 2012, the IMF was using the SBA. is means that the loans had a three
year grace period before maturity repayment, and following this point they were then repaid over a two year span. Taken
together, the SBA loans were expected to be fully repaid in exactly 5 years. We take this same approach for forecasted SBA
loans, and assume that they will be repaid, a er a three year grace period, over a two year period, quarterly, with a constant
amortization. As for EFF loans, which began to be used as of the 2012Q1 forecast, these has much longer maturities and
so had a four year grace period. ey are then repaid at a semi-annual rate and are forecasted to be fully repaid over the
next 6 years. Taken together, the EFF loans were expected to be fully repaid in exactly 10 years. We take thsi approach for
forecasted EFF loans, and assume they will be repaid, a er a four year grace period, over a six year period, semi-annually,
with a constant amortization. Principal repayments for both SBA loan and EFF loans are assumed to be in the three/six
month intervals beginning a er the disbursement date.
     For interest rates, the IMF lends at the market-related interest rate, which is the basic rate of charge. is interest rate
is calculated by taking the market-determined Special Drawing Rights (SDR) interest rate and adding a margin of 100bp.
Added to this charge is a 200bp surcharge for all amounts above 187.5% of quota, which a er three years rises to 300bp. For
all disbursed loans, the IMF gives a projected interest payment schedule, and we use this whenever possible. Otherwise, we
use Greece's quota to calculate the interest rate (on all outstanding debt), (SDR1.1 bn). We use the rate of charge prevailing
in the last day of the sample as our estimate of future interest rates. is is almost certainly a lower bound (see Figure 19),
so in practice our estimate of the internal rate of return is also a lower bound.
     In practice, only two events move the internal rate of return substantially. First, the shi from using the SBA to the
EFF and the introduction of Programme 2 a ected both the amount of disbursements and the expected interest payments.
Second, the IMF programme was o cially cancelled in January 2016, eliminating all future disbursements and with them
repayments and interest.
 128
     It looks like the EFSF assumed that the rst and second reviews would be disbursed on schedule (although they were
not) in Q4. en, they assumed e1.8 bn going forward, which is what is in the rst/second review. is is a result forecasting
fewer reviews, since the November 2012 review waas skipped.




                                                              95
                                                            IMF Adjusted Rate of Charge




                                200
                                150
                           Basis Points
                               100
                                50
                                0




                                    2008m1              2010m1    2012m1     2014m1    2016m1   2018m1
                                          Source: IMF



                                                         Figure 19: Basic Rate of Charge


I.5    Time-Varying NPV and IRR by Entity
Using 1, we can calculate the size of the transfer to Greece by each entity. We rst calculate net transfers for each discounting
each series of net transfers, using equation H.2. We then discount this series at the IMF internal rate of return. Figure 20
shows the evolution of the internal rates of return while Figure 21 shows the size of the transfer.




                                                                       96
           Annualized Internal Rate of Return - IMF                             Annualized Internal Rate of Return - GLF
3.4




                                                                     4
3.3




                                                                     3
3.2




                                                                     2
3.1




                                                                     1
3




                                                                     0


  2010q1       2012q3       2015q1        2017q3       2020q1          2010q1       2012q3       2015q1       2017q3       2020q1



                          (a) IMF                                                             (b) GLF

           Annualized Internal Rate of Return - EFSF                            Annualized Internal Rate of Return - ESM
                                                                     2
1.4




                                                                     1.8
1.2




                                                                     1.6
1




                                                                     1.4
                                                                     1.2
.8




                                                                     1
.6




  2012q1       2014q1       2016q1        2018q1       2020q1          2015q3       2016q3       2017q3       2018q3       2019q3



                         (c) EFSF                                                             (d) ESM

                                              Figure 20: IRR's by Lender




                                                                97
                                               Combined                                                                                           GLF
                    60%                                                                                          60%
                                     Restructuring                                                                                Restructuring
                           Programme 1                                                                                  Programme 1
                    50%                                                                                          50%


                    40%                                                                                          40%
Percentage of GDP




                                                                                             Percentage of GDP
                    30%                                                                                          30%


                    20%                                                                                          20%


                    10%                                                                                          10%


                     0%                                                                                           0%


                    -10%                                                                                         -10%


                    -20%                                                                                         -20%
                      2008-Q1 2009-Q2 2010-Q4 2012-Q2 2013-Q4 2015-Q2 2016-Q4 2018-Q2                              2008-Q1 2009-Q2 2010-Q4 2012-Q2 2013-Q4 2015-Q2 2016-Q4 2018-Q2



                                           (a) NT Combined                                                                                  (b) NT GLF

                                                     EFSF                                                                                         ESM
                    60%                                                                                          60%
                                     Restructuring                                                                                Restructuring
                           Programme 1                                                                                  Programme 1
                    50%                                                                                          50%


                    40%                                                                                          40%
Percentage of GDP




                                                                                             Percentage of GDP




                    30%                                                                                          30%


                    20%                                                                                          20%


                    10%                                                                                          10%


                     0%                                                                                           0%


                    -10%                                                                                         -10%


                    -20%                                                                                         -20%
                      2008-Q1 2009-Q2 2010-Q4 2012-Q2 2013-Q4 2015-Q2 2016-Q4 2018-Q2                              2008-Q1 2009-Q2 2010-Q4 2012-Q2 2013-Q4 2015-Q2 2016-Q4 2018-Q2



                                               (c) NT EFSF                                                                                  (d) NT ESM

                                                                Figure 21: Net Transfers by Lender




                                                                                        98
References for Online Appendix
Blustein, Paul. 2015. "Laid low: e IMF, the euro zone and the rst rescue of Greece." Centre for International Governance
  Innovation CIGI Paper Series 61.

CNA News Service. 2017. "Cyprus makes early payment on IMF loan." cyprus-mail.com [Online; posted 17-July-2017].

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Aitor Erce, and Timothy Uy. 2017. "O cial Sector Lending Strategies During the Euro Area Crisis."
  Centre for Macroeconomics (CFM) Discussion Papers 1720.

Du, Wenxin, Joanne Im, and Jesse Schreger. 2018. "        e U.S. Treasury Premium." Journal of International Economics,
  112(C): 167­181.

EC. 2010a. "   e Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece." European Commission Occasional Papers 61.

EC. 2010b. "   e Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece - First Review." European Commission Occasional Papers 68.

EC. 2010c. "   e Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece- Second Review." European Commission Occasional Papers
  72.

EC. 2011a. "   e Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece- Fi h Review." European Commission Occasional Papers 87.

EC. 2011b. "   e Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece- Fourth Review." European Commission Occasional Papers
  81.

EC. 2011c. "   e Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece-      ird Review." European Commission Occasional Papers 77.

EC. 2012a. "   e Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece." European Commission Occasional Papers 94.

EC. 2012b. " e Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece - First Review." European Commission Occasional
  Papers 123.

EC. 2012c. " e Second Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece - Fourth Review." European Commission Occasional
  Papers 192.

EC. 2015. "Balance of Payments Assistance Programme - Romania, 2013-2015." European Commission.

EC. 2016a. "Ex Post Evaluation of the Economic Adjustment Programme - Portugal 2011-2014." European Commission
  Institutional Papers 40.

EC. 2016b. " e ird Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece - First Compliance Report." European Commission
  Compliance Reports 1.

EC. 2017a. "Post-Programme Surveillance Report - Second Report." European Commission Institutional Papers 54.

EC. 2017b. " e ird Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece - Second Compliance Report." European Commission
  Compliance Reports 1.

EC. 2018a. " e ird Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece - Fourth Compliance Report." European Commission
  Compliance Reports 1.


                                                          99
EC. 2018b. " e ird Economic Adjustment Programme for Greece -           ird Compliance Report." European Commission
  Compliance Reports 1.

EFSF. 2014. "Second Amendment Agreement." European Financial Stability Fund.

EFSF. 2015. "   ird Amendment Agreement." European Financial Stability Fund.

ESM. 2013. "Conclusion of ESM Financial Assistance Programme for Spain: An Overview." European Stability Mechanism.

ESM. 2016. "Conclusion of ESM Financial Assistance Programme for Cyprus: An Overview." European Stability Mechanism.

ESM. 2017. "Short-Term Debt Measures for Greece, Explainer." European Stability Mechanism.

EU. 2008a. "Council recommendation (EU) no 716/2008." Council of European Union.

EU. 2008b. "Council regulation (EU) no 112/2008." Council of European Union.

EU. 2009a. "Council regulation (EU) no 289/2009." Council of European Union.

EU. 2009b. "Council regulation (EU) no 290/2009." Council of European Union.

EU. 2009c. "Council regulation (EU) no 459/2009." Council of European Union.

EU. 2011a. "Council regulation (EU) no 323/2013." Council of European Union.

EU. 2011b. "Council regulation (EU) no 344/2011." Council of European Union.

EU. 2011c. "Council regulation (EU) no 673/2011." Council of European Union.

EU. 2011d. "Council regulation (EU) no 77/2011." Council of European Union.

EU. 2013a. "Council regulation (EU) no 0336/2012." Council of European Union.

EU. 2013b. "Council regulation (EU) no 313/2013." Council of European Union.

Eurogroup. 2010. "Euro Loan Facility Act of 2010."

European Commission. 2012. "Parliamentary questions - Answer given by Mr Rehn on behalf of the Commission." 29
  June 2012.

IMF. 2007. "Sta Report for the 2007 Article IV Consultation." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2008a. "Press Release: IMF Executive Board Approves 12.3 Billion Euro Stand-By Arrangement for Hungary." Interna-
  tional Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2008b. "Press Release: IMF Executive Board Approves e1.68 Billion (US$2.35 Billion) Stand-By Arrangement for
  Latvia." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2008c. "Press Release: Statement by IMF Managing Director Strauss-Kahn on Hungary." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2008d. "Statement by IMF Managing Director Strauss-Kahn on Latvia." International Monetary Fund.


                                                         100
IMF. 2009. "Press Release: IMF Completes First Review Under Stand-By Arrangement with Latvia and Approves e195.2
  Million Disbursement." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2010a. "Greece: Sta Report on Request for Stand-By Arrangement." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2010b. "IMF Executive Board Approves e22.5 Billion Extended Arrangement for Ireland." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2010c. "Press Release: IMF Completes Second Review Under Stand-By Arrangement with Latvia and Approves e200.3
  Million Disbursement." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2010d. "Press Release: IMF Completes ird Review Under Stand-By Arrangement with Latvia and Approves e105.8
  Million Disbursement." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2011a. "IMF Executive Board Approves an e26 Billion Extended Arrangement for Portugal." International Monetary
  Fund.

IMF. 2011b. "Press Release: IMF Completes Fourth Review Under Stand-By Arrangement With Latvia." International Mon-
  etary Fund.

IMF. 2011c. "Press Release: Statement by the IMF and EC on the Fi h and Final Review to Latvia." International Monetary
  Fund.

IMF. 2012a. "Press Release: IMF Statement on Latvia's Announcement about Early Repayment to the IMF." International
  Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2012b. "Press Release: Latvia Makes Early Repayment to the IMF." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2016. "Conditionality Factsheet." International Monetary Fund.

IMF. 2017. "   e IMF's Extended Fund Facility." International Monetary Fund.

Joshi, Priyadarshani, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer. 2005. "Implicit Transfers in IMF Lending, 1973-2003." IMF Working
   Paper 05/8.

UK Treasury. 2010. "Credit Facility for Ireland Provided by     e Commisioners of Her Majesty's Treasury."

UK Treasury. 2012. "Amendment to the Credit Facility for Ireland Provided by      e Commisioners of Her Majesty's Trea-
  sury."




                                                          101
