                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  FINANCIAL VULNERABILITY AND RISKS TO GROWTH IN EMERGING MARKETS

                                          Viral V. Acharya
                                          Soumya Bhadury
                                              Jay Surti

                                        Working Paper 27411
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27411


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




The views expressed are our own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Reserve Bank of India
and the International Monetary Fund, its Management and its Executive Board, nor of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Viral V. Acharya, Soumya Bhadury, and Jay Surti. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Vulnerability and Risks to Growth in Emerging Markets
Viral V. Acharya, Soumya Bhadury, and Jay Surti
NBER Working Paper No. 27411
June 2020
JEL No. C53,E32,E44

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper introduces a new financial vulnerability index for emerging market economies by exploiting
key differences in their business cycles relative to those of advanced economies. Information on the
domestic price of risk, cost of dollar hedging and market-based measures of bank vulnerability combine
to generate indexes significantly more effective in capturing macro-financial vulnerability and stress
compared to those based on information in trade and global factors. Our index significantly augments
early warning surveillance capacity, as evidenced by out-of-sample forecasting gains around a majority
of turning points in GDP growth, relative to distributed lag models that are augmented with information
from macro-financial indexes that are custom-built to optimize such forecasts.


Viral V. Acharya                                   Jay Surti
Stern School of Business                           International Monetary Fund
New York University                                700 19th Street, NW,
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65                     Washington, DC 20431
New York, NY 10012                                 jsurti@imf.org
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Soumya Bhadury
Reserve Bank of India
Shahid Bhagat Singh Road,
Fort, Mumbai 400001
India
soumyasbhadury@rbi.org.in




Data for Financial Vulnerability Indexes is available at:
http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~sternfin/vacharya/public_html/pdfs/may-fvi.xlsx
I.         Introduction

Summary
Financial vulnerability increases risks to growth and this is reflected in the well-known
association of episodes of financial sector stress and crises with longer and more severe
economic downturns. Financial vulnerability, embedded in accumulation of leverage and
balance-sheet mismatches of economic agents, grows during booms when financing
conditions are easy, and once sufficiently elevated, greatly amplifies and prolongs the impact
of shocks on the real sector.1
Under such circumstances, metrics that capture financial vulnerability are important therefore
not only to assess risks to financial stability but also to the baseline outlook for economic
growth. Information from suitably chosen financial indicators, when appropriately combined,
may provide useful intelligence about future macro-financial risks. Recent work has shown
that financial conditions indexes (FCIs) that aggregate information from multiple financial
variables can significantly improve forecasts of tail risks to growth up to one year in advance
for several major economies.2
Existing studies suggest that FCIs and implied tail risks-to-growth fit the data significantly
better for advanced economies (AEs), including small open economies (SOEs), than for
emerging economies (EMs).3 As such, EMs have experienced tremendous growth in the
depth and sophistication of their financial sectors over the last two decades as they have
continued, and in some cases accelerated, their integration into the global financial system.
Consequently, risks to macro-financial stability in EMs are increasingly likely to be
influenced by factors similar to those in AEs over time. In particular, global risk appetite and
balance-sheets of financial institutions and the private sector in EMs should hold vital clues
to prospects for stability and risks to baseline growth outlooks.
Nonetheless, the precise manner in which such indicators may best be combined to yield
leading information on macro-financial prospects may still be vastly different in EMs and
AEs. For example, the persistence of differences in key business cycle characteristics noted
by Aguiar and Gopinath (2007), between AEs (plus SOEs) and EMs would translate into
significant differences in the cyclicality of balance-sheets and the domestic price of risk.
Changes to the structure of the economy and to policy frameworks are also more frequent,
common and significant for EMs. Therefore, neither the optimal information set, nor the
optimal concatenation of its components, can be expected to be the same for EMs and AEs.
Our paper explores this issue and is the first to show that while financial vulnerability is an
important early warning indicator in EMs, the precise measure of vulnerability needs to be

1
  Simple frameworks for understanding the joint dynamics of financial vulnerability and growth risks in
structural macro models are presented in Jeanne and Korinek (2010) and Bianchi (2011), drawing on the
pioneering work of Mendoza (2010). Bianchi and Mendoza (2018) discuss optimal, time-consistent policy in
this context. Adrian and Shin (2014) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) present eclectic models
emphasizing respectively, procyclicality of lenders' balance-sheets and leverage, and asset value volatility
spirals that characterize recessions around crises with a financial intermediary sector.
2
 See, for instance, Katagiri et. al. (2017) and Adrian et. al. (2018), building on De Nicolò and Lucchetta (2017)
and Adrian et. al. (2019).
3
    See, for example, Adrian et. al. (2018).
developed differently compared to AEs in order to maximize relevant information content.
We provide an approach to construct financial vulnerability indexes (FVIs) for EMs and use
the FVIs to assess risks to growth. In doing so, we demonstrate that FVIs can be just as
effective in EMs as in AEs in reflecting accumulation of macro-financial vulnerability,
capturing episodes of stress and instability, as well as predicting downside risks to growth.
Our construction also shows that the information indicators in the FVI and the recipe for
combining them depart significantly from available indexes for AEs. Specifically, while our
FVIs combine information from high-frequency domestic risk spreads and asset returns,
measures of external shock transmission and the credit cycle are different compared to
existing indexes for AEs. Three differences are particularly noteworthy.
First, the direct prominence of global common factors is lower for EMs. Changes in the VIX
and MOVE indexes4 reflect changes in global financial conditions and risk appetite and are
known to significantly impact EMs' domestic financial conditions (IMF (2017)). However,
after incorporating information from domestic price of risk indicators, we find the additional
information content of global factors to be negligible. Instead, these indicators overemphasize
stress around the global financial crisis (GFC), thereby decreasing the efficiency of the
resulting FVIs because they inhibit information about financial vulnerability leading up to
other known episodes of stress.
Second, broad cross-country evidence suggests that balance-sheet based measures of
vulnerability add powerful information regarding medium-term prospects for financial and
real stress, well before it is reflected in market prices.5 In EMs where key balance-sheet
vulnerabilities appear with significant lag, particularly in the financial sector, we find that
market measures of institutional vulnerability and credit risk pricing are more informative
than purely balance-sheet based measures from an early warning perspective. Importantly, in
light of the recent literature on the predictive content of credit growth and leverage for future
economic growth, we find that these measures of the credit cycle do not possess significant
information content as financial vulnerability indicators for India and China.
Third, the last two decades have seen a rapid increase in EMs' integration into the global
financial system, with bank-intermediated capital flows being complemented by the secular
increase in portfolio flows intermediated through mutual funds. Increasing supply has been
met by a corresponding increase in demand for foreign currency financing, and hence, for
hedging exchange rate risk. Consistent with this observation, we find that the cost of hedging
dollar exposure possesses significant information content vis-à-vis external shocks and their



4
 VIX refers to the Chicago Board Options Exchange's CBOE Volatility Index, a measure of the stock market's
expectation of volatility based on the Standard and Poors 500 equity index options. MOVE refers to an index-
based measure of U.S. interest rate volatility that tracks the movement in U.S. Treasury yield volatility implied
by current prices of one-month over-the-counter options on 2-year, 5-year, 10-year, and 30-year Treasuries.
Both measures are recognized to be important measures of global risk sentiment.
5
 See Katagiri et. al. (2017) and Adrian and Liang (2019) in the context of the literature on financial conditions/
vulnerability indexes. For the predictive content of credit for economic growth, see Shularick and Taylor (2012)
and Jorda et. al. (2015) for AEs and Mian et. al. (2017) for both AEs and EMs. Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017)
provide favourable evidence on the joint information content of risk spreads and credit for financial stability.
Brunnermeier et. al. (2019) assess the predictive content of credit growth for economic activity in the U.S.
across small and large dimensional VAR models
transmission potential. 6 On the other hand, traditionally dominant pass-through channels,
including terms-of-trade and commodity prices, shown to be informative in AEs and SOEs
are not so in our EM-FVIs.
In constructing FVIs, our methodological approach is to start with an encompassing set of
information variables going beyond financial indicators. Shock amplification factors for EMs
typically include a nexus of external and fiscal imbalances that culminate in twin deficit type
episodes that, in the extreme, result in sudden stop and reversal of capital flows, domestic
financial stress, financial crises, and economic slowdowns. Importantly, such amplification
factors may not be fully priced in EM financial markets into risk spreads, asset values and
volatility owing to lack of products for risk-sharing or the lack of depth in markets for such
products. These factors could potentially limit the information content of financial variables.
A good example is the lack of indicators of corporate vulnerability--credit default swap
markets do not exist for trading and pricing corporate distress risk in large EMs like India and
China, neither at the firm-level nor by credit quality class, and several firms--including large
state-owned enterprises--may be entirely privately held.
To overcome this potential limitation, we included several external, fiscal and real
amplification factors directly into our FVIs, but found them to possess negligible marginal
information content. In striking contrast, appropriately chosen financial indicators do possess
sufficient early warning surveillance information from both financial stability and growth
risks perspectives. We view our results not as reflecting the low or decreased importance of
the fiscal and external imbalance channels of shock amplification in EMs, but instead, as a
possible illustration of Goodhart's law.7 Fiscal and external indicators are subject to heavy
management through direct and indirect policy action in EMs. For example, it is common for
foreign exchange reserves as well as government debt and its yield curve to be managed as,
or via, control variables, which may serve to significantly limit their information content.
Another example may be the inhibition of information content in credit growth and leverage
measures owing to the tight control exercised in EMs over credit through various policy
instruments.8 By contrast, market signals such as risk premia in equity markets--in spite of
their limited coverage of the economy--may play a more prominent role as early warning
signals because they are not (as successfully) subject to policy control action.
From a risk surveillance perspective, the performance of our FVIs should ultimately be
assessed not only in terms of their ability to capture relevant stress episodes in financial and
credit markets, but also, in their provision of near-to-medium term early warning signals of
risk to the baseline economic outlook. Unlike most AEs and SOEs, some large EMs have not
experienced economic contractions or recessions. Moreover, given the significantly greater
volatility in their output, growth, consumption, and trade, most EM economic cycles are
better characterized as growth rate cycles of accelerations and slowdowns around a (time-
varying) trend GDP growth rate rather than business cycles of output expansions and

6
  Acharya and Vij (2017) and Bruno and Shin (forthcoming) discuss the implications of the significant increase
in dollar funding by EM firms between 2009 and 2013.
7
 "Any observed statistical regularity will tend to collapse once pressure is placed upon it for control purposes",
see Goodhart (1984).
8
 For example, in the case of India, the use of high levels of the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) until recently and
of cycle-sensitive risk weights to stimulate credit in downturns, and in case of China, the state-directed lending
policy of the four largest state-owned banks.
contractions. Accounting for this important distinction, we evaluate the early warning
capacity of our FVIs through a new approach, by assessing forecast gains from the
information in FVIs around turning points of the growth rate cycle. An autoregressive (AR)
model of economic growth with our FVI improves or provides comparable near-to-medium
term out-of-sample forecasts for a majority of turning points compared to an AR model with
a turning point index (TPI) custom-built to optimize such forecasts. In line with the existing
literature, we also assess medium-term forecast performance for the GFC period tail growth
realization for one leading case, albeit the paucity of tail episodes limits the robustness of tail
risk forecast capacity of FVIs at this time in our view. 9
India and China: Leading Case Studies
We organize our analysis around two leading examples of India and China, the largest EM
economies. The main finding is that our methodological approach results in a fully adequate
FVI for both countries that accurately captures known financial stress episodes and whose
incorporation in growth risk forecast models provides significant out-of-sample gains.
We start by exploring domestic price of risk (DPOR) indexes--FVIs built solely on the
information contained in domestic risk spreads, asset returns and market volatility. We find
that these do not capture well-recognized episodes of financial stress and growth shocks
outside of the unusually tight market conditions around the GFC.
For India, the DPOR index fails to capture highly stressed markets around the 2013 taper
tantrum, an exogenous shock that materially impacted the price and availability of dollar
funding for the corporate sector. Short in duration, the shock-induced disruption in domestic
financial markets was nonetheless significant as was the increase in risks to real economic
activity. Since the global common factor and the domestic price of risk tightened much more
modestly in 2013 relative to the GFC in 2009, the DPOR index fails to adequately capture
stress around the taper tantrum. In contrast, adding information on tightness in dollar funding
for Indian firms via the increased cost of hedging dollar exposures allows to obtain a superior
FVI that better reflects stress in both 2009 and 2013.
The decade after the GFC was also marked by a period of prolonged stress in Indian credit
markets. This was driven by a deterioration in Indian bank credit quality starting in late 2010
followed by a dragging recognition of loan losses, especially at some public-sector banks
(PSBs). DPOR indexes are ill-equipped to capture protracted levels of elevated credit market
tightness. Moreover, in India's case, information on vulnerabilities in bank balance-sheet
indicators was obscured for a majority of the last decade due to extensive non-performing
assets (NPA) restructuring and evergreening by PSBs. Augmenting the DPOR index with
market-based measures of bank vulnerability and credit pricing, the SRISK index and the
prime (corporate) lending rate, help in accurately capturing macro-financial stability risk over
the last two decades.10



9
  Forecasts of AR models of growth tend to perform particularly well on average given the statistical persistence
of economic growth in AEs, and for this very reason, they are likely to underperform when growth risks are
realized. For EMs, greater output volatility may result in more modest average forecast gain from the AR
growth models, although these are not necessarily rendered insignificant.
10
  SRISK measures the capital shortfall of a firm conditional on a severe market decline as a function of firm
leverage, size and risk. Aggregate measures of SRISK can be constructed across a sample of firms by weighing
In China's case, the period since 2000 can be divided into two distinct phases. Prior to 2010,
the financial sector was largely shielded from direct international connections and financial
development was nascent. Financial stability challenges were primarily associated with the
rise and fall of bank NPAs. Importantly, policy interventions by Chinese authorities exerted a
differential impact on the information content of market indicators of bank vulnerability
before and after 2010. A prominent example is the 2007 balance-sheet clean-up and
recapitalization of the banking system which resulted in banks being in a much stronger
position to deal with shocks associated with the GFC. As with India, policy interventions and
their impact on balance-sheet indicators mean that market-based measures of bank
vulnerability and credit pricing are often more informative as part of the FVI. Their inclusion
is also vital because the FVI would have otherwise delivered a very different message
regarding macro-financial risks during the GFC.
In the current decade, the financial sector in China grew substantially relative to GDP, was
significantly liberalized, demonstrated increasing sophistication in terms of financial products
intermediated and the complexity of business models deployed (by banks), and experienced
growth in its interconnections with the global financial system. Simultaneously, Chinese
authorities significantly enhanced banking regulation and supervision as a means to prevent a
repeat of financial vulnerability seen before 2007. For constructing early warning systems, all
of this enhances the information content of market-based indicators of bank vulnerability.
Moreover, financial stability in China has also become materially intertwined with
developments in the global economy and financial system, with external shocks and
transmission becoming more important. Besides the financial sector, carry trade activity by
Chinese firms took off spectacularly between 2009-14 and this increased the vulnerability of
the domestic corporate sector to an increase in Renminbi-U.S.$ volatility after the
unexpected, severe depreciation of the Chinese currency in 2015. Incorporating information
on the cost of hedging dollar exposures or on broader measures of exchange market pressure
results in a superior FVI as in the case of India. Such an FVI is particularly well suited to
reflect vulnerability arising from external exposures to foreign shocks and domestic policy
shocks, such as the 2013 taper tantrum, the 2015 devaluation of the Renminbi and the global
trade tensions post-2017.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II situates our paper in the context of
existing studies of how combinations of financial variables may be used to forecast the
evolution of the macroeconomy. Section III extends the differential characterization of key
EM and AE business cycle moments by Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) up to the present time
for a broader set of countries. Section IV describes the approach to FVI construction,
including the databases and empirical framework. Section V presents the FVIs for India and
China and Section VI evaluates the potential for these indexes to improve forecasts of risk to
economic growth. Section VII concludes. Technical details are relegated to the annexes.

II.     Related literature

A large body of empirical work examines the value of information in asset prices for
forecasts of the baseline growth outlook. Several asset prices have been found to be useful


firm-specific SRISK by firm market capitalization or balance-sheet size. See Acharya et. al. (2012, 2016) and
Brownlees and Engle (2017).
predictors of future GDP growth in some countries at various points in time. Short-term risk-
free yields and term spreads capture the stance of monetary policy and contain useful
information about future growth.11 Corporate bond spreads (Philippon (2009)) and loan price
deterioration (Saunders et al. (2020)) signal changes in the default-adjusted marginal return
on business fixed investment and shocks to the profitability and creditworthiness of financial
intermediaries (Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012)). Campbell et. al. (2001) present evidence that
elevated stock-return volatility can be a useful predictor of output contraction over short
horizons, albeit empirical evidence for the predictive content of stock returns is weak
(Campbell (1999)).
Combining forecasts from several models with individual asset prices results in more
consistent and higher-quality forecasts. This has led to construction of indexes that combine
several individual indicators. These indexes are called financial conditions indexes (FCIs),
since they usually reflect the ease of financing terms in the economy. 12
We depart from this literature in two important dimensions which underpin the main
contribution of our paper.
First, on index construction, our approach contains two innovations both designed to offer a
methodological framework to construct FVIs for EMs that exploit the common properties of
their business cycle and their increasing financial integration in the global financial system.
We begin by assessing real and financial channels of external shock transmission and find the
latter to be paramount in terms of information content. This reflects the increase in carry
trade-based leverage of the Chinese and Indian corporate sectors and the fact that exchange
market pressure rather than shocks to commodity prices and terms-of-trade is preeminent for
China. Next, we turn to credit cycle indicators and find that market-based measures of bank
vulnerability add more information relevant to risks to growth compared to balance-sheet
based indicators such as credit growth and non-performing or restructured loans and assets.
Second, we focus on the information content of financial indicators in forecasting risks to
GDP growth. We apply the approach of De Nicolò and Lucchetta (2017), Katagiri et. al.
(2017) and Adrian et. al. (2019) to assess of gains from incorporating information in FVIs to
forecast tail growth outcomes around the GFC. But our main contribution is to propose a new
approach to assessing risks to growth using FVIs by running a horse race of FVI-based
forecasts around turning points in the growth rate cycle against a composite leading indicator
custom-built to optimize such forecasts. Our approach leads to more robust forecast
evaluation, and is especially relevant to EMs since they tend to have growth rate cycles with
more frequent turning points between accelerations and slowdowns compared to AEs and
SOEs.




11
  See Stock and Watson (2003) for an excellent survey of the pre-2000 literature that includes a comprehensive
bibliography. See also Ang, Piazzesi and Wei (2006) for an alternative approach.
12
  This notion of financial conditions is similar to the definition proposed by Hatzius et. al. (2010). Country
specific studies are plenty. In the Indian context, these include Shankar (2014), Roy et. al. (2015) and
Khundrakpam et. al. (2017).
III.     How Different are EM and AE Business Cycles Today?

Aguiar and Gopinath (AG henceforth) report empirical regularities of EM business cycles
and where these differ significantly from AE business cycles. Specifically, they find EM s'
output and growth (measured as log change in output) to be about twice as volatile as AEs'
GDP and growth; EMs' consumption smoothing over the business cycle to be significantly
lower in comparison to AEs' consumption smoothing; and EMs' trade balances to be more
volatile than output relative to AEs' trade balances. Finally, the countercyclicality of the
current account was materially larger for EMs than for AEs. 13
Extending Aguiar's and Gopinath's (AG) sample beyond 2003 reveals several of these
differences in business cycle moments have persisted through today (Table 1).
                     Table 1. Emerging vs. Advances Economies (averages)

                                         Aguiar & Gopinath              Extended to Present
                                         AEs           EMEs              AEs           EMEs

                                         1.34           2.74                   1.36           2.73
                                         0.95           1.87                   0.84           2.11
                                         0.75           0.76                   0.84           0.68
                                         0.09           0.23                   0.31           0.05
                                         0.94           1.45                   0.78           1.12
                                         3.41           3.91                   2.98           3.23
                                         1.02           3.22                   0.90           2.07
                                         -0.17         -0.51                -0.02          -0.38
                                         0.66           0.72                   0.69           0.59
                                         0.67           0.77                   0.74           0.72


              Data sources: CEIC; and authors' calculations.
              Note: This table lists the average value of moments for EMEs and AEs following AG's
              methodology. Our sample of AEs and EMs is different from AG's: we exclude
              Argentina, Ecuador, Israel, Slovak Republic (EMs); Austria, Belgium, New Zealand,
              and Portugal (AEs), but include others not in AG's sample: Chile, India, Indonesia,
              Russia (EMs); France, Germany, Italy, Japan, U.K., and the U.S. (AEs).

This is despite the increasing maturity and depth of EMs' economies, their integration into
global trade and financial networks and the growing sophistication of their financial markets
and institutions. EM output volatility continues to be twice that in AEs. This stability in
relative volatilities is also present when we look at unfiltered first differences in the output
series. On the other hand, first-order autocorrelation in filtered output and unfiltered output
growth is lower in EMs than in AEs over the full sampling horizon relative to AG's estimates

13
   In addition, Neumeyer and Perri (2005) found that EMs' (real, short -term) interest rates were strongly
countercyclical when compared to AEs, reflecting the fact that EM exposure to international financial markets
for funding real sector activity implied the need to raise policy rates in a downturn to avoid sudden stops. By
contrast, most AE central banks are able to reduce rates in response to growth shocks. Given evidence of the
trilemma (Obstfeld, 2015) and dilemma (Rey, 2016), we see little reason to believe that this source of disparity
between cyclical properties of monetary policy in EMs and AEs has changed significantly or across-the-board.
(where the sampling horizon ends at 2003), which is likely associated with the impact of the
GFC which arguably impacted AEs more severely and broadly than EMs in our sample.
Consumption smoothing over the business cycle appears to have strengthened significantly
for both groups of countries on average post-2003 as evidenced by the large decreases in the
relative volatility of consumption to output. For example, whereas consumption was over 40
percent more volatile than GDP in EMs over 1990-2003, consumption volatility is only 12
percent higher than output volatility today. Nonetheless, relative differentials in average
consumption smoothing between AEs and EMs has remained large notwithstanding the GFC
is in our sampling horizon. The volatility of investment and net exports relative to output
volatility over the business cycle also remains significantly higher, on average, for EMs
relative to AEs. Net exports continue to covary negatively with output in EMs even as they
have decoupled from output variation in AEs. The average correlation between the trade
balance and GDP has fallen in both sets of countries since 2003, but continues to be
significantly (more) negative for EMs.
Is sampling variation driving the results?
Since our extension is based on a comparison of average of moments in a broader cross-
section of AEs and includes the larger economies in this group that was excluded by AG, we
also reviewed average moments from the common sub-set of countries in our paper and AG's
paper to check whether the points noted above continue to be valid. Table 2 shows that
restricting the sample to a common sub-set of small open economies and EMEs leaves the
results qualitatively unchanged.
                             Table 2. EMEs vs. SOEs (averages)

                                   Aguiar & Gopinath              Extended to Present
                                   AEs           EMEs              AEs          EMEs

                                   1.40           2.92            1.39           3.20
                                   1.01           1.82            0.89           2.47
                                   0.73           0.79            0.82           0.68
                                   0.08           0.31            0.30           0.06
                                   0.95           1.28            0.82           1.11
                                   3.41           3.51            3.41           3.06
                                   1.02           3.02            1.13           2.18
                                   -0.21         -0.53            -0.05          -0.42
                                   0.63           0.76            0.68           0.71
                                   0.65           0.81            0.67           0.74


            Data sources: CEIC; and authors' calculations.
            Note: See Table 1. Common countries include: Brazil, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico,
            Peru, Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey (EMs); Australia, Canada,
            Denmark, Finland, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland (SOEs).
Outside of a domestic financial crisis, several of the larger EMs have not experienced
economic contractions or recessions over the last three decades. During the GFC, almost all
AEs and SOEs experienced a severe recession while these EMs experienced either a growth
slowdown or a contraction significantly less severe than their worst recession or contraction
since the 1990s.14 Given evidence of persistently greater output growth volatility in EMs, this
implies that risks to their economic outlooks may be at least as well, if not better
characterized, by the likelihood of acceleration or slowdown in the rate of growth, i.e., of
turning points in the growth rate cycle, instead of output expansion and contraction. This is
clearly seen to be the case with both China and India (Figure 1).
                   Figure 1. Annual Real GDP Growth in China and India
                                    (in percentage points)
               A. India (1981-2019)                        B. China (1992-2019)




 Source: CEIC.



IV.     Empirical Framework and Data

Vulnerability indexes--conceptual basis
Prior to providing modelling details, we discuss how the FVI is conceptualized. Information
regarding amplification risk, i.e., the potential for the state of the system to exacerbate the
impact of shocks on financial stability and growth, can be extracted from a variety of sources.
These include the cost of transferring risks through financial markets and risks embedded in
balance-sheets of economic sectors, like leverage, which render adjustment to shocks
difficult, among others.
Figure 2 summarizes our conceptual mapping from various measures of amplification
potential into an index. The cost of risk transfer in financial markets is called the domestic
price of risk (DPOR) block, and includes term spreads, sovereign spreads, risk spreads
relevant to key business sectors, and asset returns and volatility. Increasing vulnerability is
reflected in rising risk spreads and asset volatility and falling asset returns. External risk
factors circumscribe global financing conditions and the real channel of terms-of-trade and

14
  For example, China, India and Poland have not experienced an economic contraction; Indonesia (1997) and
South Africa (2009) had a single year of output contraction; Malaysia and Thailand experienced economic
contraction in two years, both during the Asian and global financial crises; and six of 12 major EMs from Asia,
Europe and the Americas had GFC growth outcomes significantly better than their worst during this period.
commodities prices. They can be directly incorporated into an FVI, (the green dashed arrow),
or indirectly through their impact on measures of exchange market pressure, which also
incorporates domestic policy responses to external shocks. The macro-financial impact of
shocks depends critically upon balance-sheet vulnerabilities which are slower moving but
potentially more informative over longer horizons than DPOR and external factors.
This financial cycle/ balance-sheet block contains balance-sheet aggregates like private
sector leverage, the credit-to-GDP gap, fiscal balance and government debt; macroeconomic
balance-sheet risk indicators like external debt (servicing)-to-foreign exchange reserves; and
key corporate and banking sector balance-sheet vulnerability indicators or market proxies of
the same.
Empirical Model15
Dynamic Factor Models (DFM) exploit unobservable dynamic trends and filter out extra
information by selecting the most relevant factors out of multiple variables. DFMs are
particularly suitable for monitoring economic and financial conditions in real time. Our DFM
is similar in approach to Harvey (1989) and contains the following set of equations representing
a state-space model.
                                       = -1 +  ;  ~  (0 )
                                     =  +  +  ;  ~ (0 )
                                                0 ~ ( )


The DFM is performed using the multivariate autoregressive state-space (MARSS) package in
R. The time-series of economic indicators () is modelled as linear combination of hidden
trends  and factor loadings () plus some offset . The MARSS specification consists of
two stochastic components: an unobservable common component,  and an idiosyncratic
component  .  is modelled as a random walk and  as an autoregressive process.
By way of a concrete example, let us take the case of India and China, our two leading
examples. The DPOR block consists of corporate spreads, inter-bank spreads, the term spread
(China), and equity returns and return volatility. To derive the FVI corresponding to this block,
we fit a model using a single-index dynamic factor.  is an estimate of DPOR and Z represents
the loadings of the financial indicators on the common component. The identifying assumption
in the above model is that the co-movements in the time series indicators arise from the single
source  ; i.e.,  enters each indicator with different loadings,  , i =1.... ,5. This is ensured
by our assumption that  and  are mutually uncorrelated at all leads and lags for all the 5
observed financial indicators. When incorporating information from the external factors block
into the DPOR index, we estimate the same model by including one or two additional variables,
the local currency-US$ option implied volatility and an exchange market pressure index. 16



15
     Annex 1 contains further details of the empirical approach to FVI estimation.
16
  In robustness exercises, we have found that EMPI adds significant information in the case of China, but not
India; hence, we report results for India wherein only the INR-US$ option volatility is added to DPOR.
Figure 2. Vulnerabilities, Shock Transmission and Risks to Growth
Finally, we integrate information from the credit cycle block to measure aggregate financial
vulnerability. We included a banking sector risk index (the S-Risk measure),17 and the price
of credit (the prime lending rate) to construct this block.
In order to address data irregularities, especially those associated with non-synchronicity of
the data releases, MARSS uses a Kalman filtering technique. The Kalman filter adopts the
expectation maximisation algorithm, which can handle missing data (Banbura and Modugno
(2014)). The algorithm is initialised by computing principal components, and model
parameters are estimated by OLS regression, treating the principal components as if they
were the true common factors. This is a good initialisation, given that principal components
are reliable estimates of the common factors.
Data18
For India, the five-year AAA corporate bond spread and three-month commercial paper (over
equivalent maturity domestic sovereign) spreads and three-month MIBOR-to-treasuries
spread, combine data from Bloomberg, L.P. on the private sector interest rates and RBI's
DBIE on sovereign rates. Data on large cap (NIFTY 50) equity returns and option implied
volatility of the same, and the implied volatility of the US$-INR currency option with three-
month maturity were sourced from Bloomberg. The daily prime lending rate of the largest
commercial bank, the State Bank of India, a credit cycle indicator, was sourced from CEIC.
For China, the five-year corporate bond (over equivalent maturity domestic sovereign) spread
and the three-month SHIBOR-to-treasuries spread combined data from Bloomberg with data
from CEIC; the ten-year sovereign bond over three-month treasury bill spread was calculated
from CEIC data; and the Hang Seng equity return, the average of past 30 days realized
volatility of Hang Seng equity return and the US$-CNY currency option volatility with
maturity of three months were sourced from Bloomberg. Daily data on the loan prime rate
was sourced from the People's Bank of China's database.
New York University's Volatility Lab lent us their time series estimates of S-RISK for
individual commercial banks in India and China. This database constituted an unbalanced
panel. We combined this data with monthly data on market capitalization of these banks from
CMIE's Prowess database (India) and Bloomberg (China) to create a monthly time series of
market capitalization-weighted-S-RISK for the banking sectors of India and China.
Since the FVIs are constructed at a monthly frequency, the data were transformed if available
at alternate frequencies. Monthly averages of higher frequency indicators were calculated for
the indicators described above. Indicators available at a lower frequency, notably real GDP
growth, indicators built from firms' quarterly financial reporting (corporate sector debt -at-
risk, the Rajan-Zingales external financial dependence) and the BIS house price index for
India were cubic splined into monthly frequency. Z-transforms of all variables were used for
FVI construction.

V.         FVIs and Financial Stress Evolution in India and China

The three blocks described in the previous section are sequentially combined to measure
financial vulnerability in our two leading examples of India and China. The first block

17
     See Acharya et. al. (2011) and Brownlees and Engle (2017) for the definition and construction of S-Risk.
18
     See Annex 2 for further details.
consists of DPOR indicators; the second block adds external factors to the DPOR and is
denoted DPOR-EXT; and then, we integrate the credit cycle block into DPOR-EXT to
measure aggregate financial vulnerability, denoted by DPOR-BNK.
The DPOR Index
Common indicators used in constructing the DPOR for both countries include the interbank
spread, the corporate bond spread, large cap equity returns, and equity return volatility. In
addition, one country-specific indicator was added in each case given its significant
information content. For India, this is the three-month commercial paper spread, a non-bank /
shadow bank (NBFC) price of risk indicator, and for China, it is the term spread. Panels A
and B of Figure 3 show that most risk spreads have positive loading and significance,
indicating that spread widening is a key indicator of increasing financial market
vulnerability. 19 Volatility in large cap equity returns is highly significant with the expected,
positive loading, while equity returns are either insignificant (China) or less so with the
expected, negative loading (India).
                                 Figure 3. The DPOR Index for India and China
                    A. DPOR Factor Loadings (India)        B. DPOR Factor Loadings (China)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.40
                                                                                                                   DPOR
          0.4


          0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.20

          0.2


          0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.00

            0


      -0.1
                                 AAAGoI5                                    CPGoI3M                                             Eqvol                                  Ibspread                                    Eqreturn                                    -0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Tspread                                        Cspread                                        Ibspread                                          Eqreturn                                         Eqvol

                         C. DPOR Index: India (2003-20)                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D. DPOR Index: China (2004-20)
     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DPOR
                                                                                                                                                           DPOR
     10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5



      5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0

      0




     -5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Oct-05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Oct-12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Oct-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mar-05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mar-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Feb-08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sep-08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Feb-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sep-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jan-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jul-07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jul-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Aug-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jun-10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Aug-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dec-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jun-17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Aug-18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       May-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   May-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Apr-16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                May-20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Nov-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Nov-16
                    Sep-03




                                               Sep-05




                                                                          Sep-07




                                                                                                     Sep-09




                                                                                                                                Sep-11




                                                                                                                                                           Sep-13




                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep-19
           Jan-03




                                      Jan-05




                                                                 Jan-07




                                                                                            Jan-09




                                                                                                                       Jan-11




                                                                                                                                                  Jan-13




                                                                                                                                                                             Jan-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jan-19
                                                        May-06




                                                                                   May-08




                                                                                                              May-10




                                                                                                                                         May-12
                             May-04




                                                                                                                                                                    May-14




                                                                                                                                                                                               May-16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          May-18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     May-20




 Sources: Bloomberg, L.P.; CEIC; and authors' calculations.
 Notes: All indicators in Panels A and B are monthly averages of trading day values. In Panel A, AAAGoI5 =
 5-year AAA corporate bond rate minus 5-year INR sovereign rate; CPGoI3M = 3 month CP rate minus 3
 month INR sovereign rate; Eqvol = NIFTY 50 implied equity option volatility; Ibspread = Interbank spread;
 Eqreturn = NIFTY 50 monthly average equity return. In Panel B, Tspread = 10-year treasury bond rate less 3-
 month treasury bill rate; Cspread = 5-year corporate bond rate less 5 year Treasury bond rate; Ibspread =
 interbank spread; Eqreturn = Monthly average of daily Hang Seng equity return; Eqvol = average of past 30
 days of realized daily volatility in equity returns on the Hang Seng index.




19
  The only exception is the interbank spread for China which has a negative loading likely because of the
reduction in bank vulnerability due to a policy intervention shortly prior to the GFC.
In assessing performance of the DPOR index in capturing known macro-financial stress
episodes, we note that barring the GFC, the index is unable to reflect any other episode
(Panels C and D of Figure 3). For India, these include increasing stress in the banking system
and the twin deficits period (2010-12); the impact of the taper tantrum (2013); RBI's 2015
banking sector asset quality review (AQR); the RBI's February 2018 circular that compelled
banks to fully account for their non-performing assets; and the IL&FS bankruptcy, oil price
resurgence and NBFC liquidity crisis (2018-19). For China, the DPOR index fails to capture
the pre-GFC build up in banking vulnerability and associated credit market tightness
eventually resolved in late-2007 through a policy intervention writing-off bad loans and
recapitalizing banks. It also cannot account for the turmoil in financial markets following the
unexpected Renminbi depreciation of August 2015 following the widening of the exchange
rate band by Chinese authorities; the increase in trade tensions in early 2018, with a second
jump in late Q2-early Q3 of that year when these tensions surged again after a temporary lull;
and finally, more modestly during the 2013 taper tantrum. This is indicative of missing
information in the DPOR.
In order to anticipate our approach to incorporating further relevant information, we begin by
augmenting the set of indicators for China with information on money and credit market
tightness (money supply, inflation and the PBOC's one-year loan prime rate). Given
weakening bank health prior to the 2007 policy intervention, we would expect an increase in
vulnerability to show up much earlier than the one associated with the GFC in Figure 3(D).
On the other hand, since the policy intervention led to a strengthening of the banking sector,
augmenting DPOR with information on money and credit market conditions should decrease
the spike in the index around the Lehman bankruptcy. This is borne out in Figure 4, where
the augmented index registers a sharp tightening in domestic financial conditions
corresponding to credit market stress at the beginning of 2007, a short-lived loosening in H1-
2008 reflecting the policy intervention and a spike around the Lehman episode that is smaller
in magnitude relative to the DPOR. We take this discussion up in greater detail below when
we discuss the DPOR-BNK index.
                                   Figure 4. China: Comparing DPOR Indexes (2004-20)

             9
                                                                                                                                                                                                     DPOR

             7
                                                                                                                                                                                                     DPOR (with loan rate)

             5


             3


             1


            -1


            -3


            -5
                                            Oct-05




                                                                                                                                                        Oct-12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct-19
                                   Mar-05




                                                                                                                                               Mar-12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mar-19
                                                                                Feb-08
                                                                                         Sep-08




                                                                                                                                                                                            Feb-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep-15
                 Jan-04




                                                                       Jul-07




                                                                                                                             Jan-11




                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-18
                          Aug-04




                                                              Dec-06




                                                                                                                    Jun-10


                                                                                                                                      Aug-11




                                                                                                                                                                          Dec-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Aug-18
                                                     May-06




                                                                                                  Apr-09




                                                                                                                                                                 May-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Apr-16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              May-20
                                                                                                           Nov-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nov-16




        Sources: Bloomberg, L.P.; and authors' calculations.
Accounting for external shock transmission
To encompass external shocks other than the GFC, we augment the DPOR with information
on the cost of hedging dollar exposure reflected in the implied volatility of the option contract
used by market participants. Specifically, we add the INR-US$ and CNY-US$ implied option
volatility to the set of DPOR indicators to construct the DPOR-EXT index in which the
loading on the currency option volatilities are significant and positive. 20
This resulting index, DPOR-EXT indicates that increasing tightness in the global dollar
market is a significant driver of stress in domestic financial markets in India particularly
around the taper tantrum episode of 2013 (Figure 5A). In China's case, financial vulnerability
is consistently higher after introducing the external shock transmission channel, in line with
what we would expect from a country at the centre of the global trading network (Figure 5B).
Importantly, the gap between DPOR-EXT and DPOR increases significantly during the 2013
taper tantrum, the 2015 devaluation, and the 2018-19 trade tensions.
In contrast to the cost of hedging dollar exposure, direct measures of the trade channel are
uninformative as are global factors like the VIX and the MOVE (except around the GFC).
Since VIX and MOVE display extreme volatility at the peak of the GFC, their inclusion in
the FVI tends to reduce the informativeness of the index around other stress episodes.
                       Figure 5. DPOR-EXT Index for India and China
          A. DPOR-EXT Index: India (2003-20)  B. DPOR-EXT Index: China (2011-20)
     15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6

     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DPOR
                                                                                                                                                   DPOR
     11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3    DPOREXT
      9                                                                                                                                            DPOR-EXT

      7

      5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0

      3

      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -3
     -1

     -3

     -5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -6
                   Sep-03




                                              Sep-05




                                                                         Sep-07




                                                                                                    Sep-09




                                                                                                                               Sep-11




                                                                                                                                                          Sep-13




                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sep-17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sep-19
          Jan-03




                                     Jan-05




                                                                Jan-07




                                                                                           Jan-09




                                                                                                                      Jan-11




                                                                                                                                                 Jan-13




                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-19
                                                       May-06




                                                                                  May-08




                                                                                                             May-10




                                                                                                                                        May-12
                            May-04




                                                                                                                                                                   May-14




                                                                                                                                                                                              May-16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         May-18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May-20




 Sources: Bloomberg, L.P.; CEIC; and authors' calculations.


Incorporating information on the credit cycle
In order to capture information on the sustained, elevated stress in the banking system and
credit markets, we finally incorporate information on credit cycle indicators. The construction
is sensitive to country-specific information reflecting, in particular, the nature and scale of
policy interventions in the banking sector during the last two decades.




20
  In Figure 4, we report DPOR-EXT values for China starting in January 2011. This is because the currency
option was not available to hedge foreign exchange risk prior to this date. Its availability and trading in the last
decade is an important indicator of the distinction between 2004-10 and 2011-19 in our view. The pace of
China's international financial integration was much faster after 2010, during which time, greater regulatory
constraints on commercial banks also resulted in the rapid growth in shadow banking activity.
For India, we assessed the information content of several candidate variables, including
(forward-looking) indicators of corporate sector and banking sector vulnerability. 21 Corporate
sector indicators are insignificant contributors to variation in the FVI,22 and loan restructuring
of non-performing advances by large public-sector banks severely limits the information
content of balance-sheet variables of banks. Market based measures of bank vulnerability and
the cost of credit for businesses are much more informative. In order to construct an
encompassing index for China, we introduce two innovations to capture country-specific
characteristics. First, we regress the CNY-$ option implied volatility onto the DPOR index
and use the fitted values to back-cast DPOR-EXT up to 2004.23 Second, because of China's
policy intervention in late-2007, the banking sector S-RISK is lower during the GFC in 2008-
09 than during 2004-06. Hence, the S-RISK measure loads with different signs prior to, and
after, 2011. In order to incorporate this change in sign, we construct DPOR-BNK separately
for 2004-10 (using back-casts of DPOR-EXT) and 2011-19, and then use a levels-adjustment
to the 2004-10 series to staple the two indexes together.
The DPOR-BNK index satisfactorily captures the evolution of financial stress and stability
risks over the last two decades (Figure 6).
                   Figure 6. DPOR-BNK Index for India and China
      A. DPOR-BNK Index: India (2003-20) B. DPOR-BNK Index: China (2004-20)
     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20

     13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DPOR
                                                                                                                                                              DPOR
     11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DPOREXT
                                                                                                                                                              DPOREXT                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DPORBNK
      9                                                                                                                                                       DPORBNK

      7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10

      5

      3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5

      1

     -1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0

     -3

     -5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct-05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct-12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar-05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mar-12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mar-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Feb-08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sep-08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Feb-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jul-07




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jan-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jul-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Aug-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jun-10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Aug-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Dec-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Aug-18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      May-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Apr-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  May-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Apr-16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              May-20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nov-09




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Nov-16
                   Sep-03




                                              Sep-05




                                                                         Sep-07




                                                                                                    Sep-09




                                                                                                                               Sep-11




                                                                                                                                                          Sep-13




                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Sep-17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sep-19
          Jan-03




                                     Jan-05




                                                                Jan-07




                                                                                           Jan-09




                                                                                                                      Jan-11




                                                                                                                                                 Jan-13




                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-15




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jan-17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-19
                                                       May-06




                                                                                  May-08




                                                                                                             May-10




                                                                                                                                        May-12
                            May-04




                                                                                                                                                                   May-14




                                                                                                                                                                                              May-16




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         May-18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May-20




 Sources: Bloomberg, L.P.; CEIC; and authors' calculations.


In India's case, besides the GFC, it reflects growing distress in the banking sector due to the
increase in NPAs during the twin deficits period (2010H2-2012H1), the taper tantrum (2013),
the pressure on banks after the inception of the 2015 AQR, and the growing stress in the
NBFC sector during and after the 2018 ILFS default (Figure 6B). In comparing the three
indexes, the advantages of the encompassing index DPOR-BNK are evident. In comparative
terms, the GFC was not a significantly greater threat to macro-financial stability and growth

21
  Corporate sector lending, including industry and services constitutes 60 percent of the banking sector's credit
exposure as of September 2018; see for example, Reserve Bank of India (2018). Hence, it constitutes a greater
source of systemic risk relative to household lending.
22
  Corporate sector debt-at-risk is defined to be the share of sampled firms with interest coverage ratio less than
two. These are firms that are still, typically able to service their debt, albeit whose financial viability is
particularly vulnerable to earnings and funding cost shocks.
23
  In an unreported exercise, we ran a robustness check by constructing a broader exchange market pressure
index that concatenated information from changes in China's foreign currency r eserves and fluctuations in
CNY-$ exchange rate and combined this with the DPOR and found no significant change relative to the DPOR-
EXT presented in Figure 5B.
than the taper tantrum and the prolonged stress in the banking sector starting 2010 meant that
the level of financial vulnerability and growth risks dissipated slowly over the last decade. In
China's case, as indicated earlier (Figure 4), elevated banking sector vulnerability prior to the
pre-GFC policy intervention causes DPOR-BNK to increase during 2006-2007H1, rising
above DPOR. The bank recapitalization of 2007H2 put the domestic credit market and
economy in a stronger position to buffer external shocks which is reflected in a stabilization
of DPOR-BNK in 2008, a moderate increase during the GFC and a rapid and larger decrease
in vulnerability in 2009 relative to DPOR-EXT and DPOR. Moreover, the dynamics of
DPOR-BNK closely mirror those of DPOR-EXT post-2011, indicating that as carry trade by
non-financial firms and shadow banks grew and financial liberalization accelerated, banking
and external vulnerabilities began to move more in tandem.
Our presentation highlights the importance of continuous evaluation of the information base
for EM-FVIs. Prior to 2009, the information content of the currency option volatility for
international shock transmission was low (India) and its absence (China) reflected the low
degree of international financial integration which cushioned the impact of external shocks.
This source of shock transmission become significant after the GFC when U.S. monetary
policy became extraordinarily accommodative for a long time and dollar exchange rates were
very stable. This created conditions conducive for EM firms to systematically increased carry
trade to benefit from interest rate differentials (India), which coincided with the opening up to
external capital inflows (China).

VI.      FVIs as Leading Indicators of Risks to Growth

Empirical strategy
A very general way to think about increasing economic risk is to characterize it as an
unfavourable change in the probability distribution of future GDP growth. However, this
approach does not lend itself easily to interpretation. For example, a risk averse population
would think of an increase in the variance around an invariant baseline outlook as an
unfavourable change since higher uncertainty is viewed an adverse development. But, when
policy makers discuss risks to the baseline, most of the time they are expressing their concern
about the evolution of downside risks.
Our findings on EMs' business cycle characteristics in section II have important implications
for how to best identify risk realization episodes in order to conduct a robust evaluation of the
capacity of FVIs to provide early warning intelligence in this regard. Persistently higher
output and output growth volatility in EMs and the relative paucity of tail risk events
compared to AEs were highlighted as two key findings. For example, during the last 4
decades, tail growth realizations in China and India are very few in number (Figure 1).
The1991 balance-of-payments crisis appears as a clear case of an adverse tail event for India
with the peak of the GFC being a possible, less severe, second episode.24 In China's case, the
only unambiguous tail growth episode since 1980 is the one experienced in 1988. Even at the
peak of the GFC, in 2008-09, Chinese growth fell only to its 2004 level and remained



24
  While India's growth in 2008-09 was much lower than in its immediate vicinity, it was still significantly
higher than in 1991.
comfortably above growth rates experienced over the decade1994-2004; hence, it is not
possible to characterize the peak of the GFC as a tail growth episode for China.
Consequently, relative performance evaluation of out-of-sample forecasts of models
incorporating information in our FVIs cannot be done by relying primarily on tail growth
episodes because of the paucity of such episodes. Moreover, such an approach would be
inadequate in any case for countries like India and China where business cycles and growth
risks appear to be better characterized as turning points between accelerations and slowdowns.
We therefore propose a new and alternative approach to assessing early warning information
of FVIs for risks to growth, by assessing its forecasting capability around the turning points in
the growth rate cycle. As a first step, we identify the growth rate cycle turning points (TPs).
The TPs are identified using the OECD's Composite Leading Indicators (CLI) based "growth
cycle" approach. OECD uses the TP detection algorithm, which is a simplified version of the
original Bry and Boschan routine which parses local minima and maxima in the cycle series
and applies censor rules to guarantee alternating peaks and troughs. OECD's CLI based
approach identifies 10 TPs for India and 11 TPs for China (Figure 7).
To evaluate the predictive properties of the DPOR-BNK index, we run two horse races. First,
we compare conditional, retrospective, real-time, out-of-sample forecasts of real GDP growth
at the TPs of the growth rate cycle coming from an AR model of real GDP growth against
similar forecasts coming from a model that also includes lagged values of the DPOR-BNK.
The evaluation is carried out at immediate-term (i.e., one-month), near-term (i.e., one-quarter)
and medium-term (one-year) forecast horizons. Subsequently, we do a similar comparison of
relative forecasting accuracy of the model with DPOR-BNK versus one with an alternative
index specifically constructed to optimize forecasts of TPs, called a turning point index (TPI).
        Figure 7. Real GDP Growth Rate and OECD's CLI-Based Turning Points
            A. India (1997-2018)                   B. China (1992-2019)




 Sources: CEIC; OECD; and authors' calculations.
 Notes: 1 sets for a Peak and -1 sets for a Trough in the Turning Point


In the rest of this sub-section, we describe the construction of the TPI and compare it to DPOR-
BNK. The set of indicators constituting the TPI is selected by optimizing a criterion function,
with each additional indicator selected to maximize the marginal contribution to forecasting
TPs. We adopt a lasso technique for variable selection from 24 (India) and 20 (China) high
frequency indicators, including domestic real and fiscal variables, external sector variables,
ease of domestic financing variables, a nominal block of variables, a shock transmission block
of variables, and a global common factor block of variables. Seasonally adjusted annual growth
rates of all real variables are included in the TPI. The criterion function is given by:
                                                                               2                                                                                                                             
                                 

                                ( - 0 -    ) +  | | =  +  | |
                               =1                          =1                      =1                                                                                                               =1

                                                            
where | | is the lasso penalty and the lasso coefficient      is chosen to minimize the criterion
          25
function. The lasso technique results in 16 out of 24 coefficient estimates for India and 12 of
the 20 coefficient estimates for China being set to exactly zero. For India, half of the indicators
in the resulting TPI are also components of the DPOR-BNK index (left panel of Figure 8). For
China, a majority of indicators (barring two) in the TPI are different from those in DPOR-BNK
(right panel of Figure 8). We then fit a model using a single-index dynamic factor to construct
the TPI index (Figure 9). Given their composition, there is a close correspondence between the
inter-temporal evolution of the DPOR-BNK and TPI indices for India but not for China.
                                                          Figure 8. TPI Composition
                                    A. India                                                                                                                                         B. China
                 DPOR-BNK                                     TPI                              DPOR-BNK                                                                                                                        TPI
     Debt spreads                            Ease of financing block               Debt spreads                                                                                                               Ease of financing block
     - Interbank spreads                     - Blue chip index equity return       - Interbank spreads                                                                                                        - Term spread
     - Commercial paper spread               - Prime lending rate                  - Corporate spread                                                                                                         - US$-CNY spot exchange rate
     - Corporate spread                      - Large cap equity return             - Term                                                                                                                     - VIX
     Asset returns and volatility            - Interbank spreads                   Asset returns and volatility                                                                                               Real and fiscal block
     - Large cap return                      Credit cycle                          - Equity market return                                                                                                     - Fiscal revenue
     - Large cap implied option volatility   - Credit growth                       - Equity return realized volatility                                                                                        - Construction index
     - US$-INR implied option volatility     Real block                            - US$-CNY option volatility                                                                                                - Air passengers
     Credit cycle indicators                 - Tourist arrivals                    Credit cycle indicators                                                                                                    External block
     - Banking sector S-RISK                 - Auto sales                          - Banking sector S-RISK                                                                                                    - Crude oil imports
     - Prime Lending Rate                    - IIP (Infrastructure)                - Lending Rate                                                                                                             - Real exchange rate


 Sources: Bloomberg Finance, L.P.; CEIC; OECD; and authors' calculations.


                                    Figure 9. Comparing DPOR-BNK and TPI Indexes
                                    A. India                                                                                                                                         B. China
                                                                                    9

                                                                                    7

                                                                                    5

                                                                                    3

                                                                                    1

                                                                                   -1

                                                                                   -3
                                                                                                                                              DPOR-BNK

                                                                                   -5                                                         TPI

                                                                                   -7
                                                                                                                   Oct-05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oct-12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Oct-19
                                                                                                          Mar-05




                                                                                                                                                       Feb-08
                                                                                                                                                                Sep-08




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mar-12




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mar-19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Feb-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Sep-15
                                                                                                                                     Dec-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-13
                                                                                        Jan-04
                                                                                                 Aug-04




                                                                                                                                              Jul-07




                                                                                                                                                                                  Nov-09


                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan-11
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Aug-11




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-14




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nov-16


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan-18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Aug-18
                                                                                                                            May-06




                                                                                                                                                                         Apr-09


                                                                                                                                                                                           Jun-10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        May-13




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Apr-16


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jun-17




 Sources: Bloomberg Finance, L.P.; CEIC; OECD; and authors' calculations.




25
   As a result, models generated from the lasso are generally much easier to interpret than those produced by the
ridge regression.
Results
Our approach to evaluating relative performance of out-of-sample forecasts of growth rate
cycle TPs conditioned on information in the DPOR-BNK index is to compare the root mean
square error (RMSE) of forecasts of the competing models. The forecasts are retrospective,
real-time, out-of-sample, i.e., the models are trained on a slice of the historical data prior to
the TP of interest and then we evaluate monthly forecasts from the trained models over a
twelve-month window centred on that TP. We implement this procedure on 5 of the 10
identified TPs for India and 6 of the 11 identified TPs for China given data constraints.
Forecasts from the AR growth model are less accurate around a majority of TPs relative to
conditional forecasts of the AR model augmented with information in the DPOR-BNK index
at monthly and quarterly forecast horizons for both India and China (Table 3). No systematic,
significant further forecast gains are evident for India from incorporating information on the
real variables in the TPI as compared to the information in the DPOR-BNK. Relative forecast
accuracy of the model with TPI is higher than the model with DPOR-BNK at some TPs and
lower at others at short-horizons of one-to-three months, but at a policy relevant horizon of
one-year, the model with DPOR-BNK registers forecast gains for 80 percent of the TPs in our
sample (Table 4A). Our results for China are broadly similar (Table 4B). Replacing DPOR-
BNK with TPI does not register systematic significant gains at a one-year horizon and the
model with TPI underperforms the model with DPOR-BNK at shorter horizons of one-to-
three months.
                 Table 3. Turning Point Forecasts: AR model vs. AR + DPOR-BNK model
                                              A. India                                                                                                     B. China
                                                                                               RMSE                                                                                                           RMSE
  Forecast                                                                                                      Forecast
                Turning Point           Training Set                 Test Set                                                 Turning Point           Training Set                  Test Set
  Horizon                                                                                                       Horizon                                                                                AR        AR+DPOR
                                                                                        AR        AR+DPOR
                                                                                                                1 month        Feb. 2009       May 2004 - Jul 2008            Aug 2008 - Aug 2009     0.538          0.495
  1 month        Dec. 2010       Apr 2004 - May 2010            Jun 2010 - Jun 2011    0.790          0.690     1 month        Aug. 2011       May 2004 - Jan 2011            Feb 2011 - Feb 2012     0.238          0.303
  1 month        Jul. 2013       Apr 2004 - Dec 2012            Jan 2013 - Jan 2014    0.250          0.460     1 month        Nov. 2012       May 2004 - Apr 2012            May 2012 - May 2013     0.103          0.096
  1 month        Mar. 2016       Apr 2004 - Aug 2015            Sep 2015 - Sep 2016    0.270          0.340     1 month        Jan. 2014       May 2004 - Jun 2013              Jul 2013 - Jul 2014   0.211          0.232
  1 month        Jul. 2017       Apr 2004 - Dec 2016            Jan 2017 - Jan 2018    0.330          0.310     1 month        Aug. 2016       May 2004 - Jan 2016            Feb 2016 - Feb 2017     0.121          0.093
  1 month        May 2018        Apr 2004 - Oct 2017            Nov 2017 - Nov 2018    0.210          0.200     1 month        Apr. 2019       May 2004 - May 2018             Jun 2018 - Jun 2019    0.191          0.171


  1 quarter      Dec. 2010       Apr 2004 - May 2010            Jun 2010 - Jun 2011    1.700          1.440    1 quarter       Feb. 2009       May 2004 - Jul 2008            Aug 2008 - Aug 2009     1.697          1.596
                                                                                                               1 quarter       Aug. 2011       May 2004 - Jan 2011            Feb 2011 - Feb 2012     0.750          0.849
  1 quarter      Jul. 2013       Apr 2004 - Dec 2012            Jan 2013 - Jan 2014    0.590          1.010
                                                                                                               1 quarter       Nov. 2012       May 2004 - Apr 2012            May 2012 - May 2013     0.518          0.475
  1 quarter      Mar. 2016       Apr 2004 - Aug 2015            Sep 2015 - Sep 2016    0.750          0.880
                                                                                                               1 quarter       Jan. 2014       May 2004 - Jun 2013              Jul 2013 - Jul 2014   0.513          0.469
  1 quarter      Jul. 2017       Apr 2004 - Dec 2016            Jan 2017 - Jan 2018    0.860          0.700    1 quarter       Aug. 2016       May 2004 - Jan 2016            Feb 2016 - Feb 2017     0.421          0.455
  1 quarter      May 2018        Apr 2004 - Oct 2017            Nov 2017 - Nov 2018    0.590          0.540    1 quarter       Apr. 2019       May 2004 - May 2018             Jun 2018 - Jun 2019    0.444          0.410


 Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; CEIC; MOSPI; and authors' calculations.
 Notes: Green cells denote lower forecast RMSE among competing models.

         Table 4. Turning Point Forecasts: AR + DPOR-BNK model vs. AR+TPI model
                                              A. India                                                                                                     B. China
 Forecast Horizon       Turning Point            Training Set               Test Set           Relative RMSE   Forecast Horizon       Turning Point            Training Set                Test Set           Relative RMSE

                                                                                                                   1 month              Feb. 2009         May 2004 - Jul 2008       Aug 2008 - Aug 2009          1.490
     1 month              Dec. 2010         Apr 2004 - May 2010       Jun 2010 - Jun 2011         0.870
                                                                                                                   1 month              Aug. 2011         May 2004 - Jan 2011       Feb 2011 - Feb 2012          0.924
     1 month              Jul. 2013         Apr 2004 - Dec 2012       Jan 2013 - Jan 2014         1.700            1 month              Nov. 2012         May 2004 - Apr 2012       May 2012 - May 2013          0.372
     1 month              Mar. 2016         Apr 2004 - Aug 2015       Sep 2015 - Sep 2016         1.310            1 month              Jan. 2014         May 2004 - Jun 2013         Jul 2013 - Jul 2014        0.782
     1 month              Jul. 2017         Apr 2004 - Dec 2016       Jan 2017 - Jan 2018         0.820            1 month              Aug. 2016         May 2004 - Jan 2016       Feb 2016 - Feb 2017          0.934
     1 month              May 2018          Apr 2004 - Oct 2017       Nov 2017 - Nov 2018         1.180            1 month              Apr. 2019         May 2004 - May 2018        Jun 2018 - Jun 2019         1.048

    1 quarter             Dec. 2010         Apr 2004 - May 2010       Jun 2010 - Jun 2011         0.890           1 quarter             Feb. 2009         May 2004 - Jul 2008       Aug 2008 - Aug 2009          1.066
                                                                                                                  1 quarter             Aug. 2011         May 2004 - Jan 2011       Feb 2011 - Feb 2012          0.990
    1 quarter             Jul. 2013         Apr 2004 - Dec 2012       Jan 2013 - Jan 2014         1.600
                                                                                                                  1 quarter             Nov. 2012         May 2004 - Apr 2012       May 2012 - May 2013          0.573
    1 quarter             Mar. 2016         Apr 2004 - Aug 2015       Sep 2015 - Sep 2016         1.420
                                                                                                                  1 quarter             Jan. 2014         May 2004 - Jun 2013         Jul 2013 - Jul 2014        0.911
    1 quarter             Jul. 2017         Apr 2004 - Dec 2016       Jan 2017 - Jan 2018         0.620           1 quarter             Aug. 2016         May 2004 - Jan 2016       Feb 2016 - Feb 2017          0.904
    1 quarter             May 2018          Apr 2004 - Oct 2017       Nov 2017 - Nov 2018         1.100           1 quarter             Apr. 2019         May 2004 - May 2018        Jun 2018 - Jun 2019         0.951
      1 year              Dec. 2010         Apr 2004 - May 2010       Jun 2010 - Jun 2011         1.070             1 year              Feb. 2009         May 2004 - Jul 2008       Aug 2008 - Aug 2009          0.989
      1 year              Jul. 2013         Apr 2004 - Dec 2012       Jan 2013 - Jan 2014         0.970             1 year              Aug. 2011         May 2004 - Jan 2011       Feb 2011 - Feb 2012          1.108
      1 year              Mar. 2016         Apr 2004 - Aug 2015       Sep 2015 - Sep 2016         1.000             1 year              Nov. 2012         May 2004 - Apr 2012       May 2012 - May 2013          1.067
                                                                                                                    1 year              Jan. 2014         May 2004 - Jun 2013         Jul 2013 - Jul 2014        0.906
      1 year              Jul. 2017         Apr 2004 - Dec 2016       Jan 2017 - Jan 2018         0.870
                                                                                                                    1 year              Aug. 2016         May 2004 - Jan 2016       Feb 2016 - Feb 2017          0.834
      1 year              May 2018          Apr 2004 - Oct 2017       Nov 2017 - Nov 2018         0.990             1 year              Apr. 2019         May 2004 - May 2018        Jun 2018 - Jun 2019         1.192


 Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; CEIC; MOSPI; and authors' calculations.
 Notes: 1/ Relative RMSE = RMSE (AR+DPOR-BNK) / RMSE (AR + TPI). Green cells denote lower RMSE
 for AR + DPOR-BNK model.
Forecasting Tail Episodes
While we have argued against relying on forecasts in advance of tail growth episodes as a
means of evaluating the early warning capacity of FVIs, we provide an assessment of the
relative forecast performance of FVIs for India around the GFC given the pre-eminence of
this approach in the literature.26
Recent papers assessing the potential of FVIs as leading indicators of risks to growth have
emphasized the gain in information these indexes provide in terms of advance warning
regarding evolving tail risks by exploiting the fact that an estimated (linear) relationship
between these indexes and future growth changes depending on which part of the statistical
distribution of future growth is emphasized in estimating the model. Formally, by regressing
quantiles of future real GDP growth on an autoregressive term and the FVI to derive a
measure of growth-at-risk; i.e., the estimated qth-quantile of future economic growth
conditional on information contained in current and recent growth outcomes and current
financial stress as embodied in the FVI:27
                                                    
                                     + =     +    +  

where  is the seasonally adjusted, annualized rate of growth in quarterly GDP in month t;
  is the value of the DPOR-BNK index in month t, with q denoting that the regression
equation corresponds to the qth-quantile. Out-of-sample conditional forecasts of lower quantiles
of real GDP growth derived from the model above for a horizon of up to 24-months are
compared to conditional forecasts of the same quantiles of real GDP growth from an
autoregressive growth model:
                                                      
                                            +  =    +  

Comparing two-year ahead out-of-sample forecasts of annual real GDP growth at the peak of
the GFC (2009Q1) from the autoregressive model to the model incorporating information
from the FVIs indicates strong tail risk prediction properties for our FVIs. Rolling 24-months
ahead forecasts from the autoregressive model project a path of growth that modestly and
stably outpaces trend rate of growth over 2008-09. In contrast, comparable forecasts from the
model with FVIs predicts growth rate falling to more than 2 percent below trend by mid-2008
and a further steep fall to between 4 percent (when including DPOR) to 8 percent (when
using DPOR-BNK) below trend for the peak of the GFC. Strikingly, the actual economic
performance is mirrored most accurately by the out-of-sample forecasts coming from the
model including the DPOR-BNK index (Figure 10).




26
   As noted earlier in this section, we do not consider the GFC to have triggered a tail growth episode for China
and, hence, only cover India in this section. Assessing our FVIs' forecast performance for India's balance -of-
payments crisis (1991) and China's tail growth event (1988) was precluded by unavailability of data necessary
to construct our FVIs, in turn, reflecting financial market underdevelopment in the two countries at that time.
27
  See Katagiri et. al. (2017) and Adrian et. al. (2019) for the rationale for using quantile regression-based
forecasts of tail growth outcomes and Komunjer (2013) for more general properties of quantile prediction.
                 Figure 10. Forecasts of Risks-to-Growth around the GFC
                 (2-year ahead real GDP forecast with and without FVIs)




           Sources: Bloomberg Finance, L.P.; CEIC; OECD; and authors' calculations.


VII.   Conclusions

The main contribution of our paper is to offer a common approach and methodology to
construct financial vulnerability indexes for EMs that exploit the common properties of their
business cycle and similarities in their increasing financial interconnectedness with the rest of
the world. In doing so, we open up a new area of research by showing that while financial
conditions are important early warning indicators in both EMs and AEs, they need to be
developed differently for EMs in order to extract maximum information relevant to macro-
financial risk surveillance. Our FVIs accurately captures episodes of macro-financial stress
arising from disparate domestic and international shocks and transmission channels and
improves prediction of growth slowdowns over the last two decades in India and China, the
two largest EM economies in the world. Our principle findings, viz., that the domestic price
of risk in EMs adequately captures information on domestic and global risk factors and
transmission channels, but that market-based measures of bank vulnerability and the cost of
hedging dollar exposures are more informative than balance-sheet vulnerabilities and trade
shocks, can be expected to hold in a wider set of EMs and is worthy of further investigation.

Another important contribution is to offer a new approach to assessing risks to growth using
FVIs. In addition to out-of-sample forecast evaluation of FVIs against rare, tail-risk,
recessionary episodes like the GFC, we ran a horse race of relative out-of-sample forecast
performance of FVIs around turning points in the growth rate cycle against a coincident
leading indicator custom-built to perform well. Not only does this lead in our view to a more
satisfactory forecast evaluation, but equally importantly, it expands the set of episodes against
which performance evaluation may be performed. This is especially relevant to EMs given
that they tend to have growth rate cycles with frequent turning points between accelerations
and slowdowns instead of contractions and expansions typical to AEs and SOEs.

One of the surprising takeaways from our analysis is that fiscal and external measures of
shock amplification neither contribute significantly to the FVI when incorporated nor do they
systematically and significantly increase the early warning capacity of amplification indexes
for business cycle turning points in EMs. As we note in the introduction, we interpret this
result to reflect Goodhart's law; i.e., the heavy management of the evolution of key measures
of external and fiscal vulnerability and of the aggregate credit cycle by policy control
variables reduces their early warning potential. By contrast, market signals, either not (or
only unsuccessfully) subject to such controls appear to be more informative. It is possible that
the pre-eminence and stability of policy control of key macroeconomic measures of fiscal and
external imbalance over the sampling horizon for our leading case studies preclude non-
financial variables from having significant early warning capability in the time series domain.
This constraint could possibly dissipate in a broader cross-sectional study of EMs where such
measures might capture important cross-country variation in initial conditions, their use for
control purposes notwithstanding. This is a question we intend to turn to in future work
extending this paper's analysis.

Practical implementation of forecasting of risks to growth based on financial vulnerability
will inevitably require continuous calibration of these types of models. As local financial
markets develop and deepen as well as the institutional structure of credit intermediation
changes, the nature and materiality of shock transmission channels will evolve. New financial
indicators may therefore acquire greater importance and will need to be incorporated
dynamically in order to ensure robustness against a loss of information content.
                                        References


Acharya, V., C. Brownlees, F. Farazmand, and M. Richardson, 2011, "Measuring Systemic
     Risk", chapter 4 of Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd Frank Act and the New
     Architecture of Global Finance. New York, N.Y. Wiley.
_____ , R. Engle and M. Richardson, 2012, "Capital Shortfall: A New Approach to Ranking
     and Regulating Systemic Risks", American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
     102(3): 59-64.
_____ , L. Pedersen, T. Philippon, and M. Richardson, 2016, "Measuring Systemic
     Risk", Review of Financial Studies, 30: 2-47
_____ and S. Vij, 2017, "Foreign Currency Borrowing of Corporations as Carry Trades:
     Evidence from India", Working Paper. Available at:
     https://siddharthvij.com/pdf/ECBCarryTrade_Paper.pdf
Adrian, T., N. Boyarchenko and D. Giannone, 2019, "Vulnerable Growth", American
     Economic Review, 109:4, pp. 1263-89.
_____, F. Grinberg, N. Liang, and S. Malik, 2018, "The Term Structure of Growth-at-Risk",
     Working Paper 180/2018, Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
____ and H.S. Shin, 2014, "Procyclical Leverage and Value-at-Risk", Review of Financial
     Studies, 27:2, pp. 373-403.
Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath, 2007, "Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the
     Trend", Journal of Political Economy, 115:1, pp. 69-102.
Ang, A., M. Piazzesi, and M. Wei, 2006, "What does the Yield Curve Tell Us about GDP
     Growth?" Journal of Econometrics, 131:1-2, pp. 359-403.
Banbura, M. and M. Modugno, 2014, "Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Factor Models on
     Data Sets with Arbitrary Pattern of Missing Data", Working Paper 1189, Frankfurt:
     European Central Bank.
Bianchi, J., 2011, "Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle",
     American Economic Review, 101:7, pp. 3400-26.
_____ and E. Mendoza, 2018, "Optimal Time Consistent Macroprudential Policy", Journal
     of Political Economy, 126:2, pp. 588-634.
Brownlees, C. and R. Engle, 2017, "SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall Index for
    Systemic Risk Measurement", Review of Financial Studies, 30:1, pp. 48-79.
Bruno, V. and H.S. Shin, forthcoming, "Currency Depreciation and Emerging Market
     Corporate Distress", Management Science.
Brunnermeier, M., D. Palia, K. Sastry, and C. Sims, 2019, "Feedbacks: Financial Markets
     and Economic Activity", Working Paper. Available at:
     http://sims.princeton.edu/yftp/bpss/draft_s.pdf
_____ and Y. Sannikov, 2014, "A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector", American
     Economic Review, 104:2, pp. 379-421.
Campbell, J., 1999, "Asset Prices, Consumption and the Business Cycle", in Handbook of
    Macroeconomics, edited by J. Taylor and M. Woodford. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
_____, M. Lettau, B. Malkiel, and Y. Xu, 2001, "Have Individ ual Stocks Become More
     Volatile? An Empirical Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk", Journal of Finance, 56:1,
     pp. 1-43.
De Nicolò, G. and M. Lucchetta, 2017, "Forecasting Tail Risks", Journal of Applied
     Econometrics, 32:1, pp. 159-70.
Geweke, J. and K. Singleton, 1981, "Maximum Likelihood "Confirmatory" Factor Analysis
    of Economic Time Series", International Economic Review, 22:1, pp. 37-54.
Gilchrist, S. and E. Zakrajsek, 2012, "Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations",
     American Economic Review, 102:4, pp. 1692-720.
Goodhart, C., 1975, Monetary Theory and Practice, London: Macmillan Press.
Harvey, A., 1989, Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman Filter,
     Cambridge University Press.
Hatzius, J., P. Hooper, F. Mishkin, K. Schoenholtz, and M. Watson, 2010, "Financial
     Conditions Indexes: A Fresh Look after the Financial Crisis", Working Paper 16150,
     Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Holmes, E.E., E.J. Ward and M. Scheuerell, 2014, Analysis of Multi-variate Time Series
    Using the MARSS Package, NOAA, Washington.
International Monetary Fund, 2017, "Are Countries Losing Control of Domestic Financial
      Conditions?", IMF Global Financial Stability Report, April, pp. 83-108.
Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek, 2010, "Managing Credit Booms and Busts: A Pigouvian Taxation
     Approach", American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 100:2, pp. 403-7.
Jorda, O., M. Shularick and A. Taylor, 2015, "When Credit Bites Back", Journal of Money,
      Credit and Banking, 45:2, pp. 3-28.
Katagiri, M., R. Lafarguette, S. Malik, D. Seneviratne, and J. Surti, 2017, "Financial
     Conditions and Growth-at-Risk", IMF Global Financial Stability Report, October, pp.
     91-118.
Khundrakpam, J.K., R. Kavediya and J. Anthony, 2017, "Estimating Financial Conditions
    Index for India", Journal of Emerging Market Finance, 16:1, pp. 61-89.
Komunjer, I., 2013, "Quantile Prediction", in Handbook of Economic Forecasting, edited by
    G. Elliott and A. Timmermann. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Krishnamurthy, A. and T. Muir, 2017, "How Credit Cycles Around a Financial Crisis?",
     Working Paper, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mendoza, E., 2010, "Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage", American Economic
    Review, 100:5, pp. 1941-66.
Mian, A., A. Sufi and E. Verner, 2017, "Household Debt and Business Cycles Worldwide",
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, pp. 1755-1817.
Neumeyer, P. and F. Perri, 2005, "Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: The Role of
    Interest Rates", Journal of Monetary Economics, 52:2, pp. 345-80.
Obstfeld, M., 2015, "Trilemmas and Trade-off: Living With Financial Globalization", BIS
     Working Paper 480. Basel: Bank for International Settlements.
Philippon, T., 2009, "The Bond Market's Q", The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124:3,
      pp. 1011-56.
Reserve Bank of India, 2018, Report on Trends and Progress of Banking in India, 2017-18,
     Mumbai: Reserve Bank of India, December.
Rey, H., 2018, "Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy
     Independence", Working Paper 21162 , Cambridge, MA: Nationa l Bureau of Economic
     Research
Roy, I., D. Biswas, and A. Sinha, 2015, "Financial Conditions Composite Indicator (FCCI)
      for India", IFC Bulletin, 39, Basel: Bank for International Settlements.
Sapre, A. and R. Sengupta, 2017, "An Analysis of Revisions in Indian GDP Data", Working
     Paper 213, New Delhi: National Institute of Public Finance and Policy.
Saunders, A. A. Spina, S. Steffen and D. Streitz (2020), "What's in the Spread? The
     Predictive Power of Loan vs. Bond Spreads", Working Paper, New York University
     Stern School of Business.
Shankar, A., 2014, "A Financial Conditions Index for India", Working Paper 08/2014,
     Mumbai: Reserve Bank of India.
Shularick, M. and A. Taylor, 2012, "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
     Cycles and Financial Crise s", American Economic Review, 102:2, pp. 1029-61.
Sims, C., 1981, "An Autoregressive Index Model for the U.S.", in J. Kmenta and J. Ramsay,
     editors, Large Scale Macroeconometric Models: Theory and Practice, North Holland.
Stock, J. and M. Watson, 2002, "Forecasting Using Principle Components from a Large
     Number of Predictors", Journal of the American Statistical Association, 97:460, pp.
     1167-79.
_____, 2003, "Forecasting Output and Inflation: The Role of Asset Prices", Journal of
     Economic Literature, 41:3, pp. 788-829.
Zellner, A., 1963, "Estimators for Seemingly Unrelated Regression Equations", Journal of
      the American Statistical Association, 58, pp. 977-92.
Zuur, A.F., R.J. Fryer, I.T. Jolliffe, R. Dekker, and J.J. Beukema, 2003, "Estimating Common
      Trends in Multivariate Time Series Using Dynamic Factor Analysis", Environmetrics,
      14:7, pp. 65-85.
                             Annex 1. Estimating FVIs
A. Seemingly Unrelated Time Series Equation (SUTSE)
 A time-series analogue of the seemingly unrelated regression equation (SURE) model
   was first introduced by Zellner (1963)
 A system of seemingly unrelated time series equation-SUTSE model is the
   multivariate random walk plus noise process;

                                 yt  t   t ; t  1,    , T (1)
                                 t  t 1  t               (2)

   where  is a N 1 vector of local level component and  t and  t are N 1 vector of
   multivariate white noise with zero mean and covariance matrices  and 
   As in univariate model,  t and  t are assumed to be uncorrelated with each other in
   all time periods. The N series are linked via off-diagonal elements in  and  .
                                     N ( N  1)
   Each of these matrices contains             parameters.
                                         2

B. Dynamic Factor Analysis (DFA)

   In classical factor analysis, a model is setup in which it is assumed that each of N
   variables is a linear combination of K ( N ) common factor plus a random
   disturbance term, see Geweke and Singleton (1981) and Sims (1981)
   Our discussion here will be limited only to DFA within a framework obtained from
   SUTSE model. A common factor model for the trend components would be
   represented as follows;
                                     yt  t  0   t (3)
                                     t  t 1    t (4)
   where t is a K 1 vector of common trends,  is a N  K matrix of factor loadings
   and 0  K  N , The covariance matrices  and  are N  N and K  K
   respectively.


C. Identification in DFA

   For any non-singular K  K matrix H , the matrix of factor loadings and the trend
   components could be redefined as;
                               t  H t and   H 1
   Therefore, the common factor model for the trend component could be represented as;
                               yt    t  0   t (5)
                               t  t1     t (6)
                               where t  Ht ,    H  , and
                               Var (t )  H  H '

   In order for the model to be identifiable, restrictions must be placed on  and  . In a
   classical factor analysis, the covariance matrix of the common factor is taken to be an
   identity matrix. According to Harvey (1989), this is not sufficient to make the model
   identifiable since if H is an orthogonal matrix, (5) and (6) would still satisfy all the
   restrictions of (3) and (4) because Var (t )  HH '  I
   Some restrictions are needed on  and one way of imposing them is to require that
   the ij  th element of  , ij  0, for j  i ,i  1, , K  1 . Alternatively,  can be set
   equal to a diagonal matrix while ij  0 for j  i and ii  1 for i  1,     ,K .



D. Writing out a DFA in Multivariate Autoregressive State-Space (MARSS) form
 Following Holmes et al. (2014), MARSS can be written as a "state process" and an
   "observation process" as follows. The DFA in the MARSS package has a structure
   that is identical to the DFA framework obtained from SUTSE model.
 Observation ( y ) are modelled as linear combination of hidden trends ( x ) and factor
   loadings ( Z ) plus some offsets a
                             xt  xt 1  wt where wt MVN (0, Q)
                           yt  Zxt  a  vt where vt     MVN (0, R)
                              x0 MVN (, )
   It is important to writ e the DFA model in MARSS form. Let's say there is a data set
   with six observed time series, i.e., n=6.
   And it requires to fit a model with three hidden trend, m=3.
   Writing the DFA model in MARSS matrix form (ignoring the error structure and
   initial conditions for now).
                               x1  1 0 0  x1            0  w1 
                               x   0 1 0   x   0   w 
                               2                2          2
                               3 t 
                               x     0   0   1  
                                                 3  t 1 
                                                 x      0     w3 t
   Notice the process error of the hidden trend, wt   MVN (0, Q) can be written as
   follows;
                                w1         0  q11 q12 q13 
                                w   MVN ( 0 ,  q             
                                2             21 q22 q23  )
                                w3 
                                   t       0    q31 q32 q33  
   The matrix form representation of the equation between ( y ), hidden trend ( x ) and
   factor loading ( Z ) is as follows;
                           y1   z11         z12   z13         a1   v1 
                           y  z             z22   z23         a  v 
                           2   21                       1    
                                                       x       2    2

                           y3   z31         z32   z33     a3   v3 
                                                       x   
                           y4   z41         z42   z43   2   a4  v4 
                                                       x 
                           y5   z51         z52   z53   3  t  a5   v5 
                                                                
                           y6 
                              t  z61        z62   z63         a6 
                                                                  v6  t
   The observation error can be written as vt      MVN (0, R)
                       v1           0   r11 r12        r13   r14   r15   r16 
                      v             0  r r             r23   r24   r25   r26 
                       2               21 22                                 
                       v3           0  r r             r33   r34   r35   r36 
                              MVN (   ,  31 32                               )
                      v4            0   r41 r42        r43   r44   r45   r46 
                       v5           0   r51 r52        r53   r54   r55   r56 
                                                                             
                      v6 
                          t         0    r61 r62       r63   r64   r65   r66 


E. Identification in Multivariate Autoregressive State-Space (MARSS)

   This is exactly similar to what we have already specified while discussing about the
   identification in DFA. Following Harvey (1989), identification in MARSS
   specification would require the following changes.
        If Z , a, Q are not constrained, then the DFA model is unidentifiable.
        In the first m  1 rows of Z , the z  value in the j  th column and the i  th
           row set to zero, if j  i
           a is constrained so that first m values are set to zero
           Q is set equal to the identity matrix ( I m )
   Using these revised constraints, DFA will look as follows;

                          x1  1 0 0  x1        0  w1 
                          x   0 1 0   x   0   w  ,
                          2           2           2
                          x3 t 0 0 1   x3  t 1 0  w3 t

                        y1   z11       0       0         0   v1 
                        y  z          z22      0         0  v 
                        2   21                      x1     
                                                              2

                        y3   z31      z32     z33    0   v3 
                                                   x    ,
                        y4   z41      z42     z43   2  0  v4 
                                                   x 
                        y5   z51      z52     z53   3  t 0   v5 
                                                            
                        y6 
                           t  z61     z62     z63        0  v6  t
                                          w1         0 1 0 0
                                          w   MVN ( 0 , 0 1 0) ,
                                          2                   
                                          w3 
                                             t      0   0 0 1 

                                  v1             0   r11 r12    r13   r14   r15   r16 
                                 v               0  r r         r23   r24   r25   r26 
                                  2                 21 22                             
                                  v3             0  r r         r33   r34   r35   r36 
                                           MVN (   ,  31 32                           )
                                 v4              0   r41 r42    r43   r44   r45   r46 
                                  v5             0   r51 r52    r53   r54   r55   r56 
                                                                                      
                                 v6 
                                     t           0    r61 r62   r63   r64   r65   r66 

       To complete the model, it is required to set the initial condition of the state. Following
       Zuur et al. (2003), initial state vector ( x0 ) is set to have zero mean and diagonal
      variance-covariance matrix with large variance.
                                                 0  5 0 0 
                                      x0 MVN (      
                                                 0  , 0 5 0  )
                                                              
                                                 0    0 0 5   
      We assured parameter convergence by using sufficiently many iterations.

 This model was run to convergence setting maxit (maximum number of iteration) at 5000.
      First, it looks like the model did an adequate job of capturing some of the high frequency
      variation (i.e., seasonality) in the time series. Second, some of the time series had much
      better overall fit than others.
      All financial indicators are Z-score transformed before running the DFA. The Z-score
      transformation standardizes the high frequency indicators as the deviations are now
      reflected around the mean.
      It appears that, as anticipated, the dynamic evolution of the indexes is independent of
      method of concatenation of information in the individual indicators.


      F. The Expectation Maximization (EM) Algorithm

      We observe five data challenges in India, which are also faced by other EMEs. These data
      challenges are particularly relevant in time series analysis.

                   Big data revisions: According to Sapre and Sengupta (2017), the average
                   revision of GDP estimates in India is + 0.5 percentage points.
          Mixed frequencies data publication: The index on mining in India, for example,
          is published monthly, whereas the foreign exchange (FOREX) assets data is
          published bi-weekly and the National Stock Exchange (NSE) data daily.
          Small sample size: The CSO has recently replaced the earlier 2004-05 base year
          with 2011-12, and updated the National Account Statistics (NAS) methodology
          to align with more recent international guidelines. Using the data that has been
          revised in line with the updated methodology, we now have a shorter time series.
          Non-synchronous data releases: Hard data releases in India are non-
          synchronous. For example, monthly production of coal and crude oil is typically
          released on the last working day of the month, monthly production of
          commercial vehicles during the middle of the month, and railway freight traffic
          of major commodities during the first 10 days of the month.
          Varying data lags: For example, data on monthly production of steel and
          fertilizer for the month of December is released in the month of January of the
          following year. However, data on the mining and quarrying index for the
          month of November is released in the month of January of the following year
          with a lag of more than a month. Together, all of these will result in a large
          number of short, non-stationary time series with missing values.


   As observed by Zuur et al. (2003), the EM algorithm provides a way to obtain
   maximum likelihood estimates of the hyper-parameters based on the incomplete data
   in y1 , , yT . Holmes et al. (2014) points out that EM algorithm provides robust
   estimation for datasets replete with missing values and for high-dimensional models
   with various constraints. EM algorithm in MARSS specification is briefly discussed
   below;

                                                                         
   Starting with an initial set of hyper-parameters, which is denoted as 1 , an updated
                                                     
   parameter set 2 is obtained by finding the 2 that maximizes the expected value of
                                                                            
   the likelihood over the distribution of the states ( X ) conditioned on 1 .
   Mathematically, each iteration of an EM algorithm does this maximization.

                        
                       2  arg max E                 [log( | Y  y1
                                                                T
                                                                  , X]
                                             X |1
                                                             
   Then using 2 , the distribution of ( X ) conditioned on 2 is computed. Then that
                                                                                           
   distribution along with 2 in place of 1 is used to produce an updated parameter  3 .
   This is repeated until the expected log-likelihood stops increasing or increases less
   than some set tolerance level.

   Zuur et al. (2003) found that with the Harvey's second constraint (i.e. , a is
   constrained so that first m values are set to zero, see identification in MARSS), the
   EM algorithm is not particularly robust and takes time to converge. Instead, Zuur et
   al. (2003) found that EM algorithm behaves better if you constrain each of the time
   series in x to have a mean of zero across t  1 to T . Therefore, Zuur et al. replaced the
   estimates of hidden state, xtT , coming out of the Kalman smoother with
   xtT  x for t  1 to T ; where x is mean of xt across t . With this approach, you
   estimate all of the a elements, which represents average level of yt relative to
   Z ( xt  x ) . However, it was found out that demeaning xtT in this way can cause EM
   algorithm to have errors (decline in log-likelihood). Instead, demeaning data is
   followed by fixing all elements of a to zero is a better strategy.
                                                       Annex 2. Indicators Considered for FVI Construction

                                             Table A.2.1. India: Indicators Considered for FVI Construction

Indicator                                                                                            Description                                                       DataFrequency                   Source

Financial Variables
Term Spreads                                        Difference between 10 year government bond and 91 days T-Bill yields                                    Daily data averaged to monthly      RBI DBIE
Interbank Spreads                                   Difference between MIBOR 3 month and 91 days T-Bill yields                                              Daily data averaged to monthly      RBI DBIE
Sovereign Spreads                                   Difference between 10 year Indian government bond and generic 10 year US government bond yields         Daily data averaged to monthly      RBI DBIE; Bloomberg
CorporateSpread_CEMBI10year                         JPM CEMBI Broad India Blended Yield minus 10 year government bond yield                                 Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg; RBI DBIE
CorporateSpread_AAAGoI5                             5 year AAA spread over 5 year government bond yield                                                     Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
CorporateSpread_AAGoI5                              5 year AA spread over 5 year government bond yield                                                      Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
CorporateSpread_BBBAAA5                             5 year AAA spread over 5 year BBB spread                                                                Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
CorporateSpread_BBBAA5                              5 year BBB spread over 5 year AA spread                                                                 Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
CorporateSpread_CPGoI3M                             Spread of 3 month corporate bond yield to 91 days T-Bill                                                Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg; RBI DBIE
Equity Returns (Local Currency)                     Log difference of the equity indices                                                                    Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: NIFTY 500 Index                     Market cap weighted index of 500 companies                                                              Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: NSE Large Midcap 250                250 Large and mid cap Index                                                                             Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: Nifty50 Large                       50 large cap companies index                                                                            Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: Nifty Smallcap 50                   50 small cap market cao companies index                                                                 Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: Small cap100                        100 small cap companies index                                                                           Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: NSE Midcap Liquid 15                15 most liquid midcap companies index                                                                   Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: Midcap 50                           free-float market capitalization weighted index to capture midcap segment movement                      Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: Market minus Large Cap              Market minus Large Cap                                                                                  Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: Market minus Large and Medium Cap   Market minus Large and Medium Cap                                                                       Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: Large cap minus Medium Cap          Large cap minus Medium Cap                                                                              Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Returns: Large cap minus Small cap           Large cap minus Small cap                                                                               Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Return Volatility I                          Exponential weighted moving average of equity returns                                                   Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Equity Return Volatility II                         average volatility of all NSE market trading and of large cap top 50 listed companies                   Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Trading Volume (equities)                           Moving average of BSE total volume over 12 months, leaving previous month                               Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Market Capitalization (equities)                    Moving average of total BSE Market Capitalization of last 12 months, leaving previous month             Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
House Price Index                                   Log difference of the house price index                                                                 Quarterly data splined to monthly   BIS
Change in Financial Sector Share                    Log difference of the market capitalization of the financial sector to total market capitalization      Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Change in Long-Term Real Interest Rate              Change in long term real interest rate (in percent) which is calculated as difference between 10 year                                       RBI DBIE; Labour
                                                    government bond yield and inflation                                                                                                         Bureau India
MIBOR Overnight                                     Overnight Mumbai Interbank Offer Rate as short rate                                                     Daily data averaged to monthly      RBI DBIE
MIBOR 14-day                                        14 days Mumbai Interbank Offer Rate as short rate                                                       Daily data averaged to monthly      RBI DBIE
MIBOR 1-month                                       1 month Mumbai Interbank Offer Rate as short rate                                                       Daily data averaged to monthly      RBI DBIE
MIBOR 3-month                                       3 month Mumbai Interbank Offer Rate as short rate                                                       Daily data averaged to monthly      RBI DBIE
WACR                                                Weighted average call rate as short term rate                                                           Daily data averaged to monthly      RBI DBIE
Bank Rate                                           short term rate                                                                                         Daily data averaged to monthly      CEIC
Repo Rate                                           short term rate                                                                                         Daily data averaged to monthly      CEIC
Reverse Repo Rate                                   short term rate                                                                                         Daily data averaged to monthly      CEIC
Marginal Standing Facility Rate                     short term rate                                                                                         Daily data averaged to monthly      CEIC
Cash Reserve Ratio                                                                                                                                          Daily data averaged to monthly      CEIC
Statutory Liquidity Ratio                                                                                                                                   Daily data averaged to monthly      CEIC
Indicator                                                                                               Description                                                        DataFrequency                    Source

Financial Aggregates & Credit Cycle Variables
Credit Growth                                        Domestic credit by banks to all sectors                                                                    monthly                             CEIC
Credit Growth YoY                                    YoY change in domestic credit                                                                              monthly                             CEIC
Credit GDP Gap                                       Difference of Credit to GDP ratio and its long term trend                                                  Quarterly data splined to monthly   CEIC
Credit GDP Ratio                                     Ratio of domestic credit to GDP                                                                            Quarterly data splined to monthly   CEIC
Rajan-Zingales: External Finance Dependence          Ratio of difference of capital expenditure and net cash flow to capital expenditure                        Annual padded to monthly fequency   Calculation based on
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Prowess data
Debt-at-Risk lower (ICR)                             Interest expenses to PBDIT ratio less than 1.5                                                             Quarterly data splined to monthly   Prowess
Debt-at-Risk upper (ICR)                             Interest expenses to PBDIT ratio less than 2                                                               Quarterly data splined to monthly   Prowess
S-Risk of Banking Sector                             Calculated by combining current equity market value, outstanding debt and long run marginal expected       monthly                             NYU V-LAB
                                                     shortfall
Prime Lending Rate                                   Prime Lending Rate of the State Bank of India                                                              Daily data averaged to monthly      CEIC
Banking sector default probability                   Expected default frequency of the banking sector                                                           monthly                             Calculation based on
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Prowess data
Banking sector asset quality                         Non performing assets ratio to total loans of public and private sector banks                              Quarterly data splined to monthly   Bloomberg

External Shocks and Transmission Channel Variables
Oil Spot price                                       WTI Oil Spot Prices                                                                                        monthly                             FRED
Change in spot price of Oil                          Change in Oil Prices MoM                                                                                   monthly                             FRED
Carry Trade Index                                    Ratio of difference between 91days T-Bill and 3month US government bond yield to implied volatility of     monthly                             Calculation based on
                                                     3month USDINR options                                                                                                                          Bloomberg data
Short rates Carry Trade Index                        Ratio of difference between Repo rate and Fed rate upper bound to implied volatility of 3month USDINR      monthly                             Calculation based on
                                                     options                                                                                                                                        Bloomberg data
REER Misalignment                                    Difference of Real effective exchange rate from 5 year moving averaged REER                                monthly                             CEIC
VIX                                                  Chicago Board Options Exchange Market Volatility Index                                                     Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
MOVE                                                 Merrill Lynch Option Volatility Estimate Index                                                             Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
Exchange Rate Movements                              Change in monthly USDINR Currency                                                                          Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg
USDINR implied volatility                            Implied volatility of US$-INR 3 month option contract                                                      Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg

Non Financial Variables
Real GDP                                             GDP at constant price 2011-12 series                                                                       Quarterly data splined to monthly   MoSPI
Real GDP Growth                                      percent change in monthly splined real GDP                                                                 monthly                             MoSPI
Inflation                                            Percent annual change in CPI(IW)                                                                           monthly                             Labour Bureau
Primary Deficit to GDP                               Ratio of government primary deficit to monthly splined nominal GDP                                         monthly                             CEIC; MOSPI
Government Debt Outstanding to GDP                   Ratio of Outstanding Government Debt to monthly splined nominal GDP                                        monthly                             CEIC; MOSPI
Change in PrimaryDeficit                             Percent rate of change of government primary deficit                                                       monthly                             CEIC
Change in Outstanding Govt Debt                      Percent rate of change of Outstanding Government Debt                                                      monthly                             CEIC
Short Term Debt to Forex                             Ratio of Short-term External Debt to Foreign Exchange Reserves                                             monthly                             CEIC
Short Term Debt to Total External Debt               Ratio of short term External Debt and total External Debt                                                  monthly                             CEIC
External Debt to GDP                                 Ratio of total External Debt to monthly splined Nominal GDP                                                monthly                             CEIC
External Debt to GDP sans NRI debt                   Ratio of difference between total External Debt and External Debt of NRIs to monthly splined Nominal GDP   monthly                             CEIC
External Debt to GDP sans Assistance                 Ratio of difference between total External Debt and External Assistance INR Debt to monthly splined
                                                     Nominal GDP                                                                                                monthly                             CEIC
Reserve Adequacy                                     Ratio of Foreign reserves to sum of semiannual Import and annual short term debt                           monthly                             CEIC
Annual Import Coverage Ratio                         Ratio of annual change in cummulative imports to Foreign reserves                                          monthly                             CEIC
Semiannual Import Coverage Ratio                     Ratio of semiannual change in cummulative reserves to foreign reserves                                     monthly                             CEIC




Notes: Grey shaded indicators are those included in the FVIs presented below; others were considered but excluded given insignificant loading in the index;
Bloomberg = Bloomberg Finance, L.P.; FRED = U.S. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Database; MOSPI = Indian Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation
                                                  Table A.2.2. China: Indicators Included in the Financial Vulnerability Indexes

Indicator                                                                   Description                                              Data Frequency                           Source

Financial variables
Term spread                         Difference between 10 year government bond and 91-day T-Bill yields                     Daily data averaged to monthly      Thomson Reuters, OECD
InterbankSpread                     Difference between 3 month interbank lending rate and 91-day T-Bill yield               Daily data averaged to monthly      Thomson Reuters, OECD
CorporateSpread                     Difference between 3 month CEMBI yield (China) and 91-day T-Bill yield                  Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg, L.P., OECD
Equity Index Returns                Hang Seng index (HSCEI) return                                                          Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg, L.P.
Equity Index Volatility (30 days)   Standard deviation of last 30 days' HSCEI equity returns                                Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg, L.P.
Equity Index Volatility (90 days)   Standard deviation of last 90 days' HSCEI equity returns                                Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg, L.P.
External shocks and transmission
USD-CNY Option Implied Volatility   Implied volatility of U.S.$-CNY option contract                                         Daily data averaged to monthly      Bloomberg, L.P.
Credit cycle indicators
Banking sector S-RISK Index         Market capitalization weighted average of S-RISK of Chinese banks                       Weekly data averaged to monthly     NYU Volatility Risk Institute
Lending Rate 1 Year                 PBOC benchmark lending rate (Jan 2004-July 2019); Loan prime rate (Aug 2019-May 2020)   Monthly                             Bloomberg, L.P., Thomson Reuters
Other indicators
CPI Inflation                       Annual inflation based on CPI                                                           Monthly                             FRED
RGDP Growth 1/                      Real GDP growth rate (annualized)                                                       Quarterly data splined to monthly   FRED


Note: 1/ Indicator is not used in FVI construction, but in the turning points analysis.
