                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            NONDOGMATIC CLIMATE POLICY

                                         Niko Jaakkola
                                         Antony Millner

                                      Working Paper 27413
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27413


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We are grateful to Lint Barrage, Simon Dietz, Kieran Walsh, and seminar participants at UC
Berkeley and Uppsala University for helpful feedback. Jaakkola thanks Rob Hart and the
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences for support while working on this project. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Niko Jaakkola and Antony Millner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Nondogmatic Climate Policy
Niko Jaakkola and Antony Millner
NBER Working Paper No. 27413
June 2020
JEL No. D61,D63,Q54

                                            ABSTRACT

Disagreements about normative aspects of social time preferences have led to estimates of the
Social Cost of Carbon (SCC) that differ by orders of magnitude. We investigate how
disagreements about the SCC change if planners are non-dogmatic, i.e., they admit the possibility
of a change in their normative views, and internalise the preferences of future selves. Although
non-dogmatic planners may disagree about all the contentious aspects of social time preferences,
disagreements about the SCC reduce dramatically. Admitting the possibility of a change in views
once every 40 years results in a 4.6-fold reduction in the range of recommended SCCs.


Niko Jaakkola
University of Bologna
Department of Economics
Piazza Scaravilli 2
40 126 Bologna
Italy
niko.jaakkola@unibo.it

Antony Millner
Department of Economics
University of California at Santa Barbara
North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
millner@ucsb.edu
                        Non-dogmatic climate policy
                        Niko Jaakkola 1 and Antony Millner 2
                                      1
                                          University of Bologna
                             2 University   of California, Santa Barbara


                                            June 15, 2020



                                               Abstract

         Disagreements about normative aspects of social time preferences have led to
      estimates of the Social Cost of Carbon (SCC) that differ by orders of magnitude. We
      investigate how disagreements about the SCC change if planners are non-dogmatic,
      i.e., they admit the possibility of a change in their normative views, and internalise
      the preferences of future selves. Although non-dogmatic planners may disagree about
      all the contentious aspects of social time preferences, disagreements about the SCC
      reduce dramatically. Admitting the possibility of a change in views once every 40
      years results in a 4.6-fold reduction in the range of recommended SCCs.
      Keywords: Social cost of carbon, non-dogmatism, social discounting

    Disagreements about social time preferences are a major source of contention in climate
change economics. The Social Cost of Carbon (SCC) ­ the welfare cost of a ton of carbon
dioxide (CO2 ) emissions ­ is perhaps the most important indicator of the optimal intensity
of climate policy, but is highly sensitive to parameters of social time preferences that cap-
ture e.g. social impatience and aversion to intertemporal consumption inequalities. While
one might hope that new data or improved estimation methods could resolve disagreements
about their values, estimates of these parameters from market observables are suspect due
to pervasive market imperfections, and the fact that most of those who will be affected by
  
   Jaakkola: niko.jaakkola@unibo.it.
   
   Millner: amillner@econ.ucsb.edu. We are grateful to Lint Barrage, Simon Dietz, Kieran Walsh, and
seminar participants at UC Berkeley and Uppsala University for helpful feedback. Jaakkola thanks Rob
Hart and the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences for support while working on this project.

                                                   1
climate policies are not yet born (see e.g. Heal, 2017).1 Disagreements about social time
preferences thus have an irreducibly normative character (Dasgupta, 2008; Drupp et al.,
2018).
    This paper examines how disagreements about the SCC might change if advocates
of diverse normative theories of intertemporal social welfare were non-dogmatic (Millner,
2019). Non-dogmatic planners favour idiosyncratic theories of intertemporal social welfare,
but exhibit some humility; they admit the possibility of a change in their normative views,
and internalise the preferences of their future selves. We show that although such planners
may disagree on all the contested aspects of social time preferences, disagreements about
the SCC would decrease dramatically if they were even mildly non-dogmatic. Even if each
planner admitted the possibility of a change in their views only once every 40 years, the
range of recommended SCC values shrinks by almost a factor of five. Thus, even a small
amount of humility about normative judgements can help to defuse seemingly intractable
disagreements about the appropriate level of climate policy.
    The theory of non-dogmatic social time preferences was developed in Millner (2019).
That paper motivated non-dogmatism as a normative principle in its own right, arguing
that planners should exhibit a degree of humility when forming their normative judgments.
It then showed that although non-dogmatic planners may disagree about every free param-
eter of their intertemporal welfare functions, they all agree on the long-run social discount
rate, i.e. the rate of decline of the social value of marginal payoffs at long maturities.
Since current CO2 emissions cause persistent warming that lasts for significantly more
than a hundred years (Ricke & Caldeira, 2014), it is intuitive that non-dogmatism will
reduce disagreements about climate policy variables like the SCC. However, it is not at
all obvious how much reduction in disagreement can be expected. While Millner (2019)
used a calibrated version of his model to demonstrate a substantial reduction in disagree-
ments about long-run social discount rates, his analysis focussed on evaluating exogenous,
marginal, policies. By contrast, this paper focusses on endogenous, optimal, policies. Since
SCCs are calculated along optimal consumption paths, they are complex functions of the
distribution of non-dogmatic planners' preferences. Reductions in disagreement about the
value of marginal long-run projects thus may not translate into equivalent reductions in
   1
    Incomplete long-run futures markets and the presence of uncorrected climate externalities imply that
current market equilibria are likely inefficient, and therefore cannot even reveal the attitudes of current
market participants towards long-run outcomes. As Arrow et al. (2003) state, `using market observables
to infer social welfare can be misleading in imperfect economies. That we may have to be explicit about
welfare parameters...in order to estimate marginal rates of substitution in imperfect economies is not an
argument for pretending that the economies in question are not imperfect after all.'


                                                    2
endogeneous variables, and could be greater, or smaller, than might be expected based on
calculations with exogenous consumption paths. An entirely new modelling approach is
required in order to assess the consequences of non-dogmatism for disagreements about the
SCC.
    Operationalising the formalism developed in Millner (2019) in a fully optimising climate-
economy model raises several technical challenges. First, since non-dogmatic planners'
preferences may change over time, we would expect them to be time inconsistent. This
changes the appropriate equilibrium concept from individual intertemporal optimisation to
sub-game perfect equilibrium, as sophisticated planners play a game against their future
selves. As each non-dogmatic planner may have a different identity in each time period,
the relevant dynamic game has a large number of players. This potentially significantly
increases the difficulty of the numerical exercise. Second, since climate-economy models
usually have a number of endogenous state variables, and future preferences are uncertain
in the non-dogmatic paradigm, curse of dimensionality problems similar to those that arise
in numerical stochastic-dynamic optimisation raise their head. Third, since we need to
solve the model repeatedly from the perspective of many different non-dogmatic planners,
the computational demands multiply. We show that all of these difficulties can be over-
come with judicious simplifications of the problem. The baseline version of the model can
be solved on a laptop computer in about twelve hours.

Related literature

    Disagreements about social time preferences are at the heart of the extensive debate
about optimal climate policy that followed the publication of the Stern Review of the
Economics of Climate Change (Stern, 2008; Nordhaus, 2007; Dasgupta, 2008; Weitzman,
2007; Dietz & Stern, 2008). The extent of these disagreements has been documented in a
recent survey of economists (Drupp et al., 2018). It is well known that the SCC is highly
sensitive to these disagreements (see e.g. Heal & Millner, 2014; Anderson et al., 2014, and
Figure 2 below).
    Time consistency and violations thereof have been explored in the context of climate
policy by Karp (2005); Gerlagh & Liski (2017); Karp (2017); Iverson & Karp (2018). These
papers all focus on a single notion of intertemporal social welfare; they do not consider
issues that arise from disagreements about social time preferences. Barrage (2018) studies
a model of climate policy in which planners and consumers have different intertemporal


                                             3
preferences. This paper, by contrast, focusses on first-best policies, but accounts for diverse
viewpoints on how to measure intertemporal social welfare.
    Alternative approaches to resolving disagreements about social time preferences in the
context of climate policy include Dietz & Matei (2016); Heal & Millner (2014). The former
paper focusses on an incomplete dominance relation in a non-optimising model, while the
latter studies utilitarian aggregation of time preferences, also in a non-optimising model.
    The notion of `non-dogmatic' social time preferences builds on and reinterprets a prior
literature in which altruistic agents internalize others' preferences. See e.g. Ray (1987);
Saez-Marti & Weibull (2005); Galperti & Strulovici (2017), and the discussion in Millner
(2019). Alternative approaches to dealing with disagreements about intertemporal social
preferences are explored in Gollier & Zeckhauser (2005); Feng & Ke (2018); Chambers &
Echenique (2018); Millner & Heal (2018). While these papers examine a variety of aggrega-
tion techniques, non-dogmatism makes no attempt to aggregate preferences; disagreements
are left intact, but each planner is required to exhibit some humility when forming his/her
normative judgements. We show that this is enough to dramatically reduce disagreements
about the SCC.


1          Non-dogmatic social time preferences
We begin with a brief description of non-dogmatic social time preferences and their prop-
erties. The primitives of the model are a set of N planners, indexed by i, each of whom
advocates some plausible normative theory of intertemporal social welfare. We assume
that intertemporal social welfare according to planner i at time  , denoted by Vi , can be
represented by a time invariant function on the domain of infinite bounded consumption
streams of the form C = (c , c +1 , c +2 , . . .).2 Thus,

                                         Vi (C ) = Gi (c , c +1 , c +2 , . . .)                                (1)

for some functions Gi (·) that are strictly increasing in each of their arguments. Consider
how these planners evaluate a sequence  = (0 , 1 , . . .) of marginal changes to C . Using
     2
         We suppress population size for the sake of clarity in this section. Population is reintroduced in Section
2.




                                                           4
a first order Taylor expansion in the small quantities s , we have
                                                           
                         Vi (C    + ) -     Vi (C )             s (1 + ri (s))-s ,               (2)
                                                          s=0


where we define planner i's social discount rate at maturity s via:3

                                                                  -1
                                  i          Vi /c +s |C           s
                                 r (s) =                               - 1.                      (3)
                                             Vi /c |C

It is clear that generically ri (s) = rj (s) for all s if i = j ; the planners do not agree on the
value of marginal payoffs at any maturity.
    Non-dogmatic social time preferences are a subclass of the general preferences in (1)
that can be written in the following recursive form:

                       Vi = F i c , V1+1 , . . . , VN     1              N
                                                    +1 , V +2 , . . . , V +2 , . . . ,


where there exists a t > 0 such that the functions F i are strictly increasing in Vj+t for
all j = 1 . . . N . The interpretation of this restriction on preferences is as follows: each
planner at time  favours her own idiosyncratic theory of intertemporal social welfare, but
admits the possibility that her normative views may change in the future, i.e., a future
self may advocate one of the other plausible theories. Each planner is non-dogmatic ­
instead of imposing their current preferred theory on their future selves, they internalize
the preferences of future selves. Current welfare depends directly on the welfare measures
that future selves may advocate, and not just on future consumption values according
to the current self's preferred theory. Finally, non-dogmatism is persistent: planners are
always non-dogmatic. Internalization and persistence together yield a recursive preference
system in which current preferences depend on future preferences, each of which is in turn
recursively defined. Note that although non-dogmatic planners are required to admit the
possibility of a future change of heart and internalize future preferences, the functions F i (·)
are idiosyncratic. Non-dogmatic planners are thus free to advocate their preferred theory
of intertemporal social welfare unequivocally.
    If we assume further that preferences are additively time separable the functions F i (·)
  3
    We suppress the dependence of the social discount rate on the consumption path C in order to keep
the notation uncluttered.




                                                     5
can be shown to be linear, i.e.,

                                                               N
                                                                       ij j
                                  Vi       i
                                       = U (c ) +          i
                                                           s          ws V +s                            (4)
                                                     s=1       j =1

          i         ij
where s     > 0, ws    > 0 for all s = 1 . . . , i, j = 1 . . . N , and the intratemporal weights
  ij              N    ij
ws   satisfy j =1 ws      = 1 for all i, s. This interdependent preference system defines time
preferences that are complete on the set of bounded utility streams, and are increasing in
all utilities, if the coefficients si
                                      satisfy maxi        i
                                                      s=1 s < 1. We assume this condition from
now on. The central result of Millner (2019) is as follows:

Theorem 1. Assume that planners' preferences satisfy (4), and let ri (s) be the social
discount rate at maturity s according to planner i. Then

                                          lim ri (s) = lim rj (s)
                                         s               s


for all i, j  {1, . . . , N }.

   In words, all non-dogmatic planners agree on the long-run social discount rate, despite
                                                i    ij
arbitrary disagreements about the coefficients s  , ws  and utility functions U i (·).4
   Although this result may be surprising at first, it has an intuitive origin. Current
planners' attitudes towards consumption in the distant future are mediated through the
preferences of their future selves. Since each of those future selves' preferences are also
dependent on their future selves, the entire preference system in (4) must be unravelled
backwards to the present in order to understand current planners' attitudes to future
consumption. For example, suppose that the planners only place positive weight on selves
                             i
one time step ahead, i.e. s    = 0 for s  2. To understand these planners' attitudes to
consumption at some future time  + s, notice that only planners at  + s care directly about
consumption in that period. Planners at time  + s - 1 care directly about consumption
in period  + s - 1, but indirectly about consumption in period  + s via a mixture of
the preferences of the selves at time  + s. After s steps back to the present, planners'
concerns about  + s are mediated through s iterates of a mixing operator that blends
   4
     Millner (2019) presents an explicit formula for the consensus long-run social discount rate, but this is
not needed for our current purposes.




                                                     6
their intertemporal weights, and acts on utilities at time  + s.5 As s becomes large, this
mixing process converges, and all planners' utility weights decline at the same geometric
rate. In addition, marginal utilities at large maturities are dominated by the planner
whose marginal utility function decreases slowest for large (small) consumption values if
asymptotic consumption growth is positive (negative). Thus, in the limit as s  , all
planners agree on both the rate of decline of utility weights, and on the rate of decline
of marginal utility, i.e., they agree on the social discount rate. Millner (2019) presents a
formal treatment of this descriptive argument, and shows that it generalises to the case
where planners care about all future selves.
    Equation (2) indicates that the fact that non-dogmatic planners agree on the long-run
social discount rate should have especially significant consequences for disagreements about
policies with long-run effects, climate policy being an archetypal example. We turn to this
application of the theory next.


2         Application in a DICE-like model
In order to illustrate the implications of non-dogmatic time preferences for disagreements
about the SCC, we investigate their implications in a version of the DICE integrated
assessment model of climate policy (Nordhaus, 2017). DICE combines a Ramsey-style
growth model with a dynamical climate module. The climate module quantifies the CO2
emissions intensity of economic output, how emissions accumulate in the atmosphere, how
the stock of CO2 changes global average temperatures, and finally how those temperature
changes feed back into the economy via climate change damages. DICE is arguably the
simplest and most widely used model in climate economics, and has been used in a variety
of high-profile policy applications.
    The standard version of the DICE model has 6 endogenous state variables (capital,
two temperature variables, and three carbon cycle variables), 2 control variables (savings
and the emissions control rate), and also relies on several exogenous time series (for TFP,
population, non-CO2 forcings, and mitigation costs). DICE uses a discounted utilitarian
social welfare function with an iso-elastic utility function to measure intertemporal social
    5
        For example, suppose that there are only two planners. Then we can write (4) in this example as
                                                                                                          s
    V1            U 1 (c )          1 w1     1 (1 - w1 )    V1+1                 1 w1     1 (1 - w1 )         U 1 (c +s )
            =                +                                      =                                                       ,
    V2            U 2 (c )       2 (1 - w2 )    2 w2        V2+1              2 (1 - w2 )    2 w2             U 2 (c +s )
                                                                        s=0

where 1 , 2 , w1 , w2  (0, 1). The matrix in this expression is the mixing operator in question.


                                                       7
welfare:                                                              
                                  c1-            1                                    -
                     VDICE    = N     + VDICE
                                         +1   =                            N +s  s c1
                                                                                     +s ,                 (5)
                                 1-             1-                   s=0

where N is population, c is per capita consumption,   0 is the elasticity of marginal
utility, and  = (1 + )-1 , where  > 0 is the pure rate of social time preference. The
parameters  and  capture social impatience and aversion to intertemporal consumption
inequalities respectively. Our object is to provide a counterfactual analysis of the SCC that
preserves much of the standard structure of the DICE model, but allows us to investigate
how non-dogmatism might reduce disagreement amongst planners who favour different
values of  and  . While there are other normative choices in the model that could be
interrogated (e.g. its treatment of population ethics and uncertainty (Fleurbaey et al.,
2018)), much of the debate in the literature has focussed on these two parameters. As
our goal is to demonstrate the consequences of non-dogmatism in a well-known benchmark
model, we make minimal changes to the DICE framework itself.
    In order to bring the non-dogmatic preferences (4) into contact with the DICE model
in a computationally tractable manner, we make three simplifying assumptions, on time
inconsistency issues, the set of planner preferences we consider, and on how to model the
climate system. We describe each of these simplifications in turn.


2.1     Time (in)consistency issues
Since non-dogmatic planners' preferences may change over time, intuition might suggest
that they are necessarily time inconsistent. However, this is not the case:
                                                                              i
Proposition 1. The time preferences in (4) are time consistent if and only if s = 0 for
all s  2, i = 1 . . . N .

Proof. Johnsen & Donaldson (1985) show that history independent and consequentialist6
time preferences are time consistent iff they have the form

                                Vi (x, c) = Fi (x, {Vj+1 (c)}|j  I +1 )

where x is current consumption, c is an arbitrary stream of future consumption, and I +1
indexes a set of events (preference changes in our setting) that occur at the beginning of
   6
     Preferences are consequentialist if they only depend on reachable nodes of a decision tree, i.e., they do
not depend on unrealised events or plans not carried out. The preferences in (4) are both consequentialist
and history independent.

                                                      8
period  + 1. Applying this constraint on preferences to (4) yields the result.

   Thus, although non-dogmatic planners' preferences may change over time, they need
not be time inconsistent. This is a direct consequence of preference internalisation: if
current planners internalise the preferences of future selves in the next time period only,
their preferences satisfy a recurrence relation that is reminiscent of a stochastic Bellman
equation; they are thus time consistent. In our simulations we will work with the following
system of non-dogmatic time preferences:

                                                      N
                              Vi         i
                                   = N U (c ) + i               wij Vj+1 .               (6)
                                                      j =1


As these preferences are time consistent, the numerics are vastly simpler than what would
be necessary in a dynamic game between sophisticated, time inconsistent, non-dogmatic
planners (see Iverson & Karp, 2018, for a discussion of the numerical difficulties that occur
in solving such games).
    The constraint on preferences in (6) is less severe than it may appear. An alternative
choice that has received axiomatic support in the literature (Galperti & Strulovici, 2017),
is an exponential model of the form:

                                                                 N
                                                                        ij j
                         Vi          i
                              = N U (c ) + i         (i )   s
                                                                       ws V +s .         (7)
                                               s=1              j =1


These preferences are time inconsistent. However, Millner (2019) observes that if we require
(7) to approximate Discounted Utilitarian (DU) time preferences in the `dogmatic limit'
         ij
where ws     0 if j = i, then we must take i to be large, while holding i i fixed. Call the
limit as i  , while i i is fixed, the DU limit of (7). As we approch the DU limit, (6)
becomes a very good approximation to (7). Moreover, as we will work with a finite horizon
model in our simulations, there is a unique sub-game perfect equilibrium of the dynamic
game between sophisticated exponential non-dogmatic planners. That equilibrium must
converge to a solution of (6) in the DU limit. Thus the models in (6) and (7) are mutually
consistent if we require preferences to reduce to discounted utilitarianism in the dogmatic
limit. This requirement is essential for consistency with the survey data we calibrate our
model to. We now turn to a description of that data.




                                               9
2.2       Calibrating preferences
To implement (4) in a quantitative application we need to calibrate preferences to a sample
of plausible normative theories of intertemporal social welfare. We follow Millner (2019),
who calibrates the model to data from a survey of economists who have published papers
on social discounting (Drupp et al., 2018). The survey elicited 173 respondents' views on
the appropriate values of the parameters  and  of the discounted utilitarian intertemporal
welfare function in (5). To demonstrate how non-dogmatism reduces disagreements about
the SCC, we need to solve non-dogmatic versions of the DICE model for each of these
parameter values. That is, we run many versions of the DICE model assuming that a
different planner is in complete control of policy in each run; however, each planner is
non-dogmatic.
    In the version of the model used by Millner (2019) planners are assumed to have sym-
metric switching probabilities wij that take the following form:

                                                   1-x j =i
                                         wij =       x
                                                                                              (8)
                                                    N -1
                                                         j=i

Thus, planners stick to their current theory in the next period with probability 1 - x 
[1/N, 1]. Conditional on switching (which occurs with probability x  [0, 1 - 1/N ]), they
switch to any of the plausible alternative normative theories with equal probability. The
variable x thus measures the `degree' of non-dogmatism. Note that this model does not
imply that switching probabilities are uniformly distributed over the space of possible
preferences. Regions of (,  ) space that are more common in our sample will be switched
to more often, on average, than sparsely populated regions. In the dogmatic case where
x = 0, the preferences in (6) coincide with the standard discounted utilitarian preferences
in (5).
    A direct implementation of this calibration methodology leads to 173 different intertem-
poral optimization problems, and 173 different value functions that must be solved for in
each time step of the model.7 Since this problem is prohibitively costly to implement
computationally, we simplify the dataset. We use a k -means clustering algorithm to assign
each data point in the sample of (,  ) pairs to one of M     173 clusters, in such a way that
the within cluster variance is minimised. All points within a cluster are identified with the
                                               # points in cluster i
centroid of that cluster, and a weight mi =             N
                                                                     is assigned to cluster i.
  7
      Since we work with a finite horizon model, value functions depend explicitly on time.



                                                     10
                                                         C
The switching probabilities between clusters, denoted wij  , are then assumed to be propor-
tional to their weight, so that the uniform switching probabilities at the individual level in
(8) are reflected at the level of clusters:

                                     C         1 - x + xmi j = i
                                    wij =                        .                                        (9)
                                                   xmj     j=i

Figure 1 illustrates the dataset, and its partition into 10 clusters. Note that since the
clustering algorithm invariably loses some of the variation in the data, our results will
necessarily provide a lower bound on the reduction in disagreement about the SCC due to
non-dogmatism.


2.3     Simplifying the climate dynamics
Our final simplification relates to the way DICE represents climate dynamics, i.e., the
relationship between CO2 emissions and temperature change. As we observed above, DICE
uses 5 state variables to represent the climate system. The climate model in DICE builds on
an early simple climate model (Schneider & Thompson, 1981), which aimed to represent the
lags between emissions and warming that were thought to occur because of the dynamics
of heat transfer between the atmosphere and the oceans (Nordhaus & Boyer, 2000). More
recent work with sophisticated earth systems models has however shown that the inertia
in the climate system as represented in DICE is overstated, largely because it neglects
feedbacks in the climate system, and the saturation of carbon sinks in particular (Dietz
& Venmans, 2019). To a very good approximation over time scales of a century or more,
emitting a ton of CO2 causes an almost immediate,8 permanent, increase in temperature
that is independent of initial CO2 concentrations (Matthews et al., 2009; Ricke & Caldeira,
2014). With the 10 year time step that DICE uses, the relationship between temperature
T and emissions e in successive time steps is very well approximated by:

                                             T +1 - T = µe
   8
    Peak warming after an emissions pulse occurs after about 10 years in modern earth systems models.
The falloff in temperature response after the peak is very small over a period of 100 years (Ricke & Caldeira,
2014). Dietz & Venmans (2019) consider a simple two state model that allows one to fit the short-run
peak in the temperature response curve, but show that such a model is virtually indistinguishable from a
one state model in which warming is immediate.




                                                     11
                                                                                                                 12




                                            5


                                           4.5


                                            4
      Elasticity of marginal utility ( )




                                           3.5


                                            3


                                           2.5


                                            2


                                           1.5


                                            1


                                           0.5


                                            0
                                                 0   1   2          3          4         5          6    7   8
                                                         Pure rate of social time preference ( , %/yr)


Figure 1: Recommended values for the pair of parameters (,  ) from the Drupp et al.
(2018) survey. Points with the same colour are assigned to the same cluster by a k -means
clustering algorithm, and cluster centroids are marked with a cross. Ten clusters are used
in this example. Note that cluster sizes are not fully represented in this figure as there
may be several data points at the same value of (,  ).
for some µ > 0. Summing this relationship, we find
                                                          
                                          T - T0 = µ           et .
                                                         t=0


The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's central estimate is that 1 trillion tons of
CO2 emissions will cause approximately 2 C of warming (Collins et al., 2013) ­ this allows
us to calibrate the value of µ. Dietz & Venmans (2019) provide a valuable discussion of the
scientific literature that demonstrates the linear relationship between temperature change
and cumulative emissions, and of the deficiencies of the climate model in DICE on this
dimension.
    Using this simple `cumulative carbon' model of the climate system allows us to reduce
the number of climatic state variables in DICE from five down to one ­ cumulative CO2
emissions. Although this is a simplification, this model is more representative of the state
of the art in climate science than the more complex climate model that DICE deploys.


2.4     Numerics
Other than the changes to the climate model and social time preferences described above,
the version of the DICE model we work with is virtually identical to that in Nordhaus
(2017).9 Given our simplifications, the model depends on the pair of state variables S =
(K , CO2, ), where K is the capital stock, and CO2, is the stock of CO2 in the atmosphere.
Letting Z denote the pair of controls (i.e., consumption and the emissions control rate)
at time  , our modified DICE model can now be written as a set of equations of motion of
the form:
                                   S +1 = H (S , Z ,  )

These equations depend explicitly on time  through the exogenous time series in the
DICE model. The model can now be solved using methods from numerical stochastic
dynamic programming (see Appendix A for further details). Formally, we find numerical
   9
     There are two other minor differences. We do not include exogenous non-CO2 forcings, as modelling
their effects correctly would require extra state variables. These forcings have only small effects on the
SCC. In addition, unlike the version of DICE in Nordhaus (2017), we constrain the emissions control rate
to lie in [0,1].




                                                   13
approximations to the M time dependent value functions Vi (S ) defined through

                                                        M
                                              1                 C j
                 Vi (S )               i
                           = max N U (Z ) +                    wij V +1 (H (S , Z ,  )).
                              Z             1 + i       j =1


The SCC is the welfare cost of an addition ton of CO2 emissions in consumption units.
According to planner i at time  in state S , the SCC is given by10

                                    i             Vi / CO2, |S
                                 SCC  (S ) =                   .                                  (10)
                                                  Vi /K |S

Each run of the model with a different planner `in charge' starts out with the same initial
values of the state variables S0 . However, the trajectories of state variables from  = 1
onwards are endogenous to planners' preferences, and stochastic (due to the possibility of
a change in preferences). Thus SCCs for   1 are random variables, which are computed
at different values of S for each planner.


3      Results
Our first main result ­ Figure 2 below ­ plots the distribution of SCCs in the initial pe-
riod of the model as a function of the `non-dogmatism' parameter x in (9). We work
with the values x = {0, 2.5%, 5%, 10%, 20%}/yr, which correspond to a change in norma-
tive views roughly once every {, 40, 20, 10, 5} years on average. Even for x = 2.5%/yr
non-dogmatism gives rise to a dramatic reduction in disagreement about the SCC. Dog-
matic SCCs fall in the range 3-459$/tCO2 , while non-dogmatic SCCs fall in the range
27-126$/tCO2 when x = 2.5%/yr, a 4.6-fold reduction in disagreement. For x = 10%/yr,
the range of SCCs shrinks to 46-96$/tCO2 , a ninefold reduction in disagreement. These
reductions in disagreement occur despite the fact that disagreements about the primitive
welfare parameters ,  remain intact.
    Although a lot of this reduction in disagreement comes from the planner with preference
parameters  = 0.4%/yr,  = 0.4, this planner represents the fourth largest cluster. While
this planner's dogmatic SCC value is an outlier, the preference parameters that underlie
it are not. Indeed, if we exclude outliers the results become even more dramatic. To
demonstrate this, let I90 (x) denote the smallest SCC interval that contains 90% of the
  10
    To facilitate comparison to Nordhaus (2017) the units of our SCC are 2010$/tCO2 . Multiply by 44/12
to convert to 2010$/tC.


                                                  14
                                                500
                                                                                                   = 0.3%,    = 1.0        = 0.6%,   =data1
                                                                                                                                       2.9
                                                                                                                                      data2
                                                                                                   = 0.2%,    = 1.8        = 4.4%,   =data3
                                                                                                                                       0.7
                                                                                                                                      data4
                                                                                                   = 2.3%,    = 0.8        = 0.8%,   =data5
                                                                                                                                       4.7
                                                                                                   = 0.4%,    = 0.4        = 7.5%,   =data7
                                                                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                      data6

                                                                                                   = 1.5%,    = 1.8        = 6.0%,   =data8
                                                                                                                                       4.0
                                                                                                                                      data9
                                                                                                                                      data10
                                                                                                                                      data11
                                                450                                                                                   data12
          Social Cost of Carbon (2010$/tCO 2)




                                                                                                                                      data13
                                                                                                                                      data14
                                                                                                                                      data15
                                                                                                                                      data16
                                                                                                                                      data17
                                                                                                                                      data18
                                                                                                                                      data19
                                                                                                                                      data20




                                                100




                                                 50




                                                  0
                                                      0   2   4   6         8        10       12         14           16       18              20
                                                                      Non-dogmatism parameter x (%/yr)



Figure 2: SCCs in the initial model year (2015) as a function of the degree of non-
dogmatism. Marker sizes are proportional to cluster sizes.



sample.11 This interval excludes the most extreme 10% of SCC values, which in practice
means the very low SCC values that obtain due to very large values for ,  , or both
(i.e., the yellow, dark blue, black, or light green clusters in Figure 1). Table 1 records
the values of I90 (x). Excluding outliers, we find a 7.7-fold reduction in the range of SCCs
when x = 2.5%/yr, with substantially bigger reductions in disagreement as x increases.
Although our results are not driven by extreme preferences, the fact that non-dogmatism
has a very substantial effect on extreme SCCs illustrates the value of a little normative
humility in the context of the climate debate, or conversely, how inflexible adherence to a
dogmatic normative paradigm can hold up agreement.
    Figure 3 illustrates the dynamics of non-dogmatic SCCs. Figure 3a plots the one
standard deviation range of SCC values in future model years for x = 2.5%, for each
  11
   In detail, let  be an arbitrary subset of cluster indices such that       i mi  0.9, and let
SCC i [x] be the initial SCC in cluster i when the non-dogmatism parameter is x. We define I90 (x) =
min [min{SCC i [x]|i  }, max{SCC i [x]|i  }].



                                                                                  15
non-dogmatic planner. The figure shows that even a small possibility of future preference
change gives rise to considerable uncertainty about future SCCs; this is a consequence of
variations in the endogenous trajectories of the state variables across different planners,
and different realisations of the stochastic process for preference change. Despite this new
source of uncertainty, we must look ahead 25 years before the variation in non-dogmatic
SCCs is comparable to the current variation in dogmatic SCCs. It is essential to emphasize
that this figure represents the uncertainty about future non-dogmatic SCC values for each
planner, and not the reduction in disagreement about SCCs that would occur in any future
period. Reductions in disagreement in future periods could be at least as large as those
depicted in Figure 2, since the uncertainty about the interim trajectories of the state
variables will be resolved when SCCs are computed in those periods. We illustrate this in
Figure 3b, which plots dogmatic and non-dogmatic SCCs along a fixed reference trajectory
for the state variables, taken to be the optimal path according to a dogmatic planner whose
preference parameters coincide with those used in Nordhaus (2017). This figure illustrates
that reductions in disagreement could be substantially larger in the future, depending on
the interim evolution of the climate-economy system.


4    Conclusion
This paper presented a normative model of climate policy in which devotees of diverse
theories of intertemporal social welfare are non-dogmatic ­ they admit the possibility of a
change in their normative views, and internalise the preferences of possible future selves.
The model requires planners (or economists) to exhibit a little humility about their pre-
ferred framework for evaluating climate policies. Despite this, the model still allows an-
alysts the freedom to advocate their preferred normative theory unequivocally. Although
disagreements about contested welfare parameters ­ the pure rate of social time preference

          Table 1: Reduction in disagreement excluding outlying 10% of sample

                   x (%/yr) I90 (x)   (2010$/tCO2 )    |I90 (0)|/|I90 (x)|
                       0              11-459                    1
                      2.5             68-126                   7.7
                       5              72-105                  13.6
                      10               76-96                  22.4
                      20               79-92                  34.5


                                            16
                                                                                                                      17

                                               
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
             6RFLDO&RVWRI&DUERQW&2



                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   


                                               



                                               



                                                 
                                                                                                                   
                                                                               <HDU
(a) Shaded areas denote the one standard deviation range of future SCC values for each of the
non-dogmatic planners (x = 2.5%). Filled dots denote initial dogmatic SCCs.


                                                                                                          data1
                                                                                                          data2
                                               850                                                        data3
                                                                                                          data4
                                                                                                          data5
                                                                                                          data6
                                                                                                          data7
                                               750                                                        data8
                                                                                                          data9
                                                                                                          data10
         Social Cost of Carbon (2010$/tCO2 )




                                               650



                                               550



                                               450




                                               200



                                               100



                                                 0
                                                        2015          2025   2035       2045       2055
                                                                             Year


(b) SCC values along a fixed trajectory for the state variables given by the optimal path according
to a dogmatic planner with DICE preferences ( = 1.5%,  = 1.45). Filled dots correspond to
x = 0, open circles to x = 2.5%, and stars to x = 10%. The dashed line marks the DICE SCC.

                                                     Figure 3: Dynamics of disagreement about the SCC
and elasticity of marginal utility ­ remain intact, planners who embrace non-dogmatism
will exhibit significantly less disagreement about the SCC. Disagreements reduce by almost
a factor of five if planners admit the possibility of a change in views once every forty years,
and substantially more if they are more non-dogmatic. While non-dogmatism cannot de-
liver a universally acknowledged `best' value of the SCC, it can focus policy evaluation on
a much narrower range of values, which nevertheless reflects a plurality of normative views.
This can hopefully help to move the debate on optimal climate policy past ethics, and on
to practicalities.


References
B. Anderson, et al. (2014). `Uncertainty in Climate Change Modeling: Can Global Sensi-
  tivity Analysis Be of Help?'. Risk Analysis 34(2):271­293.

K. J. Arrow, et al. (2003). `Evaluating Projects and Assessing Sustainable Development
  in Imperfect Economies'. Environmental and Resource Economics 26(4):647­685.

L. Barrage (2018). `Be careful what you calibrate for: Social discounting in general equi-
  librium'. Journal of Public Economics 160:33­49.

C. P. Chambers & F. Echenique (2018). `On Multiple Discount Rates'. Econometrica
  86(4):1325­1346.

M. Collins, et al. (2013). `Long-tem climate change: Projections, Commitments and Ir-
 reversibility'. In Climate Change 2013 - The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
 Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
 Climate Change, chap. 12, pp. 1029­1136. Cambridge University Press.

P. Dasgupta (2008). `Discounting climate change'. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
  37(2):141­169.

S. Dietz & N. A. Matei (2016). `Spaces for agreement: A theory of time-stochastic domi-
  nance and an application to climate change'. Journal of hte Association of Environmental
  and Resource Economists 3(1):85­130.

S. Dietz & N. Stern (2008). `Why Economic Analysis Supports Strong Action on Climate
   Change: A Response to the Stern Review's Critics'. Review of Environmental Economics
   and Policy 2(1):94 ­113.

                                              18
S. Dietz & F. Venmans (2019). `Cumulative carbon emissions and economic policy: In
  search of general principles'. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
  96:108­129.

M. Drupp, et al. (2018). `Discounting Disentangled'. American Economic Journal: Eco-
 nomic Policy 10(4):109­134.

T. Feng & S. Ke (2018). `Social Discounting and Intergenerational Pareto'. Econometrica
  86(5):1537­1567.

M. Fleurbaey, et al. (2018). `The Social Cost of Carbon: Valuing Inequality, Risk, and
 Population for Climate Policy'. The Monist 102(1):84­109.

S. Galperti & B. Strulovici (2017). `A Theory of Intergenerational Altruism'. Econometrica
   85(4):1175­1218.

R. Gerlagh & M. Liski (2017). `Consistent Climate Policies'. Journal of the European
  Economic Association 16(1):1­44.

C. Gollier & R. Zeckhauser (2005). `Aggregation of Heterogeneous Time Preferences'.
  Journal of Political Economy 113(4):878­896.

G. Heal (2017). `The economics of the climate'. Journal of Economic Literature 55(3):1046­
  1063.

G. M. Heal & A. Millner (2014). `Agreeing to disagree on climate policy'. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences 111(10):3695­3698.

T. Iverson & L. Karp (2018). `Carbon taxes and climate commitment with non-constant
  time preference'. Working paper, https: // www. dropbox. com/ s/ hukvzenu50fmis6/
  IversonKarp_ July2018. pdf? dl= 0 .

T. H. Johnsen & J. B. Donaldson (1985). `The Structure of Intertemporal Preferences
  under Uncertainty and Time Consistent Plans'. Econometrica 53(6):1451­1458.

K. L. Judd (1998). Numerical Methods in Economics. The MIT Press.

L. Karp (2005). `Global warming and hyperbolic discounting'. Journal of Public Economics
  89(2­3):261­282.



                                           19
L. Karp (2017). `Provision of a Public Good with Multiple Dynasties'. The Economic
  Journal .

H. D. Matthews, et al. (2009). `The proportionality of global warming to cumulative carbon
  emissions'. Nature 459:829­832.

A. Millner (2019). `Non-dogmatic Social Discounting'. American Economic Review (forth-
  coming) .

A. Millner & G. Heal (2018). `Discounting by committee'. Journal of Public Economics
  167:91­104.

W. Nordhaus & J. Boyer (2000). Warming the World: Economic Models of Climate
 Change. MITPress, Cambridge, MA, USA.

W. D. Nordhaus (2007). `A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
 Change'. Journal of Economic Literature 45(3):686­702.

W. D. Nordhaus (2017). `Revisiting the social cost of carbon'. Proceedings of the National
 Academy of Sciences 114(7):1518­1523.

D. Ray (1987). `Nonpaternalistic intergenerational altruism'. Journal of Economic Theory
  41(1):112­132.

K. L. Ricke & K. Caldeira (2014). `Maximum warming occurs about one decade after a
  carbon dioxide emission'. Environmental Research Letters 9(12):124002.

M. Saez-Marti & J. W. Weibull (2005). `Discounting and altruism to future decision-
 makers'. Journal of Economic Theory 122(2):254­266.

S. H. Schneider & S. L. Thompson (1981). `Atmospheric CO2 and climate: Importance of
   the transiet response'. Journal of Geophysical Research Oceans 86(C4):3135­3147.

N. Stern (2008). `The Economics of Climate Change'. American Economic Review 98(2):1­
  37.

M. L. Weitzman (2007). `A Review of The Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
 Change'. Journal of Economic Literature 45(3):703­724.




                                           20
Appendix

A      Details of the numerical solution
We solve the model using numerical stochastic dynamic programming. The model's time
step is 10 years, the initial model year is 2015, and and the terminal period is taken to be
T = 50, corresponding to the year 2515, at which point the economy comes to an end.12
The final period value function for each type i is given by the utility of consuming all
output plus any remaining undepreciated capital. By approximating the value functions
at any t  T , we can solve the problem for each type at time t - 1. We iterate until t = 0.
     Value functions are approximated by Chebyshev collocation. That is, we choose a de-
gree of approximation (NK , NCO2 ) and approximate each value function V i,t by V     ~ i,t (K, CO2 ) 
   NK -1    N CO2 - 1  i,t                        i,t
   j =0     k=0       zjk  j (K )k (CO2 ), where zjk  is the set of NK NCO2 coefficients for type i
at time t, and j (·) is the Chebyshev polynomial of degree j . The value function is ap-
proximated in [K, K ] × [CO2 , CO2 ] (with the state intervals normalised to [-1, 1] for the
Chebyshev approximation itself). We compute the set of Chebyshev nodes in this region,
solve the optimisation problem of type i at time t at each node, and choose the coefficients
such that the approximation holds exactly at these nodes (Judd, 1998).
     We choose NK = 24, NCO2 = 10. The problem is set up in Julia, using JuMP and the
solver IPOPT. We use tight tolerances and verify that the relative errors in the Bellman
equation are small (typically of the order of 10-4 ), despite the existence of a kink where
the abatement rate reaches unity (the maximal degree of abatement). The algorithm is
stable as long at the state space region is chosen large enough.
     After solving for the value functions, simulation of time paths (given an initial state)
is straightforward: given a realisation of the type sequence, the optimal decision can be
calculated for each t. Social costs of carbon are calculated using the formula (10), given
our approximations for the value functions.




  12
     We could use an alternative terminal condition, for example that the economy is forced to reach a
steady state at this point. Given the DICE assumptions about TFP growth, and conservatively using the
preference parameter combination mini i , mini i , the effects due to the choice of terminal condition are
small.


                                                   21
