                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FOOD, FUEL AND THE DOMESDAY ECONOMY

                                       Juan Moreno-Cruz
                                        M. Scott Taylor

                                      Working Paper 27414
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27414


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




Support for this research (Taylor) was provided by the Social Science and Humanities Research
Council of Canada and (Taylor and Moreno-Cruz) the Canada Research Chairs program. We
would like to thank, without implicating, conference participants at the New Malthusian
conference held in Cambridge UK in December 2018 for very helpful comments. Excellent
research assistance was provided by Fruzsi Mayer and Zahra Espanani. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Juan Moreno-Cruz and M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Food, Fuel and the Domesday Economy
Juan Moreno-Cruz and M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 27414
June 2020
JEL No. Q4,R12

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper develops a theory where access to food and fuel energy is critical to the location,
number, and size of human settlements. By combining our theory with a simple Malthusian
mechanism, we generate predictions for the distribution of economic activity and population
across geographic space. We evaluate the model using data drawn from the very first census
undertaken in the English language - the Domesday census - commissioned by William the
Conqueror in 1086 A.D. Using G.I.S. data and techniques we find strong evidence that
Malthusian forces determined the population size and the number of settlements in Domesday
England.


Juan Moreno-Cruz
University of Waterloo
School of Environment, Enterprise and Development
juan.moreno-cruz@uwaterloo.ca

M. Scott Taylor
Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
The University of Calgary
2500 University Drive, N.W.
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and NBER
m.scott.taylor1@gmail.com
1         Introduction

This paper is an attempt to bring formal theory to bear in explaining the number, population
size, and distribution of settlements across a spatially explicit geographic landscape. Our
attempt is unusual because we study the economic landscape of Medieval England using data
drawn from the very first census recorded in the English language. This data is summarized
in the so-called - Domesday book - commissioned by William the Conqueror in 1086 A.D..
        Any attempt to understand the location of production must decide which geographic
features will take center stage, and which will play no role at all. We have chosen to
focus on a location's access to abundant, high density, energy that is embodied in our
agrarian economy's production of food and fuel. Agents reap energy from the surrounding
environment and transport it to the economy's core, or settlement, for use. Food and fuel
production determines a settlement's income, and via a Malthusian mechanism governing
births and deaths, its steady state population size.1 We then aggregate settlements across
larger geographic units, called landscapes, and show how their specific geographies determine
transport costs, settlement density, and overall population levels.
        To evaluate our theory we need data from a time and place where local energy produc-
tion was critical to both economic activity and human survival. This necessitates a move
backwards in time. Economies in the distant past were simpler, far less integrated into
larger regions, and therefore more reliant on single factors of production such as energy.
As a result, the local abundance and productivity of land determined, to a large extent,
incomes. Incomes in turn affected both birth and death processes, and hence populations.
This Domesday England of 1086.
        We proceed in three steps. First, we develop a theory of a single isolated settlement. Our
theory provides an explicit link between food and fuel productivities and transport costs, to
    1
    There is an ongoing debate over when the Malthusian period ended, how it ended, and how sharply
England transitioned to a new demographic model (See for example, Nicolini (2007) for a cogent discussion).
Clark (2008b) provides a robust defense of his well known Malthusian view of population history contained
in Clark (2008a).



                                                    2
predictions for settlement population sizes, the share of land devoted to food production,
and the overall area of land exploited by a settlement.
       Second, we embed our model of a single settlement into a larger geographic space con-
taining many such settlements. We refer to this space as a landscape. It is a geographic area
populated by agents who share a set of common model primitives (tastes, technologies) and
face a common physical environment defined by its geographic features (pre-existing Roman
roads, rivers, impassible mountains and coastlines) which determine the costs of energy col-
lection and transport. We define four types of landscapes: simple, connected, coastal and
edge. Surprisingly, our theory's predictions vary in an entirely intuitive manner across them.
       Finally, we move to empirical work. We treat each manor recorded in the Domesday book
as a settlement.2 We locate this manor within its parish, which in turn is contained within an
ancient administrative unit called a Hundred. We then aggregate across settlement income
and population data using parish area weights to obtain the average income and population
of settlements in a given Hundred.3 The data we employ provides observations on 875
hundreds contained in 34 of England's 39 ancient counties.
       Domesday records provide us with measures of settlement income, the abundance of
arable land, and populations. None of this data is perfect: our measure of arable land relies
on an assumed constancy between arable land and livestock kept to plough fields; incomes
are assumed to be proportional to the value of assets; and populations are estimates provided
by the researchers who digitized the Domesday book. We use present day G.I.S. data and
methods to generate a proxy for transport costs, to develop environmental controls, and
to place Hundreds within landscapes based on G.I.S. obtained geographic descriptors. A
   2
     J. McDonald and G.D. Snooks were the first to examine the statistical properties of entries in the
Domesday book arguing, against conventional wisdom, that they contained much useful information about
the organization of production, efficiency, and tax incidence. See for example, McDonald and Snooks (1985a),
McDonald (2005), and McDonald and Snooks (1985b). None of this earlier work considers the same issues
as those pursued here.
   3
     The Domesday book contains data on several measures that, in theory, we could use to infer the geo-
graphic size of a settlement. This proved impossible because the units were inconsistent, ancient, and often
unknown. Our attempts often produced counterfactual conclusions (for example, calculated land in a hun-
dred was greater than actual land). Since the majority of parishes contain only a very few settlements, we
employ parish area weights to capture the relative size of settlements, rather than rely on simple averages.


                                                     3
further challenge is that our data is a single cross-section recorded in 1086. This requires an
interpretation of the data as observations at or near the Malthusian steady state.
    Despite these challenges we find very strong evidence of Malthus at work in Domesday
England. We divide Malthusian forces into their implications on two different margins.
    On the intensive margin, they are reflected in the response of settlement populations
to income gains. Empirically, we find a doubling of settlement income raises settlement
population by over 80%. Alternatively, holding aggregate income constant, but doubling the
abundance of arable land, raises settlement populations by over 25%. This is strong evidence
of Malthus operating on the intensive margin.
    On the extensive margin Malthusian forces are reflected in the response of settlement
numbers and overall populations to increases in the useful land of a Hundred. We find a
doubling of Hundred area raises settlement numbers by about 80%, while doubling Hundred
populations. This is strong evidence of Malthus operating on the extensive margin. More
land creates more settlements, greater population, but leaves constant population density.
    Our model also has several, quite specific, predictions for the organization of economic
production across space. For example, it predicts settlement density falls with some forms of
income gains and rises with others. Surprisingly, we find just that. A doubling of income that
leaves the composition of output constant, expands the geographic size of settlements, and
settlement density falls. Empirically, we find it falls, via this channel, by 30%. Conversely,
an increase in the abundance of arable land, shifts specialization patterns towards food
production. Settlements are smaller and hence density rises. We find a doubling of the
abundance of arable land raises settlement density by approximately 80%.
    Our results add to the growing body of evidence supporting a Malthusian view of world
history.4 See for example the book length treatment of Gregory Clark (Clark (2008b)) and
the many contributions by Oded Galor and co-authors (Galor and Weil (2000), Galor and
   4
     There are of course Neo-Malthusians who contend that Malthusian forces are still at play today. Brander
and Dowrick (1994) for example, find evidence that high fertility leads to investment dilution effects and
lowers subsequent economic growth in contemporary data.



                                                     4
Moav (2002) and Ashraf and Galor (2011) for example). There are two common approaches
to the empirical study of Malthusian forces. One approach focuses on the steady state
relationships. The goal is, for example, to show a strong relationship between technological
progress and populations, but none between progress and individual incomes (See Ashraf
and Galor (2011) for a excellent example). Another approach is to study the underlying
mechanisms at play in moving an economy towards its Malthusian steady state. In this
approach, the goal is to estimate the strength of the preventative or positive checks put
forward by Malthus. This is, for example, commonly used with time-series, (Nicolini (2007)
and Møller and Sharp (2014)), or panel data, (Lagerl¨
                                                    of (2015)) methods.
      Other related work comes from authors who have drawn a connection between the avail-
ability of energy resources and resulting populations. For food energy we have recent work by
Nunn and Qian (2011), Chen and Kung (2016) and Cherniwchan and Moreno-Cruz (2019).
For fuel energy there is a longer tradition. Recent important contributions are Allen (2009),
Fouquet (2008), and Wrigley (2010) . In Moreno-Cruz and Taylor (2017) we developed the
"Only Energy Model" and constructed a market economy where energy transforming inter-
mediate goods created a motive for agglomeration leading to income and population growth.
Here we extend the "Only Energy Model" to multiple energy sources, expand our predictions
from single cores to landscapes, and develop an empirical method for evaluation.5
      The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In the section 2 we develop our simple model
of the Food and Fuel economy, and prove four propositions linking variation in food and fuel
productivities to variation in settlement populations, their geographic size, and the division
of land across activities. Section 3 shows how we aggregate across individual settlements
to obtain predictions at the landscape level. We also present the three equations guiding
our empirical work. In section 4 we present, describe and interpret our empirical results.
A short conclusion ends the paper. A lengthy appendix contains intermediate calculations,
some proofs, and a full description of our data and empirical methods.
  5
      We thank Oded Galor for suggesting we develop a food and fuel extension to the Only Energy Model.



                                                    5
2     Food and Fuel

There are two renewable energy resources producing harvests we call Food and Fuel. We
abstract from optimal cropping decisions and assume storage is not possible. This allows
us to focus on the relationship between energy availability and populations in steady state.
This seems appropriate given our dataset is a single cross-section drawn from the 11th
century. We assume consumption and production activities are located at a point in two
dimensional space which we call the core, while resources supplying the core are distributed
in the surrounding space. We treat cores and settlements as synonymous, because every core
will be represented by a settlement drawn from the Domesday Book.


2.1    The Demand for Energy

Agents have a conventional quasi-concave and linearly homogeneous utility function defined
over the service flow provided by food and fuel energy. By choosing service units appropri-
ately we represent utility as:
                                         u " upWo, We q                                    (1)

where Wo is food energy and We is fuel energy.            Agents maximize (1) subject to their
income.    Given linear homogeneity, the distribution of income is irrelevant to aggregate
demands; hence the (aggregate) relative demand for food vs. fuel, can be written as a simple
function of their relative price. Choosing fuel as the numeraire, we have:


                                   D                          1
                                 pWo {WeD q " Qppq          Q 0                            (2)

    where p " p0 {pe , and D indicates a quantity demanded at those prices.




                                               6
2.2       The Supply of Energy

The supply of energy depends on two choices potential suppliers make.                  First, they must
determine whether they can profitably deliver the harvest from either energy resource to the
core.     Second, if they can make a profitable delivery of either food or fuel, which energy
resource should they cultivate and hence supply?
       Consider the profitability question first. For either energy resource it is simple to calcu-
late the distance at which transport to the core becomes prohibitive. We distinguish energy
sources by their (power) density or spatial productivity, , and let c be the unit energy
cost of transport. Power density measures productivity per unit area, measured in energy
provided, over a given unit of time.6
       Then the net supply obtained from an energy resource with density , delivered to the
core at distance R, is simply:
                                          dp, Rq "  ´ cR                                               (3)

       Marginal energy resources provide no supply: dp, Rq " 0 and are located at distance
R " {c. The more productive (dense) the energy resource (think dung, then wood, then
coal) the further we are willing to go for it; likewise, the lower are transport costs (think
overland, over road, and then on water) the lengthier the distance we willingly transport
energy. If our two energy resources - food and fuel - have productivities denoted by o
and e then their corresponding marginal energy resources would be located at distances
Ro " o {c and Re " e {c from our core.
   6
    Power density is measured in Watts per meter squared [W/m2 ]. An example might be helpful to fix ideas.
Suppose a forest covering 100 m2 generates a sustainable harvest of 10 kg of firewood per year. Firewood
contains 15 MJ per kg; and there are 31,536 x 103 seconds in a year. Then this forest provides 4.75 W/m2
on average for the year. This is its power density or productivity. A similar calculation for staple crops
generates their power density. We assume the Watts produced by food and fuel are imperfect substitutes
and both are essential for human survival.




                                                    7
2.3       The Composition of Output

 To determine which resource to cultivate, agents compare their returns. The return to
producing food is equal to its price times the quantity supplied to the core. This return
varies with R and using (3), is pdpo , Rq. This is simply the value of its energy rents. The
value of producing fuel is similarly dpe , Rq if we recall that fuel is our numeraire. Without
loss of generality we assume the power density of fuel exceeds that of food e  o . This
immediately implies Re  Ro .7 We will adopt this assumption at present, but nothing
important hinges on it. A comparison of energy rent schedules is shown in Figure 1 below.




                                   #
                     EnergyRents




                                   $
                                        




                                                    #                  $
                                            Distancefromthecore,r


                                       Figure 1: Energy Rent Schedules


       Profit maximizing agents choose options from the upper envelope of the two rent sched-
ules. At short distances, food provides a greater return. We can solve for the distance r°
where agents are indifferent between producing food or fuel. At point a, energy rents (per
   7
    If transport costs differed across energy types, we could assume the ratio of fuel density to its transport
costs exceed that of food and proceed. The key condition emanating from equal transport costs is ppo {e q 
1 and this will necessarily be true in equilibrium. With unequal transport costs a similar condition will obtain
to ensure both goods are produced.




                                                        8
m2 land) are identical, and this implies: p ro ´ cr° s " re ´ cr° s. Solving we find:

                                                   ´   ´ ¯¯
                                                        e
                                                 Ro p ´  o
                                        r° "                                                                           (4)
                                                            pp ´ 1q

   For any given relative price, food supply is found by adding up along a ray to r° , and
then sweeping this ray around the 2 radians of our exploitation zone. This produces:

                                                                     ~             ¸2 ~                       ¸
                    2  r°                                                      e                    e
                                               3                         p´    o             2 pp ´ o q
             S
            Wo "             v po ´ cv q dvd " 2 o                                        1´                           (5)
                     0   0                     c                         p´1                 3 pp ´ 1q

   Over r°  r  Re fuel is supplied, and its supply can be written:
                                                        ¨            ~              ¸2 ~                           ¸
                                                                         p                             
             2  Re
                                                 3                         o
                                                                               ´1                 2 pp o    ´ 1q
    WeS "            v pe ´ cv q dvd "             e    1 ´               e
                                                                                           1´           e          ,   (6)
            0   r°                              c2      3                 p´1                     3 pp ´ 1q


   It is useful to construct the relative supply of food energy to fuel energy as:

                                                        ^       e
                                                                     2 ^                 e
                                                                                               
                                                             p´                    2 pp´ o q
                                    ^       3                 p´1
                                                                 o
                                                                           1´      3 pp´1q
                     S                  o
                   pWo {WeS q   "               ~                                                   ¸                  (7)
                                        e                   ^
                                                                p o ´1
                                                                         2 ^
                                                                                         pp o ´1q
                                                    1            e                   2      e
                                                    3
                                                        ´        p´1
                                                                               1´    3    pp´1q




Consider the properties of (7). For any relative price p  e {o there is zero supply of
food because it is not in any agent's interest to supply it. In terms of Figure 1 the fuel rent
schedule would lie above the food schedule at all distances. For prices above p " e {o
food supply is positive and its relative supply is increasing in p. This is true because as p
rises the food rent schedule pivots upwards and hence, r° is an increasing function of p. As
p rises and approaches plus infinity we can use (4) to show that r° approaches Ro . Therefore
as prices become very high, the relative supply curve becomes infinitely inelastic.




                                                            9
2.4       The General Equilibrium

 It is apparent that as long as food and fuel are both essential in consumption there will
be one, and only one, intersection of relative demand and supply. The equilibrium relative
energy price p is therefore unique and can be found by equating relative demands and
supplies; that is:
                                         D
                                       pWo {WeD q " pWo
                                                      S
                                                        {WeS q                                         (8)

       The general equilibrium generates a distribution of activity surrounding our core very sim-
ilar to that of Von Thunen (See Th¨
                                  unen (1826)) - with one important distinction. Whereas
Von Thunen assumed linear transport costs to limit city size, our linear transport cost c
follows from the simple mechanics of friction, mass and work.8 In this sense, we provide a
theoretical and physics-based underpinning for Von Thunen's assumed linear costs.9


2.4.1      The National Income Function

Our Malthusian formulation requires us to study the determinants of real personal income
quite closely. A useful step recognizes that using the equilibrium p from (8) we can compute
aggregate income. This is the value of energy rents produced at the general equilibrium, or:


                             I pp, 1, o , e q " pWo ` We
                                                      ~                 ¸
                                                              o       3
                                                 3  e
                                                          p p  e
                                                                 ´ 1 q
                                              "        1`                                              (9)
                                                 3c2        pp ´ 1q2


       Since r° reflects optimizing behaviour of price-taking agents, (9) represents a maximized
GNP or national income function. It is homogeneous of degree one in all prices, and the
partial derivatives with respect to prices equal optimal supplies. The partial derivative with
   8
    See our appendix, section B.1 for a demonstration.
   9
    It is a common misperception that Samuelson's iceberg transport costs are the same as those of Von
Thunen. A very close read of Samuelson (1983) will reveal that settlement size is not determined by Samuel-
son's iceberg transport costs, but instead by an additional assumption imposed that limits the minimum
density of labor to land employed. See our appendix, section B.2




                                                    10
respect to a productivity measure equals its positive marginal return. Consequently:

                   dI   BI    s    dI    BI         dI    BI
                      "    " Wo ,     "      0 and     "     0
                   dp   Bp        de    B e        do    B o

2.4.2   Malthus

In the simplest Malthusian set up, a population's birth rate is simply linear in a measure of
average well being. Typically this measure of well being is taken to be average per capita
real income. We follow that convention and write the birth rate (per unit time) as simply:
births " b " b0 ` b1 rY {Ls. Similarly, the death rate is: deaths " d " d0 ´ d1 rY {Ls where
real per capita income equals Y {L and L represents population size.
   Population growth is equal to births minus deaths, but both forces reflect deeper de-
terminants.   First, there are the autonomous rates of births and deaths which determine
whether population growth is positive or negative at the lower bound of well being (zero).
These are the intercepts in the relations above. It is always assumed population growth is
negative at very low levels of well being (d0  b0 q. Second, there is a marginal response to
changes in real income. These are the famous positive and preventative checks discussed by
Malthus. These marginal responses arise from changes in fertility (preventative) and changes
in mortality (positive) and they are captured by the slope coefficients in the relations above.
   Setting births equal to deaths allows us to solve for the steady state relationship between
real income per person and population size, finding:

                                                       d1 ` b1
                            L " M ¨ Y where M "                0                           (10)
                                                       d0 ´ b0

   M represents the Malthusian forces translating real income gains into resulting population
sizes. Since Y {L " 1{M , for given Y , the stronger are the Malthusian forces the larger is
the resulting steady state population and the lower is per capita income in the core.
   Substituting for real income Y we can now obtain a solution linking characteristics of



                                              11
energy sources, Malthusian forces, and details of our general equilibrium economy to the
resulting steady state population. This is given by:


                  L"M ¨Y "M ¨S¨V ¨B                                                       (11)
                               ~                ¸
                                       o      3
                      3            p p   ´ 1 q
                  S"    e
                          , V " 1 ` e             , and B " 1{ ppq                        (12)
                     3c2             pp ´ 1q2

S represents the scale of national income. It is equal to the value of fuel energy that would
be available to the core if only fuel was produced. But of course more than fuel is produced,
and V reflects how the value of national output is enhanced by the economy producing food
as well. Therefore, V is a multiplier. It is greater than one because food is only produced
when its value (in terms of fuel) exceeds that of fuel itself. Finally, B takes national income
measured in terms of fuel and asks how many consumption baskets of food and fuel it could
buy. B equals the number of baskets you can buy with income equal to one unit of fuel. As
p rises, food becomes more expensive and B falls.
   Combining our results, several Propositions now follow.

Proposition 1 An increase in transport costs, c, leaves relative prices unchanged, but lowers
the population size for any settlement. The exploitation zone for any settlement falls.

   An increase in transport costs hits each energy source equally and their relative supply is
unaffected (see (7)). Relative demand is unaffected: hence prices do not change. Real income
however falls (see (9)) and so too do population sizes. Every settlement's exploitation zone
becomes geographically smaller (both horizontal intercepts in Figure 1 shift in). Conversely,
settlements blessed with better transportation options (think roads, navigable rivers, or
coastal locations) should be more populous. The mechanism is of course Malthusian: lower
transport costs raise real income per capita, and these potential gains are then dissipated by
population growth. In the end, settlements with better transport options are geographically
larger but agents are not any richer.
   A similar result follows when real income instead grows from a change in productivities.

                                              12
Proposition 2 An equiproportionate increase in food and fuel productivities po , e q leaves
relative prices unchanged, but raises the population size of any settlement. The exploitation
zone for any settlement grows.

   This neutral change in productivities raises energy supplies equally. Real income per
capita would rise, but is instead dissipated by population growth. In terms of Figure 1,
the rent schedules shift out uniformly raising r° in direct proportion to Re . Settlements are
bigger geographically, and in terms of population, but no richer on average.
   It is less clear what happens to populations and exploitation zones when the produc-
tivity of only one energy source changes. This case requires further analysis because the
composition of economic activities changes and this alters relative prices, real incomes etc.
Nevertheless, there is a certain answer:

Proposition 3 Settlement population sizes respond positively to increases in the productivity
of fuel or food resources. An increase in the productivity of food leaves the size of exploitation
zones unaffected; an increase in the productivity of fuel increases the size of exploitation
zones.

   Consider the impact on a settlement's real income and hence its population. Recall real
income Y is I { ppq. We can differentiate Y " I pp, 1, o , e q{ ppq with respect to o to
find:                                ´                                  ¯
                             dY        rIp ddp
                                            o
                                               ` I o s ´  1
                                                            p p q  dp
                                                                  do
                                                                      I
                                "
                             do                       2

where subscripts on I refer to partial derivatives.         The envelope theorem tells us that Ip
equals the supply of food since I is a maximum value function; similarly, since Y is an
                                                           1 ppqI
indirect utility function, Roy's identity tells us that     2
                                                                    equals the demand for food energy.
Therefore the two terms multiplied by the price response cancel leaving us with a simple
expression given by dY {do " Io {  0. Similarly, dY {de " Ie {  0.
   Real income again rises. In terms of Figure 1, the food rent schedule shifts out with the
productivity improvement and then inwards as food's relative price falls. r° may rise or fall

                                                 13
depending on the elasticity of demand, but since r° is set optimally, and ours is a competitive
economy, real income must rise. Our Malthusian mechanism then translates these aggregate
settlement wide real income gains into more populous settlements. For marginal changes, fuel
will continue to determine the size of the exploitation zones and hence they are unaffected.
A similar change in the productivity of fuel, raises real incomes, populations, but in this case
increases the size of exploitation zones.10 Finally, one last result we find useful is that:


Proposition 4 The fraction of the exploitation zone taken up by food production is solely
determined by the relative productivity of food to fuel.


       This is easy to prove by dividing the definition of r° by Re to find this ratio is only a
function of relative productivities and relative prices. One implication is that the neutral
changes in productivities discussed in Proposition 2, not only raise incomes and exploitation
zones but leave the fraction of land employed in food unchanged. It appears to suggest,
from Proposition 2, that an increase in the productivity of food will raise incomes, while
increasing the share of land dedicated to food. Similarly, an increase in the productivity of
fuel should lower the fraction of land dedicated to food. These last two statements however
are only necessarily true when demands are sufficiently elastic. When the productivity of
food rises, its supply rises and its relative price must fall to clear the market. With elastic
demand, the needed change in relative prices is small and r° rises. Land dedicated to food
production rises. While individual agricultural commodities (and individual fuel types) often
have inelastic demands, we have aggregated across all possible commodity and fuel types to
obtain our aggregates. Therefore, an elastic demand for our aggregates seems appropriate,
and we take this as given for the remainder of the paper.
  10
    These results extend naturally to the addition of any new food or fuel type that competes for land with
existing energy resources. If this new resource provides fuel or food energy more cheaply, a new r° will
emerge, real income rises, and so too will the settlement population. If the new resources are not perfect
substitutes for the existing fuel or food resources, then the equilibrium will have several r° switching points,
but the argument remains the same.




                                                      14
3     From Core to Landscape Predictions

Thus far we have modelled only isolated settlements.      The world however is composed of
many concentrations of population and economic activity, and almost all statistical reporting
units - provinces, prefectures, or states - include multiple settlements of various sizes and
shapes.   In order to facilitate empirical work we extend our theory to larger geographic
units we call landscapes. We think of political units such as countries, provinces, counties,
or shires as composed of landscapes that differ in terms of their geography and productivity;
and the number and size of these landscapes would, inter alia, determine the overall spatial
structure of the aggregate economy.
    Landscapes are defined by two attributes: 1) a set of common model primitives; and
2), a description of its geography. We assume any settlement located within landscape
j , is populated by agents whose actions are governed by the set of common primitives
tcj , Mj , j   j
           o , e u. This ensures that all settlements within a given landscape are identical in

terms of geographic size, population numbers, and of course, real income.
    A landscape is also characterized by its physical geography: its physical size Aj and
those features of its geography that determine transport costs through Aj . These features are
access to the network of (pre-existing Roman) roads, rivers, mountain ranges, and coastlines.
We define four geographies and refer to them as the simple, connected, coastal and edge
geographies. The spatial organization of settlements within each geography is shown in
Figure 2. This spatial organization reflects two additional assumptions we have made. First,
we have assumed the area of a landscape is "full", in the sense that no free area large
enough to support a settlement is left empty. This assumption is akin to ignoring an integer
constraint, since free entry of settlements is assumed to perfectly exhaust useful land. Since
Aj is useful productive land, this assumption does not rule out locations where very low
productivity land supports few, if any, people.
    Second, we assume the exploitation zones of settlements cannot intersect. This reflects
a deeper assumption we make regarding settlement size. Our theory assumes settlement

                                              15
size is the maximum possible limited only by energy constraints; specifically, the zero rent
margin for fuel. As such, it rules out other possible limiting factors. For example, the
exploitation zone for any settlement may be limited by the ability of its residents to defend
its resources; it may be limited by the ability of manor managers to monitor serfs working
on demense lands; or it may have been limited by political considerations and power sharing
arrangements within the feudal system. Choosing the zero rent margin as the determinant
of size, also implicitly assumes smaller settlements are inferior to larger ones.
   In Moreno-Cruz and Taylor (2017), we addressed these settlement size issues by develop-
ing a similar model where energy products were slightly differentiated. In that setting, agents
could remain isolated or join a settlement where there was a greater variety of lower cost
products. A "love for variety" across products ensured agents wanted to live in the largest
settlement possible, but in low productivity environments agents remained dispersed. Our
setting here is, in many ways, representative of a special case of this model, where pro-
ductivities in useful land are high enough to induce agglomeration into settlements, but
differentiation within energy products approaches zero. Introducing differentiation across
types of food and fuel harvests is possible, but would complicate and lengthen our analysis
considerably.
   With these provisos in mind, consider the top left panel of Figure 2, where we depict a
simple landscape. In a simple landscape, transport in all directions is possible and equally
costly. The uniform two dimensional space we employed in the theory fits this definition
precisely.
   A connected landscape is one where transport in all directions is possible but transport
is less costly along an existing (North-South, East-West grid) road network cutting through
the settlements.   As a result of these low cost transport corridors, the exploitation zones
appear as those shown in the right uppermost panel.
   The third landscape is a coastal landscape where there is a low cost transportation
option along one border perhaps provided by an ocean or lake. The coast provides cheap


                                              16
                                (a) Simple                   (b) Connected




                                (c) Coastal                     (d) Edge

                                        Figure 2: Geographies

transportation for resources further up or downstream from the core as shown. Finally an
edge landscape is shown in the last panel. An edge landscape is one where expansion of the
exploitation zone in at least one direction (the edge) is not possible. Edge landscapes are
ones where a mountain range, a desert, or a political boundary limits potentially profitable
expansion along one edge of the landscape boundary.
      It is natural to think that settlements within a landscape featuring good transport op-
tions (say roads, rivers or a coastline) may engage in local (within landscape) or regional
(across landscape) trade. Settlements on coastlines may even engage in international trade.
These trading opportunities, would, in turn, provide real income gains affecting population
numbers. It is beyond the scope of our theory to model all of these possibilities since they
rely on the joint distribution of geographic features and potential differences in primitives
across landscapes.11 Nevertheless, in our empirical work we can allow for these complications
 11
      This might be possible in a quantitative setting, but the relevant data remain very scarce. For an


                                                   17
quite readily. Our first step in doing so is to extend our theory's predictions to the landscape
level. We provide this extension for simple landscapes in the text, and leave the remaining
lengthier extensions for other landscapes to our appendix.


3.1     Simple Landscapes

Consider a single core at location i placed within a simple landscape j that has useful
area Aj . Within this simple landscape consider what our theory says about the number of
settlements, their average size and the landscape's population in a Malthusian steady state.
We start with settlement numbers. The extensive margin for any settlement in landscape j
is: Rej " j
          e {cj because fuel represents the extensive margin of exploitation.

   Since exploitation zones are circular they have an area proportional to the square of Rej ,
and therefore a simple landscape that has useful land of size Aj can support at most Nj
(non-intersecting) exploitation zones where Nj is given by:

                                                   Aj
                                          Nj "                                               (13)
                                                  rj
                                                   e {cj s
                                                           2



When the number of cores or settlements reaches Nj the landscape is full. While this predic-
tion for core numbers is interesting, its empirical verification is made difficult by the presence
of fuel's spatial productivity in equation (13). Our data however includes information about
both settlement population size and income. To exploit this information we note income at
any core location i in landscape j can be written as:

                                                            rj es
                                                                 3
                                    Iij pp, 1, o , e q "           Vj                        (14)
                                                             3c2
                                                               j



where we have purposely written out the determinants of scale S . Note Vj is solely a function
of relative productivities; i.e., the comparative advantage of landscape j in producing food
versus fuel. In contrast, the productivity of fuel scales income for a given composition of
excellent review of quantitative economic geography see Redding and Rossi-Hansberg (2017)


                                                  18
settlement output. We can now easily isolate the productivity of fuel to find:

                                                           1{3
                                             Iij 3c2
                                              ,,
                                                   j
                                       j
                                       e   "                                                (15)
                                             Vj 

Eliminating the productivity of fuel is very useful step towards our empirics, because a
measure of income is observable in our data, and we can develop controls for the determinants
of Vj (comparative advantage) and transport costs, cj . If we now substitute for j
                                                                                 e in (13)

we obtain our first prediction at the landscape level:

                                                        2{3 2{3
                                              Aj V j c j
                                       Nj "                 2{3
                                                                                            (16)
                                              p9 q1{3 Iij

Or more simply in log form:


                   log Nj " 0 ` 1 log Aj ` 2 log Vj ´ 3 log Iij ` 4 log cj                  (17)

                         0 " ´p1{3q log 9, 1 " 1, p2,3,4q " 2{3


   The (log) number of settlements in landscape j is equal to a location independent constant
plus log measures of its area, a measure of its local comparative advantage, the income of
a typical settlement, and transport costs. All gamma coefficients are positive, except the
constant 0 . Looking more closely, it is easy to see why the number of cores is proportional to
useful area if the landscape is truly full. It is also easy to see why settlement numbers rise if
transport costs are larger because exploitation zones are then smaller. It is a little harder to
understand how Iij and Vj affect settlement numbers. Consider two landscapes, and assume
one is uniformly more productive than the other. Uniform differences in productivity means
they share the same V 1 s. But in terms of Figure 1, the rent schedules of the more productive
landscape are shifted outwards and the geographic size of its exploitation zone is greater.
For a given area, fewer settlements should be observed and this is why settlement income
appears with a negative sign. Conversely, suppose settlement income was the same across


                                                   19
two landscapes, but one landscape was a more productive location for food. All else equal,
Vj is higher for this landscape, and to ensure average income across landscapes remained the
same, its productivity of fuel must be correspondingly lower. A lower productivity for fuel
in one landscape implies its settlements have smaller exploitation zones. For a given area,
this landscape would have more settlements. This is why Vj enters with a positive sign.
   Now consider how settlement population size varies across landscapes. We can easily
write the steady state population in any given core i, located in any given landscape j as:


                                          Lij " Mj Bj Iij                               (18)


Taking logs we obtain a prediction for settlement population i within landscape j :


                          log Lij " 1 log Mj ` 2 log Bj ` 3 log Iij                     (19)

                                1 " 2 " 3 " 1


   The (log) population in any settlement is determined by the strength of Malthusian
forces, the local cost of a consumption basket, and average income of settlements in j .
Holding income constant, as the cost of a consumption basket falls, B rises and so too does
the population. Therefore, we would expect measures of productivity in food production
to raise settlement population. Holding relative prices constant, increases in income raise
population levels one for one. Combining these two we see Malthus at work: any (incipient)
increase in settlement real income per person, is dissipated by a corresponding proportionate
increase in settlement population size.
   A different role for Malthus appears via Mj . Variation in Mj could arise from variation
across landscapes in the behavioral response of birth and deaths to changes in income. These
are Malthus's famous preventative and positive checks captured in the numerator of M in
(10). Since our landscapes will be relatively small geographic units, these differences may
be small or non-existent. The other source would be variation in the autonomous birth and

                                                20
death rates across landscapes. Any increase in the harshness of the natural environment
might be expected to raise the gap between these death and birth rates. This raises the
denominator of M in (10) lowering a settlement's population.
   Finally we can use our solution for settlement size and numbers to obtain a prediction
for aggregate landscape population. Combining, we find:

                                                        2{3 2{3 1{3
                                            Aj Mj Bj Vj cj Iij
                              Lj " Nj Lij "                                                (20)
                                                  p9 q1{3

Taking logs and introducing parameter coefficients, yields something more readable: :


     ln Lj " µ0 ` µ1 log Aj ` µ2 log Mj ` µ3 log Bj ` µ4 log Vj ` µ5 log cj ` µ6 log Iij   (21)

          µ0 " ´p1{3q logp9 q, µ1,2,3 " 1, µ4,5 " p2{3q, µ6 " p1{3q


   A landscape's (log) population is determined by (log) measures of the landscape's area,
the strength of Malthusian forces, two terms that reflect the landscape's comparative advan-
tage in food production, local transport costs and average income.
   The roles of Aj , Mj and Bj in determining landscape populations are identical to the
impacts they had on either settlement numbers or settlement population sizes. Similarly,
variation in Vj and cj only affect settlement numbers and their impacts follow from our
earlier discussion.
   One surprising finding is that while an increase in the (average) income of settlements in
a landscape raises landscape population, a doubling of income does not double population
sizes. This seems puzzling. To understand why, recall that to double income, holding both
Bj and Vj constant, requires this increase come from a equiproportionate increase in both
food and fuel productivities. This expands city size, and for given landscape area, it reduces
settlement numbers. Each settlement is doubly as populous, but there are fewer of them.
The net effect is a smaller increase in landscape population.



                                               21
4       Empirics

4.1       The Domesday Book

The Domesday census is the first recorded census in the English language and it contains
some of the most valuable information we have concerning the organization of medieval
economies. The census was ordered by William the Conqueror in the winter of 1085 and
was completed in a little under twenty months.               The purpose was to obtain information
on the resources and the financial wherewithal of the tenants he had conquered. The census
was a major undertaking.           To conduct it, the ancient counties were organized into seven
circuits and each circuit was assigned a commission charged with collecting and verifying the
information requested.12 Each team of commissioners sent a list of questions to land holders.
This information was then verified by personal testimony in the shire court in front of the
commissioners and local leaders. This quite detailed information was then sent to a central
clearing house believed to be the Exchequer at Winchester where it was transcribed, edited,
and summarized to make up the final volumes.
      While the census includes detail on many aspects of life at this time, some entries are
more important than others for our purposes. The book contains a description of various
manor resources such as fisheries, mills and pasture land, etc.; a measure of plough teams
is available; and estimates of the value of the manor at three points in time. In addition
the entries contain measures of the population at each location although this is incomplete.
The book does not enumerate individual persons, but does list heads of households divided
by class from which historians have produced population estimates.13 While we do not have
the census questions posed, most researchers accept the text of the Inquisitio Eliensis, an
account of the estates of the Abbey of Ely in the counties of Cambridge, Hertford, Essex,
Norfolk, Suffolk, and Huntingdon, presents the set of questions that fit the answers recorded
in the Domesday records. In particular it asks the name of the manor; who held it in the
 12
      Domesday contains entries from only 34 of the 39 ancient counties.
 13
      See McDonald and Snooks (1985b), page 363 for a full account of the resources listed.


                                                     22
time of King Edward, and who holds it now, how many hides (approx 120 acres) are there,
how many ploughs in demesne (how many oxen plough teams are there on the local lands
of the manor) and how many belonging to the men (extra teams for other land), how many
villeins, cottars, slaves, freemen and sokemen; how much woodland, meadow and pasture,
how many mills and fisheries; how much has been added to or taken from the estate, how
much the whole used to be worth, and how much it is worth now; and how much each
freeman or sokeman had or has there; if more can be got out of it than is obtained now; all
this three times over, with reference to the time of King Edward, and to the time when King
William gave the land, and to the present time. As is apparent, this is a fairly intrusive and
detailed accounting of the financial records of manors at the time. Since the records were
given verbally and sworn to in the shire-court with local nobility and the sherriff present it is
believed that the Domesday records are, to the best of our knowledge, reasonably accurate.
       The specific data used in this project was obtained from the History Data Service and
is the Electronic Edition of Domesday Book: Translation, Databases and Scholarly Com-
mentary, located at https://www.ukdataservice.ac.uk. The database is the latest version of
a long standing project to improve on the accuracy of both the Great and Little Domesday
Books. The translation is based on the printed edition of Domesday Book by Phillimore and
Co Ltd (39 volumes, 1975-92), as supplemented or amended by Domesday Explorer (2000),
also published by Phillimore (www.phillimore.co.uk).14


4.2       Matching Theory to Domesday records

4.2.1      The Unit of Analysis

Landscapes are a useful device for generating theoretical predictions, but most data is col-
lected over large politically defined geographic areas containing many or several landscapes.
Since heterogeneity is a problem for aggregation, we adopt the smallest possible political
  14
   For further information see the guide for the electronic resource also available at the same location under
SN:5694 - Electronic Edition of Domesday Book: Translation, Databases and Scholarly Commentary, 1086.



                                                     23
aggregate we can - English hundreds (or wapentakes in former Danelaw regions) which are
much smaller than traditional counties. There are for example only 39 ancient counties in
England, but almost 900 hundreds. But some hundreds are large geographic units (larger
than some counties) and they contain many manors and settlements that are quite hetero-
geneous. To partially remedy this, we exploit smaller sub-units of hundreds - parishes - in
calculating hundred average characteristics. We first assign any Domesday entry to a parish
from its location, and then use parish geographic size as a fraction of hundred size to create
weighted averages over parishes within the hundred. Specifically, for any variable xj tied to
                              Nj
hundred j , we calculate: xj " i" 1 xij ° rAij {Aj s where xij is the corresponding variable j

drawn from a location in parish i, Nj is the number of parishes in hundred j , and Aij {Aj is
the area of parish i divided by the area of hundred j .15 When xj is a continuous variable, it
is simply a parish-area weighted average. When xj is a categorical variable (i.e. a parish has
river access or not), then it represents the density of this characteristic within the hundred.
    While the Domesday book contains information on 894 hundreds, in moving to estimation
we make two adjustments to this potential sample. Since it is impossible to know whether
the lack of a Domesday record for a hundred reflects a true zero for population or a value that
is missing, we drop all hundreds for which there is no paired Domesday record. Similarly, we
drop all hundreds that report a zero value for resources in 1086. With these two exclusions
we are left with 875 observations at the hundred level. These 875 hundreds are in turn
comprised of 8, 103 parishes containing 18, 410 settlements.
  15
     We believe weighting by geographic size gives us a more accurate picture of hundred features, but there
are some drawbacks to this procedure created by geographic spillovers. For example, manors will undoubtedly
have lands and resources spread out over more than just the parish they are located within and parishes
without a located resource will appear poorer than in reality. These spillovers will however be accounted for
in neighboring parishes, which, in most cases, are also within the same hundred. Our choice of hundred as
the unit of analysis was guided by the availability of parish boundary data, a concern that moving to parishes
as the unit of analysis would create very large spillovers, while moving to counties would be aggregating over
areas that are far too heterogeneous.




                                                     24
4.2.2   Economic Determinants

Our model links settlement numbers, settlement population sizes, and overall hundred pop-
ulations to a relatively small number of economic forces determining transport costs, the
scale and composition of incomes, and a Malthusian birth/death process. Key to our empir-
ical work is our method for separating income into its scale and composition determinants.
Recall from Propositions 2 and 3 that income gains coming from neutral increases in produc-
tivity have different impacts than income gains coming from an increase in the productivity
of food alone. Both raise incomes, but one expands exploitation zones and one does not.
Proposition 4 also tells us that the share of land dedicated to food production is unaffected
in the first case, and should rise in the second (assuming demand is elastic).
   With these results in mind, we start by assuming income earned on a manor is pro-
portional to the value of its resources as recorded in the Domesday census. We use the
most-often-reported 1086 value as our measure of income, although we also exploit the ear-
lier 1066 value for some purposes (see below). This measure of income should be directly
connected to the productivities of both food and fuel production, as it is in our theory (9).
Average income, measured as described above, becomes our empirical measure of Iij .
   Also included in the Domesday survey is a measure of plough teams. Plough teams
are exactly that, teams of oxen (thought to be eight) used to plough lands for intensive
agriculture. Plough teams are a useful indicator of the composition of output, under two
assumptions: the area of agricultural land (devoted to food) is proportional to the number of
plough teams held to cultivate this land; and two, that our model's description of the division
of land into that dedicated to food and fuel is correct. Under these assumptions we can use
Proposition 4 to conclude that the number of plough teams per acre of land employed is
tied directly to the relative productivities of food versus fuel. It is also an accurate measure
of the fraction of land dedicated to food production (when demand is elastic). We exploit
this connection to create a variable we call the abundance of arable land. It is of course
a parish weighted average aggregated to the hundred level, and it captures, in theory, the


                                              25
fraction of land under the plough.16 In theory, this abundance measure would affect both the
composition of output Vj and the cost of the consumption basket Bj . We cannot separately
identify these effects, and arable land, measured as described above, becomes our empirical
measure of either or both Vj and Bj .
    Finally, since the population shares many cultural and religious practices we treat the
demographic portion of the model as common across all of English hundreds. While this
doesn't rule out the possibility that hundreds differ in fertility and mortality because the local
cost of a consumption basket differs, in addition we allow for the possibility that hundreds
may differ in fertility and mortality, if they differ significantly in the harshness of the local
climate. Variation in local climate is measured by average temperature and rainfall.


4.2.3    Transport costs, Geographic Descriptors and Interactions

To capture local differences in transport costs separate from those introduced by landscape
geographic descriptors we employ a measure of the land's ruggedness. Greater ruggedness
implies greater short term elevation changes over space, and hence higher transport costs.
To classify hundreds into different landscapes we proceed in two steps. First, we create a set
of categorical variables indicating the presence of roads, rivers, coastal or edge geographic
features. Specifically, we identify all parishes within 5 km of a coastline and treat them
as coastal; we find all parishes which are crossed by a major or minor Roman road and
treat them as road connected; parishes on a political border are edge; and similarly, all
parishes crossed by a major river are river connected. We then aggregate these categorical
variables over the number of parishes in a hundred, weighting by their geographic size, to
obtain a measure of the density of roads, rivers, or coastal access in that hundred. Since
many parishes may be coastal and have river access, and this interconnection may matter for
trade or commerce, we include a full set of interactions to allow for any non-linear network
  16
     An alternative would be to use Domesday entries for plough lands. Unfortunately, this is recorded in
disparate units and attempts at conversion to a common unit proved impossible. Plough teams in contrast
are thought to be a fairly standard reference to a team of 8 oxen, whose productivity should not vary greatly
geographically.


                                                     26
effects. Hundreds along the Welsh border are treated as edge, and we take simple landscapes
as the excluded category in our empirical work. County wide differences are also captured
via a set of county fixed effects. In doing so, our analysis is focused on the within county
but across hundred variation in populations, settlements and incomes. Our hope is that by
limiting our data's variation in this way we have retained sufficient variation to identify key
forces at play, while eliminating problems arising from what we expect are sometimes large
across county differences in unobservables. Finally, since the data was collected by common
methods within each circuit, and circuits are contiguous, we cluster errors at the circuit level.


4.2.4   Endogeneity

The predictions we derived for population sizes, settlement numbers, etc. are reduced form
expressions relating exogenous right hand side drivers to endogenous variables on the left.
Settlement income is for example a predetermined variable setting population sizes in (19).
This may be surprising, but in our theory, labour, and hence populations do not appear as a
factor of production. Energy rents are collected, they are not generated by production. This
assumption let us concentrate on transport costs, relative productivities, and our aggregation
to landscape predictions. It also let us side-step, by assumption, a major issue in the empirical
literature - the endogeneity of populations and incomes.
   In similar, but more complicated, formulations, labor would appear explicitly in the
national income function, and settlement density may affect individual settlement incomes.
In these cases, settlement income and populations would be determined simultaneously.
For the most part we will ignore this possibility and proceed with OLS estimation as if
our theory was literally true, but in our appendix we investigate further by developing an
instrument for income. Our instrument is provided in the Domesday survey - the previously
determined settlement values in the year 1066. These values are strongly related to the
subsequent 1086 values we employ, but are not be determined by the labor force employed




                                               27
twenty years hence.17 These earlier values are not available for every settlement, so our
sample size shrinks slightly but we retain over 700 hundreds in our dataset. In addition,
Domesday contains records for several "resources" that are clearly in elastic supply and
therefore potentially contaminated by population sizes.18 Arable land, in contrast, is largely
determined by geography. As a result, we ignore information on mills, fisheries, meadows
etc. Doing so will strengthen the case that our results are truly causal.
       To preempt slightly, instrumenting for income does not alter our OLS results in any
significant way. Coefficient estimates are slightly different, but significance levels are not.
Nothing of substance changes. It is for this reason that we feel comfortable with presenting
and discussing the OLS results that follow.


4.3       Malthus at the Intensive Margin: Settlement Size

In Table 1 we examine the determinants of settlement size. Settlement size is, in theory,
determined by a very small number of economic determinants as shown by (19): the aver-
age income of a settlement; the cost of a consumption basket; and Malthusian forces. In
other landscapes, geographic descriptors also come into play.19 Therefore, we divide the
explanatory variables into three groups: economic determinants; landscape descriptors; and
interaction effects. We start in column (1) with variables capturing the direct economic
forces, and then add landscape descriptors and their interactions in columns two and three.
       Recall that the abundance of arable land shifts a settlement's composition of output
towards food and lowers its relative price. This lowers the price index and real income rises.
Similarly, holding the composition of output constant, an increase in settlement income
raises real income. Across all columns we find a strong positive relationship between these
  17
     The rationale for the instrument is that the cross-sectional distribution of incomes in 1066 fully reveals
underlying technological differences across hundreds, if 1066 is itself a Malthusian steady state. See our
appendix for further details, the first stage results, and test for a weak instrument.
  18
     We would like to thank an anonymous referee for this observation.
  19
     We calculated equation (19) using the simple landscape. With different landscapes, the equation is
identical up to a constant function g pq which depends on geographic descriptors. The full derivation of
settlement size for alternative landscapes is in our Appendix A.3.2



                                                      28
determinants of real income and settlement population. In particular, a 100% increase in
settlement income raises populations by over 80%. This is strong evidence for Malthusian
forces at work on the intensive margin.

                                       Table 1: Settlement Size
                                       (1)                        (2)                        (3)
                                             a                          a
Income                                 0.817                      0.817                      0.820a
                                     (0.043)                    (0.039)                    (0.037)
Abund. Arable Land                     0.263b                     0.269b                     0.264b
                                     (0.092)                    (0.086)                    (0.083)
Precipitation                         -1.205                     -1.241c                    -1.252c
                                     (0.647)                    (0.628)                    (0.621)
Temperature                           0.110                      -0.187                     -0.231
                                     (0.577)                    (0.667)                    (0.631)
Coastal                                                           0.031                     0.002
                                                                (0.036)                    (0.043)
Rivers                                                            0.223                      0.312b
                                                                (0.143)                    (0.118)
Minor Roads                                                       0.027                      0.028
                                                                (0.161)                    (0.167)
Major Roads                                                      -0.093                     -0.119
                                                                (0.088)                    (0.111)
Border Wales                                                      0.291a                    0.289a
                                                                (0.069)                    (0.070)
Coastal and Rivers                                                                          -0.727a
                                                                                           (0.163)
Coastal and Minor Roads                                                                     0.670c
                                                                                           (0.320)
Coastal and Major Roads                                                                     0.682a
                                                                                           (0.155)
Rivers and Minor Roads                                                                      -0.522c
                                                                                           (0.250)
Rivers and Major Roads                                                                      -0.072
                                                                                           (0.157)
Constant                              8.444                      9.374                       9.548
                                     (5.345)                    (5.236)                    (5.171)
County                                  X                          X                           X
Observations                          875                        875                        875
Adjusted R2                           0.79                       0.79                       0.79
 Notes: All variables are log transformed using x   ~ " lnp1 ` xq. Errors clustered at the circuit level are
reported in round parentheses. a , b , and c denote significance at the 1 , 5 and 10


    Similarly, a doubling of the abundance of arable land raises populations a little less than
30%. Since we do not have information on the exact price index relevant at this time, nor
the price adjustment created by an abundance of arable land, it is not possible to relate this
magnitude directly to its impact on real income. Nevertheless, it indicates a very strong role

                                                    29
for the abundance of arable land in determining real income and hence populations in this
highly agrarian society.
   To account for potential differences in the strength of Malthusian forces tied to the
harshness of the climate, we have included both the average temperature and precipitation
of the hundred. It seems reasonable to assume that the behavioral responses captured in
the preventative and positive checks do not vary within counties. However, the harshness
of the climate could adversely affect the very young and very old. Given our specification,
our environmental variables capture only the within county and across hundred variation.
Although some counties are very large, many are relatively small and hence this variation is
undoubtedly small. Perhaps not surprisingly, of the environmental variables only precipita-
tion is significantly related to populations. We find, across all columns that settlement size
falls with rainfall even controlling for the composition and scale of income, temperature and
potential coastal location.
   In the last two columns we add landscape descriptors and their interactions. Column two
offers little in the way of evidence for a positive link between additional transport options
and populations. It does however show a strong influence of being on the border of Wales.
This may indicate settlement size also reflects trade or security motivations. Column three
is more useful, as it appears that the interaction of transport options is important albeit in
confusing ways. Coastal locations appear to raise settlement sizes, but this is mediated by
the joining interior transport option (roads or rivers).
   Overall the results are highly encouraging. Consonant with Propositions 2 and 3, we
find that real income gains, however created, drive large and highly significant increases in
population. For example, a uniform increase in productivities that doubled income, would
be almost completely dissipated by subsequent growth. This very strong intensive margin
effect tells us that Malthusian forces are alive and well in Domesday England. Adding in
controls for the harshness of the climate, and transport options has little if any effect on
these results suggesting their robustness. Finally, we find strong evidence that transport


                                              30
options have large impacts on settlement size although exactly how remains unclear.


4.4       Malthus at the Extensive Margin

We now examine the strength of Malthusian forces at the extensive margin. Recall that
settlements within landscapes have common productivity, abundance of arable land, and are
therefore of equal size. This implies any expansion of hundred geographic size should produce
more settlements, a greater population, but equal population density. This is, in essence,
our model's Malthusian prediction at the extensive margin. We start our investigation of
these extensive margin effects by examining the determinants of settlement density.


4.4.1      The Number of Settlements

In Table 2 we examine the determinants of settlement density by estimating different versions
of (17) over our 875 hundreds.20 We start in column (1) with variables capturing the direct
economic forces, and then add landscape descriptors and their interactions in columns two
and three respectively. The four key economic regressors are: the income of settlements in
the hundred (Iij averaged over i); the abundance of arable land which is our determinant
of Vj ; a direct measure of hundred area Aj ; and ruggedness which measures variation in
transport costs across hundreds.
       In column one, we find strong evidence that our two determinants of income affect set-
tlement size differently. For example, increases in settlement income coming from a larger
reliance on arable land, holding overall settlement income constant, produces a landscape
populated by geographically smaller but more numerous settlements. Conversely, increases
in income coming from uniform differences in productivity, holding the abundance of arable
land constant, produces larger and less numerous settlements (for given area). The impacts
of these changes are also economically significant. An increase of 20% in the abundance of
  20
    We calculated equation (17) using the simple landscape. With different landscapes, the equation is
identical up to a constant function g pq which captures the impact of geographic features lowering transport
costs. The full derivation of the number of settlements for alternative landscapes is in our Appendix A.3.3



                                                    31
                                  Table 2: Number of Settlements
                                       (1)                        (2)                        (3)
Income                                -0.315a                    -0.311a                     -0.309a
                                     (0.047)                    (0.045)                     (0.042)
Abund. Arable Land                     0.811a                    0.803a                      0.802a
                                     (0.110)                    (0.104)                     (0.102)
Area                                  0.772a                     0.769a                      0.769a
                                     (0.021)                    (0.018)                     (0.018)
Ruggedness                             0.015                      0.009                       0.008
                                     (0.033)                    (0.035)                     (0.037)
Coastal                                                          -0.107                      -0.151
                                                                (0.076)                     (0.088)
Rivers                                                           -0.317c                     -0.319b
                                                                (0.144)                     (0.105)
Minor Roads                                                      -0.095                      -0.132
                                                                (0.068)                     (0.072)
Major Roads                                                       0.031                       0.044
                                                                (0.066)                     (0.082)
Border Wales                                                      0.342a                     0.339a
                                                                (0.039)                     (0.036)
Coastal and Rivers                                                                            0.511c
                                                                                            (0.234)
Coastal and Minor Roads                                                                      1.120a
                                                                                            (0.112)
Coastal and Major Roads                                                                      0.145
                                                                                            (0.393)
Rivers and Minor Roads                                                                        0.730c
                                                                                            (0.310)
Rivers and Major Roads                                                                       -0.204
                                                                                            (0.217)
Constant                              -0.832b                    -0.760b                     -0.753b
                                     (0.255)                    (0.274)                     (0.296)
County                                  X                          X                            X
Observations                          875                         875                        875
Adjusted R2                           0.91                        0.91                       0.91
 Notes: All variables are log transformed using x   ~ " lnp1 ` xq. Errors clustered at the circuit level are
reported in round parentheses. a , b , and c denote significance at the 1 , 5 and 10


arable land, raises the density of settlements by 15%; An increase in overall productivity of
the landscape by 20%, lowers the density of settlements by 7%.
    Not surprisingly, area is a strong indicator of settlement numbers. A doubling of hundred
area leads to an almost 80% increase. Since this point estimate falls short of unity, it
implies the density of settlements falls with overall hundred size. This result remains true
even as we move rightwards in the table to columns two and three. Since we are taking
hundred area as equivalent to our theory's useful land, our finding that larger hundreds

                                                    32
have less full landscapes is perhaps not surprising. Less satisfying is that ruggedness (our
measure of within hundred variation in transport costs) has the predicted sign but fails to
be significant. It is possible that too little variation in ruggedness within counties is left,
leading to imprecision in this estimate. Adding in other determinants in columns two and
three does nothing to remedy the situation, but neither does it worsen it.
       In column two we introduce our landscape descriptors. Each of the regressors is measured
as a density: they represent the weighted average proportion of parishes within a hundred
that are crossed by (rivers, roads) or touch (coast) the named geographic feature. In theory,
an increase in the density of these features should lower transport costs and produce fewer but
geographically larger settlements for given hundred area. While three of our four descriptors
do enter negatively, only river density seems to matter. Proximity to the Welsh border also
seems to matter, although why this is true is a mystery.
       In column three we include interaction terms to allow transport options to magnify the
impact of others. Surprisingly, these interactions seem to matter greatly, although in the
opposite direction our theory suggests. In almost all cases, these interactions enter positively
suggesting smaller settlements and greater density. One possibility is that within hundred,
across county or even across country, trade is being facilitated (a possibility not in our
theory), by a more robust transportation network. If this trade brings income gains, akin to
those raising Vj , then settlements maybe become richer, but not necessarily larger. This is,
however, only one of many potential explanations and future work could explore more fully
the potential role of trade in affecting Domesday geography.21
       Overall, Table 1 presents strong support for our approach. Despite the task of explaining
the variation in settlement density across much of Norman England over 1000 years ago, our
simple model determinants and landscape descriptors do quite well.
  21
    There is very little if any information on even regional trade at this time. Transport costs within country
were thought to be very high, which may explain why transport networks loom so large here. It is difficult to
see a meaningful way forward to identifying the source of these effects, other than mechanically introducing
regional or river system effects or running gravity type specifications. See however Masschaele (1993) for an
ingenious method of measuring transport costs in Medieval England. We leave this task to future researchers.



                                                      33
4.4.2      Hundred Populations

In Table 3 we examine the link between hundred population levels and our theory's set of
determinants. The equation we estimate is a version of equation (21).22 Consider first the
role of income as measured in column one. We find strong evidence that differences in income
across hundreds matters to populations. For example, a doubling of income raises hundred
population by approximately 42%. This estimate is far from unity because our hundreds
are of fixed size and this limits their expansion. Recall from Tables 1 and 2, that increases
in income, raise settlement population sizes but lower settlement numbers given our fixed
hundred size. Consequently, its total impact on hundred population levels is uncertain.
What our estimates in Table 3 indicate, is that overall population does rise, but less than
one for one with income gains.
       In fact, we could have arrived at this result in a somewhat different way. If we add the
partial impact of income on settlement numbers (from Table 2, column 1) to the partial
impact of income on settlement size (from column 1 in Table 1) we find a total impact of
.503 which is only slightly larger than our estimate in Table 3 column one. This tells us that
our theory's very specific prediction for how income gains are dissipated by population gains
as evidenced by Tables 1 and 2, are now confirmed by the aggregate results in Table 3.23
       A similar result is true for changes in the abundance of arable land. From Table 3 we
find a 100% increase in the abundance of arable land, produces an 140% increase in hundred
populations. From Table 1 and 2, an increase in the abundance of arable land produces
more and larger settlements. Since both effects work in the same direction, we find a greatly
magnified impact of arable land at the aggregate level. We could arrive at this conclusion
  22
     It differs from (21) only in terms of its constant which now appears as µ0 " g pq where g pq is zero in a
simple landscape, but not equal to zero in a coastal, connected, or edge landscape. See our appendix section
A.3 which contains the complete derivation of g pq.
  23
     Why do the estimates not add up exactly? What we are doing here is relating an aggregate z to its
components x and y, where z " xy . Taking logs and differentiating shows we should be able to add up the
partial effects estimated in the regressions. Apart from estimation and approximation error, they shouldn't
add up exactly because average settlement population is a parish-area weighted-average, and this average,
multiplied by the number of settlements does not equal the simple sum of population in that hundred.




                                                     34
                            Table 3: Overall Population Size Hundreds
                                       (1)                        (2)                        (3)
Income                                 0.419a                     0.429a                     0.435a
                                     (0.087)                    (0.085)                    (0.082)
Abund. Arable Land                     1.391a                     1.381a                     1.375a
                                     (0.157)                    (0.149)                    (0.139)
Area                                  0.940a                      0.938a                     0.939a
                                     (0.038)                    (0.036)                    (0.035)
Precipitation                         -4.049b                    -4.038b                    -4.044b
                                     (1.178)                    (1.151)                    (1.141)
Temperature                           0.938                       1.561                      1.547
                                     (1.362)                    (1.353)                    (1.420)
Ruggedness                            0.090                       0.092                     0.088
                                     (0.060)                    (0.059)                    (0.063)
Coastal                                                          -0.228b                    -0.352b
                                                                (0.086)                    (0.102)
Rivers                                                           -0.120                     -0.035
                                                                (0.142)                    (0.181)
Minor Roads                                                      -0.026                     -0.068
                                                                (0.143)                    (0.147)
Major Roads                                                      -0.156                     -0.173
                                                                (0.166)                    (0.204)
Border Wales                                                      1.292a                     1.287a
                                                                (0.153)                    (0.151)
Coastal and Rivers                                                                           0.255
                                                                                           (0.312)
Coastal and Minor Roads                                                                     2.603a
                                                                                           (0.482)
Coastal and Major Roads                                                                     1.113
                                                                                           (0.681)
Rivers and Minor Roads                                                                      -0.035
                                                                                           (0.602)
Rivers and Major Roads                                                                      -0.338
                                                                                           (0.295)
Constant                             21.935c                    20.393c                    20.492c
                                     (9.928)                    (9.643)                    (9.738)
County                                  X                          X                           X
Observations                          875                        875                        875
Adjusted R2                           0.80                       0.81                       0.81
 Notes: All variables are log transformed using x   ~ " lnp1 ` xq. Errors clustered at the circuit level are
reported in round parentheses. a , b , and c denote significance at the 1 , 5 and 10


by adding up the partial effects across tables. The sum of partial effects across tables, is
1.1 versus an estimated total effect in Table 3 of 1.4. Our theory's very specific prediction
for how income gains from more abundant arable land are dissipated is confirmed by the
aggregate results.
    In Table 3 we find, across all columns, that the coefficient on area is positive, significant,

                                                    35
and close to one in magnitude at .94. Given the standard errors shown, it is apparent we
cannot reject the hypothesis of this coefficient being exactly one. Therefore, a doubling of
hundred size doubles the overall population. This is strong evidence of Malthusian forces at
work on the extensive margin.
    We also find some evidence that climate may matter for populations. We again find
variation in temperate has little effect on populations, but precipitation has a strong negative
impact. This is suggestive evidence that cold harsh rainy locations may have higher death
rates or lower birth rates, independent of their incomes. Turning to the costs of transport,
a hundred's ruggedness per se has no significant impact on its population, although some
of our geographic descriptors do have an impact. For example, location on a coast seems
important although its unclear how or why. Coastal location appears to lower populations,
but coastal locations tied to interior transport networks raise hundred populations. We find
that our one descriptor of an edge landscape - an indicator for hundreds that border Wales -
appears to raise population levels. Again, we are left with evidence that the transportation
network matters, but does so in somewhat mysterious ways.



5     Conclusions

This paper developed a simple, spatially explicit, economic model that generates predictions
for the size, location, and number of human settlements across geographic space. We started
by examining a single core whose size was constrained by its productivity in food and fuel
production. A simple general equilibrium determined relative prices, land use, and incomes.
A Malthusian process, governing births and deaths, ensured population numbers kept real
income per capita at subsistence levels. By placing this core into a larger geographic unit,
we refer to as a landscape, we obtained additional predictions for the density of settlements
and aggregate landscape populations.
    We evaluated our theory's predictions with data drawn from the very first census in the



                                              36
English language - the Domesday census of 1086 ordered by William the Conqueror. This
census is a very rich source of geo-located data drawn from a time and place where energy
constraints were of first-order importance. Using the Domesday data, together with other
geo-spatial information on Roman roads, navigable rivers and coastlines, we evaluated our
theory's precise, and sometime surprising, hypotheses. We have three major findings.
   First, we find strong evidence of Malthusian population adjustment on two different
margins. On the intensive margin, we find individual settlement population sizes rise more
than 80% when settlement incomes double. Settlements within hundreds grow larger, but
there are correspondingly fewer of them. When we expand hundred size, we find even stronger
results on the extensive margin. Populations within a hundred would for example double, if
hundred area doubled. Malthusian forces populate the new area with equal density. This is
Malthus at work on the extensive margin.
   Second, we find a surprising difference between the impacts of income gains created by
an increase in the abundance (or productivity) of arable land, and the impact of income
gains created by uniform productivity gains. The former raises populations, and generates
more numerous but geographically smaller settlements. The latter raises populations, but
generates fewer and geographically larger settlements.
   Third, we find strong evidence that transport costs and physical geography have large
effects on both settlement size and settlement numbers. While the estimated impacts of
road, rivers and coastlines are sometimes in line with our theory; they are often not, and
a key task for future research is to investigate how trade and transportation networks may
have affected even 11th century economic geography.
   Despite the obvious limitations to our cross-sectional data, and the challenges faced in
modelling a Medieval economy, we have made significant progress in shedding light on the
role Malthusian forces played in shaping the economic geography of Domesday England.




                                            37
References

Allen, Robert C, The British industrial revolution in global perspective, Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 2009.

Ashraf, Quamrul and Oded Galor, "Dynamics and stagnation in the Malthusian epoch,"
  American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5), 2003­41.

Brander, James A and Steve Dowrick, "The role of fertility and population in economic
  growth," Journal of Population Economics, 1994, 7 (1), 1­25.

Chen, Shuo and James Kai sing Kung, "Of maize and men: the effect of a New World
  crop on population and economic growth in China," Journal of Economic Growth, 2016,
  21 (1), 71­99.

Cherniwchan, Jevan and Juan Moreno-Cruz, "Maize and precolonial Africa," Journal
  of Development Economics, 2019, 136, 137­150.

Clark, Gregory, A farewell to alms: a brief economic history of the world, Vol. 25, Prince-
  ton University Press, 2008.

  , "In defense of the Malthusian interpretation of history," European Review of Economic
  History, 2008, 12 (2), 175­199.

Fouquet, Roger, Heat, power and light: revolutions in energy services, Edward Elgar
  Publishing, 2008.

Galor, Oded and David N. Weil, "Population, Technology, and Growth: From Malthu-
  sian Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond," American Economic Review,
  September 2000, 90 (4), 806­828.

  and Omer Moav, "Natural selection and the origin of economic growth," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1133­1191.


                                            38
Lagerl¨
      of, Nils-Petter, "Malthus in Sweden," The Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
  2015, 117 (4), 1091­1133.

Masschaele, James, "Transport costs in medieval England," Economic History Review,
  1993, 2, 266­279.

McDonald, John, Production Efficiency in Domesday England, 1086, Routledge, 2005.

  and Graham D Snooks, "The determinants of manorial income in Domesday England:
  evidence from Essex," The Journal of Economic History, 1985, 45 (3), 541­556.

  and       , "Were the tax assessments of Domesday England artificial? The case of Essex,"
  The Economic History Review, 1985, 38 (3), 352­372.

Møller, Niels Framroze and Paul Sharp, "Malthus in cointegration space: evidence
  of a post-Malthusian pre-industrial England," Journal of economic growth, 2014, 19 (1),
  105­140.

Moreno-Cruz, Juan and M Scott Taylor, "An energy-centric theory of agglomeration,"
  Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2017, 84, 153­172.

Nicolini, Esteban A, "Was Malthus right? A VAR analysis of economic and demographic
  interactions in pre-industrial England," European review of economic history, 2007, 11 (1),
  99­121.

Nunn, Nathan and Nancy Qian, "The potato's contribution to population and urban-
  ization: evidence from a historical experiment," The quarterly journal of economics, 2011,
  126 (2), 593­650.

Redding, Stephen J and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, "Quantitative spatial economics,"
  Annual Review of Economics, 2017, 9, 21­58.

Samuelson, Paul A, "Th¨
                      unen at two hundred," Journal of Economic Literature, 1983,
  pp. 1468­1488.

                                             39
von Th¨
      unen,      JH, "Der isolierte staat," Beziehung auf Landwirtschaft und Na-
  tional¨
        okonomie, 1826.

Wrigley, Edward Anthony, Energy and the English industrial revolution, Cambridge
  University Press, 2010.




                                       40
                            Appendix:
              Food, Fuel and the Domesday Economy
                     Juan Moreno Cruz               M. Scott Taylor
                                      June 15, 2020


A       Lengthy Calculations
A.1       Net power supplied
A.1.1     One crop
Energy rents are given by  ´ cr, where r is the distance to the core. Marginal energy
rents are given by  ´ cR " 0 so that the maximum radius defining the exploitation zone is
R " {c. The net power supplied to the core is:
                        2  R                        R
                   S                   c                        c
                  W "          v r1 ´ v sdvd " 2       v r1 ´ v sdv
                        0    0                       0          
                          ,, 2           R
                            v       v3   " 
                                                3
                     " 2       ´c                                                  (A.1)
                             2       3 0     3c2

A.1.2     Two Crops
The indifference point is calculated from:
                                  p ro ´ cr° s " re ´ cr° s                             (A.2)
so that                             ´   ´ ¯¯
                                         e
                                  Ro p ´  o
                           r° "                  where Ro " o {c                        (A.3)
                                    pp ´ 1q
    The flow of (net) food energy they supply to the core is given by:
                                                    ~        ¸2 ~                ¸
                   2  r°                                   e                 e
                                                  3   p ´ o          2 pp ´ o
                                                                               q
           WoS
               "          v po ´ cv q dvd " 2 o                  1´                     (A.4)
                   0    0                      c       p ´ 1         3  pp ´ 1q

The flow of (net) fuel energy supplied over r°  r  Re becomes:
                                           ¨     ~           ¸2 ~                  ¸
          2  Re                                      o                    o
                                         3
                                              1    p e
                                                        ´  1          p
                                                                    2 e p    ´  1q
  WeS "            v pe ´ cv q dvd " 2 e  ´                      1´                 ,   (A.5)
          0    r °                     c      3      p ´ 1          3   p p ´ 1q


                                              1
   For the area of exploitation, we are only interested in the external margin, which is simply
the area of a circle with radius R¯ e . Here we use the double integral notation, because it is
useful for future calculations as we deviate from the simplest case.
                                        2  R  ¯e          ^ 2
                                                            e
                              EX "               vdvd "                                    (A.6)
                                        0   0                c

A.2     Connected, Coastal and Edge Landscapes
We have thus far only considered simple landscapes, and it is tempting to think that many
of our results are reliant on this assumption. Surprisingly, very similar and often exactly the
same results hold for very different landscapes. To understand why, we construct a specific
example to help build intuition. We show that a river through any core at location i, in
landscape j effectively magnifies by a factor p1 ` g pqq  1, the power densities of both
energy sources. That is, we can write:
                       j e " p1 ` g pqq    e and j
                                       1{3 j 0
                                                  o " p1 ` g pqq
                                                                 1{3 j 0
                                                                    o                     (A.7)
                               a
                             1 1 ´ 2         ¯
                                             
                     g pq "              ´ 0
                                             
                                               ¯
                             "
                                cr, s if   
                     cp  q "                   ¯
                                c         if   
                             `                      
                    r, s " p1 ´ 2 q1{2 sin  `  cos 
                                                                                          (A.8)
where the superscript j 0 represents the landscape's original productivities without the river.
Note g pq is increasing in the cost advantage of the river option   1. More efficient river
transport implies  Ñ 0 which drives g pq towards infinity.      ¯ " cos´1  is independent of
relative prices and uniquely determined by the cost advantage of the river option, . This
result is just a generalization of our finding of a transport multiplier, but now extended to
a market economy with two energy sources.
    Given the multiplicative role of g pq, it is apparent the relative supply of food to fuel
energy will be unaffected by the existence of the river and hence so too will be equilibrium
relative prices. But since core income is homogeneous of degree three in power densities,
we conclude that the existence of a river through the core raises real income by a factor
g pq  0. It is then immediate that the resulting steady state population in a core with
river transport is greater by a factor g pq.
    To calculate the number of such cores supported in a given landscape, we need to amend
our earlier calculations for the area of exploitation coming from the extensive margin. In
the case of a river, the extensive margin is given by
                                           " e
                                                     if    ¯
                                   R p q " c e
                                              r,s
                                                           ¯                             (A.9)
                                             c
                                                     if   
Therefore, the size of the exploitation zone for a river located core is given by:
                                                           2  e
                                   EX river " p1 ` g pqq     2
                                                                                         (A.10)
                                                           c

                                                 2
and this implies the number of cores supported in a landscape of size A is given by:

                                        A            Ac2
                                N"             "                                         (A.11)
                                      EX river   2
                                                 e p1 ` g pqq

Putting these results together we have found our previous predictions need only small amend-
ments. The river works like a lowering of transport costs albeit of a specific type. It lowers
transport costs, expands exploitation zones, and lowers settlement numbers. Its strength in
doing so depends on the cost advantage as captured by . The addition of the river enters
simply and drives up the population within each settlement. Finally, since the total land-
scape population is found by multiplying settlement numbers by their average size, quite
surprisingly we find the overall population in the landscape is independent of g pq. This is
a surprising result. Access to a river makes any core larger in terms of its population and
lowers the number of settlements in any given area, but leaves the overall population size
of the landscape unaffected. Rivers - just like the costs of transport we already studied
- affect the organization of production but not its overall efficiency. They support larger
centers since they lower transport costs, but if the efficiency of the underlying environment
is unaffected by their presence then so too are population levels.
    Although it is not immediately apparent, these results generalize quite nicely. For
example, consider a landscape where a road intersected the core rather than a river. In this
case our magnification effect would be p1 ` 2g pqq or almost twice as large since transport
is made less costly in both directions. Settlement numbers fall, their size rises and our log
linear equations need only the most obvious amendment. Similarly, consider a landscape
where along one side there was an ocean and the other was landscape with a given power
density. This is a coastal landscape. Assuming transport in both directions along an coast is
possible (like our road case) then it should be apparent the exploitation zone for a core along
                                            2
the coast is just equal to p1{2 ` gj pj qq  e
                                           c2
                                              . A seaside located core would have its population
magnified by a factor p1{2 ` g pqq and the number of such locations in a given area has to
fall as before. Next, consider a landscape completely filled with N cores all connected by
a rectangular road network with two roads (North-South, and East-West) running through
the cores. This is our connected landscape. Each of the cores would then be twice as
connected as those connected with a single road and hence more populous in proportion to
p1 ` 4g pqq. This implies there would be fewer and larger cores, and again all adjustment
in our predictions are straightforward.
    Finally, consider a situation where the expansion in one (or more) directions from the
core is blocked by either a geographical or political barrier. This is our edge landscape. In
this situation, the landscape would be just half the population size of the simple landscape
and it would have the same number of places.
    The derivation details are in the subsections below.

A.2.1    Rivers
Energy rents in the case of a river are given by w "  ´ cpqr where
                                                        ¯
                                        "
                                           cr, s if   
                                 cpq "                  ¯                                (A.12)
                                           c       if   

                                               3
                                                                          ¯ will deviate to
              `                         
and r, s " p1 ´ 2 q1{2 sin  `  cos  . Farmers located at an angle   
                                                                ¯
the river. The cut-off radius for farmers located at an angle    is given by:
                                                        p0 ´ e
                                                 ra "                                             (A.13)
                                                         pp ´ 1qc

The cut-off radius for farmers located at an angle   ¯ is given by:

                                                        p0 ´ e
                                           rb pq "                                                (A.14)
                                                     pp ´ 1qcr, s

   The integrals of energy supplied for food and energy are given respectively by:
                       « ¯                                                      ff
                           rb pq                            ra
           River
         Wo      "2^             po ´ cr, sv qvdvd `            po ´ cv qvdvd
                              0    0                                    ¯
                                                                             0
                          ~               ¸2 ~      ¯
                                                              ¸~
                                                               ¸
                                      e    e       
                  3           p´     2 p ´ o
                 " 2o             1´  o
                                               ´¯`    r, s´2 d
                   c     p´1         3 p´1         0
                      ~       ¸2 ~           ¸~             ¸
                            e              e
                                                   a
                  3     p ´          2 p ´           1 ´  2
                 " 2o       o
                                  1´       o
                                               ´¯`
                   c     p´1         3 p´1             
                              S
                 " p1 ` g pqqWo                                                                   (A.15)

                      « ¯                                                                    ff
                         Re p  q                                       Re
      WeRiver " 2 ^                    pe ´ cr, sv qvdvd `                   pe ´ cv qvdvd
                          0   rb pq                                 ¯
                                                                        ra
                      ¨       ~              ¸2 ~                   ¸ ~
                                                                     ¸
                                                          ¯
                                  p                           
                                                         
                3    1       ´1     o
                                              ´1          2 p o
              "   e ´              e
                                     1´            , ´¯`    r, s´2 d
                                                               e

                c2   3     p´1          3 p´1            0
                   ¨   ~         ¸2 ~              
                                                  ¸ ~             ¸
                           o                o
                                                         a
                3    1   p   ´ 1        2 p   ´ 1          1 ´  2
              " 2e  ´      e
                                     1´     e      , ´¯`
                c    3     p´1          3 p´1                

              " p1 ` g pqqWeS                                                                     (A.16)

Now, we can write energy delivered to the core in the presence of a river as
                                            River              S
                                           Wo     " p1 ` g pqqWo                                  (A.17)

                                           WeRiver " p1 ` g pqqWeS                                (A.18)
       S
where Wo and WeS are defined above, and g pq is given by the following expression:
                                        a
                                      1 1 ´ 2        ¯
                                                     
                               g pq "             ´ .                              (A.19)
                                                     



                                                         4
   The area of the exploitation zone for a core with a river is given by:
                                   « ¯                                 ff
                                        Re p  q            Re
                    EX River " 2 ^              vdvd `           vdvd                                  (A.20)
                                            0       0           ¯
                                                                        0
                                       «       ¯
                                                       ff
                                    2      ¯`    1
                                   " 2e  ´         2
                                                     d                                                 (A.21)
                                     c        0 p q

                                   " p1 ` g pqqEX                                                      (A.22)

A.2.2   Roads
Next consider a core with a road instead of a river. A road is a river that allows for lower
costs of transportation in both directions. This means the energy supplied is now given by:
                                « ¯                                                        ff
                                          Re p  q                                  {2   Re
                  WeRoad   "4^                      pe ´ cr, sv qvdvd `                      pe ´ cv qvdvd
                                      0   rb pq                                  ¯
                                                                                        ra

WeRoad " p1 ` 2g pqqWeS                                                                                (A.23)

                       « ¯                                                                        ff
                          rb pq                                  {2  ra
          Road
         Wo      "4^                 po ´ cr, sv qvdvd `                        po ´ cv qvdvd
                           0   0                                    ¯
                                                                            0
                               S
                 " p1 ` 2g pqqWo                                                                       (A.24)

   The area of the exploitation zone for a core with a road is given by:

                                     EX Road " p1 ` 2g pqqEX                                           (A.25)

A.2.3   Connected Landscape
Consider two roads crossing the core perpendicular to each other. Under the simplifying
assumption that ¯   {4 we get:

                                    WeConnected " p4g pq ´ 3qWeS                                       (A.26)
                                     Connected               S
                                    Wo         " p4g pq ´ 3qWo                                         (A.27)
If ¯   {4 then we have to modify the g pq function to account for a small change. Define
g
~pq as                                      a
                                          1 1 ´ 2
                                  g
                                  ~pq "                                           (A.28)
                                               
and in this case we find
                                                        g pqqWeS
                                    WeConnected " p1 ` 4~                                              (A.29)
                                     Connected               S
                                    Wo         " p1 ` 4~
                                                       g pqqWo                                         (A.30)



                                                        5
     The area of the exploitation zone of a city in a connected landscape with ¯   {4 is given
by

                                 EX Connected " p1 ` 4g pqqEX                            (A.31)

and for ¯   {4, it is equal to

                                 EX Connected " p1 ` 4~
                                                      g pqqEX                            (A.32)

A.2.4     Coastal
The energy provided to the core of a coastal city is given by

                                  WeCoastal " p1{2 ` g pqqWeS                            (A.33)
                                   Coastal                S
                                  Wo       " p1{2 ` g pqqWo                              (A.34)
     The area of the exploitation zone for a city in a coastal landscape is given by

                                 EX Coastal " p1{2 ` g pqqEX                             (A.35)

A.2.5     Edge
The energy provided to the core of a coastal city is given by
                                                1
                                        WeEdge " WeS                                     (A.36)
                                                2
                                           Edge    1 S
                                        Wo      " Wo                                     (A.37)
                                                   2
     The area of the exploitation zone of a city in an Edge landscape is given by
                                                1
                                       EX Edge " EX                                      (A.38)
                                                2

A.3      Political Aggregates
A.3.1     Aggregate income
Aggregate income is the value sum of all energy rents. Using the general equilibrium price
p, we have for the simple landscape:

                            I pp, o , e q " pWo ` We
                                                  ~                 ¸
                                                         o        3
                                             3  e
                                                      pp   e
                                                             ´ 1q
                                          "        1`
                                             3c2        pp ´ 1q2
                                                                                         (A.39)

     Using this result, we can calculate aggregate income for all other landscapes as:

                                   I pp, o , e q " pWo ` We                              (A.40)

                                               6
where   P tConnected, Coastal, Edgeu. Using the results from above, we obtain

                       I Connected pp, o , e q " p1 ` 4g pqqI pp, o , e q
                         I Coastal pp, o , e q " p1{2 ` g pqqI pp, o , e q
                                                 1
                            I Edge pp, o , e q " I pp, o , e q                          (A.41)
                                                 2

A.3.2    Average population size
The cities belonging to different landscapes will be characterized by a population size that is
proportional to the cube of the productivity of the landscape. In particular, for the simple
landscape, the size of a city is given by:
                                                      ~                  ¸
                                                               o       3
                                                  3         pp    ´ 1 q
                Lij " M I pp, o , e q{ ppq " M 2e 1 ` e                    { ppq        (A.42)
                                                  3c          pp ´ 1q2

where  ppq is the appropriate price index. From here it follows directly from the results
above that

                                 LConnected
                                  ij        " p1 ` 4g pqqLij
                                     LCoastal
                                      ij      " p1{2 ` g pqqLij
                                                1
                                       LEdge
                                         ij   " Lij                                     (A.43)
                                                2

A.3.3    Number of places
The number of places in a landscape is calculated by dividing the area of the landscape, Aj ,
but the area of the exploitation zone. In particular, for the simple landscape, the number of
places is given by:

                                             Aj    Aj c2
                                                       j   2
                                  N"        ´ ¯2 "       ´
                                                         e                              (A.44)
                                             e      
                                             cj


Using this result we, we can write
                                                       Aj
                                            N "                                         (A.45)
                                                      EX
where   P tRiver, Connected, Coastalu to find

                                N Connected " p1 ` 4g pqq´1 N
                                  N Coastal " p1{2 ` g pqq´1 N
                                      N Edge " 2N




                                                  7
A.3.4     Total population landscape
Total population for the landscape is given by the multiplication of the number of places
and the size of each place. For the simple landscape this is equivalent to:
                                              ~                 ¸
                                     1             pp e
                                                        o
                                                          ´ 1q3
                      Lj " N Lij " Aj M e 1 `                     { ppq            (A.46)
                                     3               pp ´ 1q2

which is independent of the geography of the landscape.


B       von Th¨
              unen and Samuelson
B.1      Linear transportation costs
Work is equal to force, F , times distance, x, or work is Wk " F ¨ x. Force is in turn equal
to mass, M , times acceleration g ; as any mass moved horizontally must overcome the force
of gravity as mediated by friction in transport, where µ is the coefficient of friction.1 This
work is done per unit time since power is a flow (as is for example the flow of labor and
capital services that creates the flow of useful output in standard analyses). Choosing units
is inconsequential and if we measure time in seconds, then the flow of work, Wk , measured
in Joules per second is now power requirements measured in Watts.2
    Now consider the costs of moving energy resources providing one Watt of power just one
meter. Consider an energy source with power density  [Watts/m2 ] with a concentration
measure d[kg/m2 ], this in turn implies the energy resources it represents must weigh d{
kilograms. Moving this mass one meter, and overcoming friction, requires a flow of power of
µgd{. Therefore, µgd is the number of Watts needed to transport  Watts worth of an
energy source with power density , one meter. When energy sources are transported by
                                                                                  
land we have c " µgd. In this case, the zero energy margin distance is R° " µgd      and total
                                            3
energy collected is given by W ° "        pµgdq2
                                                 .

B.2      Iceberg costs
Our model generates results much like those in von Th¨    unen's Isolated State (1826). Our
costs are constant per unit mass and thus generate a limit to the exploitation zone. We
derive a primitive per meter transport cost similar to that assumed by von Th¨ unen and but
now explicitly linked to fundamentals such as the energy density of resources, the difficulty
of terrain and the physical amount of work required to transport objects (Moreno-Cruz and
Taylor, 2018). Just like von Th¨  unen, we solve for a circular area of exploitation whose
margins are determined by a zero rent condition. While von Th¨     unen determined the zero
    1
      We are ignoring static friction encountered when the object first moves. The force that needs to be
overcome to keep an object in motion is equal to the normal force times the coefficient of friction. Since the
object is moving horizontally, the normal force is just gravity times the mass of the object . The coefficient
of friction is a pure number greater than zero; and force is measured in Newtons.
    2
      Expending 1 Joule of energy in 1 second means you are delivering 1 Watt of power.



                                                      8
rent condition based on transportation cost only, we find that limit is a function of both
productivity and transportation costs.
    von Th¨unen motivates his constant per unit mass costs by assuming transportation costs
are measured in "natural units," using the analogy that the horse eats the grain it is trans-
porting to the city (Clark 1967). In our case, we use energy to move energy. Samuleson
(1983) takes this analogy to justify his assumption about iceberg transportation costs. While
the assumption of iceberg costs simplifies some of the calculations, Samuelson gets in trou-
ble when trying to identify a limit to the exploitation. Under the iceberg assumption, the
exploitation zone of the outer ring would extent infinitely.3
    In Samuelson (1983)'s model, labor is required in situ to produce agricultural output
and he shows that in equilibrium population density is declining away from the city core.
Samuelson's limit on the exploitation zone comes from the assumption that labor is too
scarce at long distances from the core, and thus at some point, more resources will not
increase total energy delivered to the core.
    Reading further von Th¨  unen, Clark (1967) argues the idea of "natural units" captures
all costs required to transport good, measured in terms of the good being transported,
including paying for the means of transportation (the wagon) or the fact that waste of
burning energy for transportation (incomplete combustion) leaves mass that needs to be
transported. Introducing fixed costs the naturally generates a limit in the exploitation zone.4
   3
     To see how our model generates Samuleson's result, assume there is a farmer located at a distance r
away from the city center. This farmer spends some of the energy he collects in transportation. Energy used
in transportation per unit of distance is
                                                        c
                                           W T p xq "     W pxqdx                                     (B.1)
                                                        
where W pxq is the amount of energy that is left after transporting the original amount of energy a distance
                                                      c
x. That is, energy at distance W px ` dxq " W pxq ´     W pxqdx. We can rewrite this as

                                     W px ` dxq ´ W pxq    c
                                                        " ´ W p xq                                    (B.2)
                                             dx            
In the limit where dx approaches zero, the lefthand side in the previous equation becomes, by definition,
dW {dx. The following differential equation determines the energy surplus at distance x:

                                    dW pxq                   c
                                           " ´T C pW pxqq " ´ W pxq                                   (B.3)
                                     dx                      
Assume the farmer is sitting in 1m2 of land with power density  so that W p0q " . The solution to this
differential equation is:
                                                          c
                                             W p xq "  e´  x                                    (B.4)
If we evaluate this expression at distance r, then we obtain the energy delivered to the city by a farmer
located a distance r away from the core. In this case, due to the exponential nature of the energy supplied,
there is not a limit to how far farmer can be located away from the city as the amount of energy brought
into the city is always positive.
   4
     Assume transportation costs are given by:
                                               ´           c       ¯
                                     W T pxq " C pW0 q ` W pxq dx                                     (B.5)
                                                           
where C pW0 q are the fixed costs incurred to move energy W0 . Total energy at distance W px ` dxq "



                                                        9
C      Data Appendix
Our data come from one of the most interesting records in history. The Domesday book is
a historical artifact, but also an economic and cultural one. In our paper, we use it for its
value as an accounting document. In this appendix, we describe how we handle the data
and the assumptions we made to be able to use it as an input in our paper.

C.1      Domesday Book
The data used in this project was obtained from the History Data Service and is the Elec-
tronic Edition of Domesday Book: Translation, Databases and Scholarly Commentary, lo-
cated at https://www.ukdataservice.ac.uk. The data come in many tables and observa-
tions are organized and traced throughout using the identifier "structidx." In the file "By-
Places.csv" we have information on the "4-figures OS coordinates of Domesday vill" of the
places, or settlements, referenced in the Domesday book. We use these coordinates to add
environmental and landscape information, as we discuss below. We also have a shapefile of
the parishes in England that match very closely to the location of places. We can then use
this shapefile to calculate the approximate area of the place at the time. We then aggregate
from Parishes to Hundreds and add circuit and county identifiers.
    Most of the census information is in the file "Manors.csv." We use the following infor-
mation:
Population data: We obtain the population data at the place as the sum of the population
entries in the Domesday book "Villager + Smallholders." We aggregate them at the parish
level and the hundred level.
Income data: We obtain income data at the place from the variables "Value 86" and "Value
66" which are the "value of the holding to its lord in 1086" and "value of the holding to its
lord in 1066" respectively.
Ploughteams: We obtain income data from the variable "TotalPloughs" which captures
"total number of ploughteams attributed to the holding, the teams each assumed to comprise
8 oxen." An oxgang captures how much land was tillable by one ox in a ploughing season.
One ploughteam, or carucate, was equivalent to 120 acres, but there was substantial variance
across villages. We use ploughteams to calculate the abundance of arable land in a hundred.
       `            c
                             
W pxq ´ C pW0 q `    W pxq      dx. Rearranging terms we can rewrite this expression as

                          W px ` dxq ´ W pxq   dW pxq    ´         c     ¯
                                             "        " ´ C pW0 q ` W pxq                               (B.6)
                                  dx            dx                 
The solution to the differential equation is:
                                         ^          
                                                        c   
                                W pxq " W0 ` C pW0 q e´  x ´ C pW0 q                                    (B.7)
                                              c             c

   Define R as the radius for which W pRq " 0; that is, energy supplied to the city by sources farther than R
is zero. The solution for R is:                    ^              
                                                     c W0
                                        R"      ln             `1                                        (B.8)
                                              c       C p W0 q




                                                       10
C.2     Environmental and Landscape Data
Ruggedness: We obtain terrain ruggedness from Nathan Nunn and Diego Puga article
'Ruggedness: The blessing of bad geography in Africa', published in the Review of Economics
and Statistics 94(1), February 2012: 20-36. They provide the Terrain Ruggedness Index (in
milimetres) at the level of individual cells on a 30 arc-seconds grid across the surface of the
Earth.
Temperature: We use data from FAO-GAEZ (http://gaez.fao.org/Main.html). Our data
is baseline mean annual temperature data for the years 1960-1990 measured in o C.
Precipitation: We use data from FAO-GAEZ (http://gaez.fao.org/Main.html). Our data
is baseline mean annual precipitation data for the years 1960-1990 measured in mm.
Landscapes: We obtain data on navigable rivers and ancient (major and minor) roads
from Satchell, M., Shaw-Taylor, L., Wrigley, E. (2018) [data collection]. UK Data Service.
SN: 852999, http://doi.org/10.5255/UKDA-SN-852999. We use ArcGIS to identify coastal
counties and counties bordering Wales. The approximate location of Norman castles is also
in our database. All these variables are creating using a buffer of 2km around the feature.
For example, the variable Rivers counts the number of parishes that are less than 2 km away
from a navigable river. The same procedure applies to the other landscape characteristics
such a road landscapes, coastal landscapes, and edge (Wales) landscapes.



                             Landscapes
                                 NavigableRivers
                                 Castles
                                 DistanceWales                          ¯
                                 MinorRoads
                                 MajorRoads
                                 DistanceCoast
                                 PlacesParishes




                                                        0 15 30   60   90   120
                                                                              Miles




Figure C.1: Landscapes: This map summarizes the distribution of landscapes across England
and Wales.


                                                   11
C.3      Variables construction and summary statistics
The summary statistics of the variables used in our analysis are presented in Table C.1.
Below, we show how we constructed each variable. There are 875 hundreds in our sample.
No. Settlements is the count of settlements withing a Hundred.
Population Settlement is calculated as the area-weighted average of the settlement popula-
tion. That is,
                                         Nj
                                        ÿ                   Areaij
                          Pop. Sett. "       Populationij °                          (C.1)
                                        i "1
                                                            Areaj
Total Population at the hundred level is the sum of the populations in all settlements within
a hundred.
Income is calculated via an area-weighted average of the income of the place as in equation
(C.1).
Abundance of arable land is calculated as the total number of ploughteams, divided by the
area of the hundred.
    The environmental and terrain variables ruggedness, temperature and precipitation are
represented as weighted averages and calculated the same way as in equation (C.1). Ag-
gregate landscape characteristics are calculated as the count of parishes that belong to a
particular landscape in a hundred. If two parishes have rivers, then the River variables at
the hundred level is 2. We then divide by the total number of parishes in the hundred to get
at a measure of intensity.

                                 Table C.1: Summary Statistics
                            Mean                Std. Dev.               Min                  Max
No. Settl.                   21.04                21.76                 1.00                151.00
Pop. Settl.                  21.69                26.66                 0.00                344.15
Total Population            288.98               408.45                 0.00               6801.00
Income 1086                   8.89                12.45                 0.00                142.77
Abund. Arable Land            0.96                 1.99                 0.00                34.27
Area                        225.17               244.45                 0.55               1553.64
Ruggedness                 20756.88             19143.81               138.40             159844.53

                                                  Environmental Variables

Temperature                  9.59                 0.48                  7.10                   10.67
Precipitation               726.40               146.38                560.34                 1285.02

                                                          Landscapes

Coastal                      0.10                 0.25                  0.00                   1.00
Rivers                       0.07                 0.20                  0.00                   1.00
Minor Roads                  0.07                 0.19                  0.00                   1.00
Major Roads                  0.19                 0.28                  0.00                   1.00
Border Wales                 0.01                 0.06                  0.00                   1.00
Castles                      0.07                 0.20                  0.00                   1.00
Notes: Summary statistics for the dependent and independent variables used in our analysis.




                                                  12
Number of Settlements
    0.69 - 1.39
                                            ±                Population Settlement
                                                                 0.00
                                                                                                         ±                Total Population
                                                                                                                               0.00
                                                                                                                                                              ±
    1.61 - 2.20                                                  0.29 - 1.85                                                   0.69 - 3.47

    2.30 - 2.89                                                  1.86 - 2.51                                                   3.58 - 4.65

    2.94 - 3.47                                                  2.51 - 3.09                                                   4.67 - 5.52

    3.50 - 4.08                                                  3.11 - 3.82                                                   5.53 - 6.32

    4.09 - 5.02                                                  3.86 - 5.84                                                   6.33 - 8.82




                             0   50   100   200 Kilometers                                0   50   100   200 Kilometers                        0   50   100   200 Kilometers




                                                                                                                          Abund. Arable Land

Income
    0.00
                                            ±                Area Hundred
                                                                 0.44 - 2.61
                                                                                                         ±                     0.00
                                                                                                                               0.00 - 0.49
                                                                                                                               0.49 - 0.82
                                                                                                                                                              ±
    0.00 - 1.34                                                  2.65 - 3.76                                                   0.83 - 1.37
    1.35 - 1.86                                                  3.78 - 4.62                                                   1.40 - 2.32
    1.86 - 2.44                                                  4.63 - 5.39                                                   2.59 - 3.56
    2.46 - 3.22                                                  5.40 - 6.15

    3.25 - 4.97                                                  6.18 - 7.35




                             0   50   100   200 Kilometers                                0   50   100   200 Kilometers                        0   50   100   200 Kilometers




Ruggedness
    4.94 - 7.46
                                            ±                Temperature
                                                                 2.09 - 2.25
                                                                                                         ±                Precipitation
                                                                                                                               6.33 - 6.42
                                                                                                                                                              ±
    7.49 - 8.59                                                  2.25 - 2.31                                                   6.42 - 6.50

    8.62 - 9.39                                                  2.31 - 2.35                                                   6.50 - 6.58

    9.40 - 10.06                                                 2.35 - 2.37                                                   6.58 - 6.70

    10.07 - 10.69                                                2.37 - 2.40                                                   6.70 - 6.89

    10.70 - 11.98                                                2.40 - 2.46                                                   6.90 - 7.16




                             0   50   100   200 Kilometers                                0   50   100   200 Kilometers                        0   50   100   200 Kilometers




                    Figure C.2: Spatial distribution of dependent and independent variables


                                                                                     13
D      Instrumental Variables Approach
We are concerned with the potential endogeneity of income and our outcomes of interest. In
our model income is determined independently of labor, and is not affected by the number
of neighboring settlements via trade or migration. In other settings it would or could be
determined by these factors, contaminating the errors in our OLS specification. To address
this issue we need an instrumental variable with across hundred variation that is both cor-
related with incomes in 1086, and otherwise excluded from the regressions. We instrument
contemporaneous income levels in 1086 using incomes reported in 1066. The basic idea is
that the cross-sectional distribution of incomes in 1066 contains information about the cross-
sectional distribution of hundred productivities that is, in turn, responsible for an exogenous
component of variation in the 1086 values. The logic behind this instrument comes from
considering an alternative model where labor enters the national income function. For exam-
ple, consider a neoclassical model where there are many hundreds that differed only in terms
of their Hicks-neutral technological productivity. Then labor demands would differ across
the hundreds since they differ in productivities, but the Malthusian steady state supply of
labor is perfectly elastic at the subsistence wage. The hundreds would differ in terms of
population sizes, and incomes as a result. If 1066 is an existing steady state, the variation
we see across hundreds in terms of their average settlement incomes is perfectly correlated
with their cross-sectional differences in productivity. Our underlying assumption is that
the cross-sectional distribution of income in 1066 affects outcomes in 1086 only through the
information it contains in terms of hundred productivities that is captured in 1086 average
hundred incomes. Further complications arise if the observations in 1066 were not from an
existing steady state; if our model is not true so labor supply is not elastic at the subsistence
wage; or if transitory shocks from 1066 reverberated through to other variables in 1086 as
well. To deal with any of these issues, a panel data estimation would be required, and of
course we have no ability to generate such a panel as the 1066 entries in the Domesday book
are very incomplete. With these caveats in mind consider Table D.1.
    Table D.1 shows the strength and quality of our instruments. We restrict the sample
the hundreds that report income in 1066. The number of observations is reduced from 875
to 712 hundreds. In Panels A through C, the first column shows the regression results for
the Number of Settlements, the second column for Settlement Size and the third column
for Total Population. To save space, we indicate but don't report when we are using Land-
scape controls (Coastal, Rivers, Minor Roads, Major Roads, Border Wales, Castles and their
interactions) and Environmental Controls (Temperature and Precipitation).
    Panel A replicates our results for the OLS from the main paper but with the restricted
sample. Restricting the sample changes the point estimates, but their remain statistically
significant, of equal magnitude and sign.
    Panel B shows a statistically significant relation between income 1066 and the outcome
variable. Higher income in 1066 is related with a lower number of settlements, higher settle-
ment populations and higher overall population. These results are all statistically significant
at the 5% level.
    In Panel D the dependent variable is Income in 1086 and shows the first stage results. A
positive relation between income in 1066 and income in 1086 exists across all specifications.
this relations is statistically significant at the 1% level. The first stage Kleibergen-Paap

                                               14
F-statistic for the excluded instrument is 12.5 or higher across different regressions. This
implies it is unlikely that our estimates are biased by weak instruments.
    Panel C shows the 2SLS results. In all cases, our earlier results are strengthened by
instrumenting. The overall take away from our analysis remains the same.

                     Table D.1: Instrumental Variables (Value 86=Value 66)
                            No. Settlements                    Settlement Size                 Total Population
                                                               Panel A: OLS
Income                           -0.282a                           0.812a                             0.448a
                                (0.039)                           (0.042)                            (0.081)
Abund. Arable Land               0.745a                            0.268b                             1.276a
                                (0.115)                           (0.085)                            (0.142)
Area                             0.769a                                                               0.923a
                                (0.017)                                                              (0.050)
Ruggedness                       0.010                                                                0.106
                                (0.037)                                                              (0.069)
Constant                         -0.784b                            5.499                             8.362c
                                (0.317)                            (2.870)                           (3.851)
                                                               Panel C: 2SLS
Income                           -0.340a                            0.801a                            0.347a
                                (0.040)                            (0.071)                           (0.113)
Abund. Arable Land               0.813a                             0.279a                            1.396a
                                (0.087)                            (0.104)                           (0.149)
Area                             0.775a                                                               0.933a
                                (0.015)                                                              (0.046)
Ruggedness                       0.012                                                                0.109c
                                (0.035)                                                              (0.064)
Constant                         -0.780b                            5.646b                            9.480a
                                (0.323)                            (2.753)                           (3.636)

                                           Panel D: First Stage -- Dependent Variable: Income 1086
Income 1066                      0.507a                             0.516a                            0.504a
                                (0.149)                            (0.149)                           (0.144)
Abund. Arable Land               0.740a                             0.656a                            0.741a
                                (0.137)                            (0.124)                           (0.128)
Area                             0.054a                                                               0.052a
                                (0.016)                                                              (0.016)
Ruggedness                       0.002                                                                0.006
                                (0.042)                                                              (0.040)
Constant                         0.066                              4.003                             3.005
                                (0.534)                            (5.501)                           (4.889)
Landscapes                         X                                  X                                 X
Environment                                                           X                                 X
County                             X                                  X                                 X
Observations                      712                                712                              712

 Notes: All variables are log transformed using x
                                                ~ " lnp1 ` xq. Errors clustered at the circuit level are reported
in round parentheses. a , b , and c denote significance at the 1 , 5 and 10. All regression include landscapes
and environmental variables when required.




                                                          15
