Conservation Co-Benefits from Air Pollution Regulation: Evidence from Birds
Yuanning Liang, Ivan J. Rudik, Eric Zou, Alison Johnston, Amanda D. Rodewald, and Catherine
L. Kling
NBER Working Paper No. 27415
June 2020, Revised in August 2020
JEL No. Q53,Q57,Q58

                                           ABSTRACT

Massive wildlife losses over the past 50 years have brought new urgency to identifying both the
drivers of population decline and potential solutions. We provide the first large-scale evidence
that air pollution, specifically ozone, is associated with declines in bird abundance in the United
States. We show that an air pollution regulation limiting ozone precursors emissions has
delivered substantial benefits to bird conservation. Our estimates imply that air quality
improvements over the past four decades have stemmed the decline in bird populations, averting
the loss of 1.5 billion birds, approximately 20 percent of current totals. Our results highlight that
in addition to protecting human health, air pollution regulations have previously unrecognized
and unquantified conservation co-benefits.

Yuanning Liang                                    Alison Johnston
Cornell University                                Cornell University
yl2544@cornell.edu                                Cornell Lab of Ornithology
                                                  aj327@cornell.edu
Ivan J. Rudik
Cornell University                                Amanda D. Rodewald
Dyson School of Applied Economics                 Cornell University
and Management                                    Department of Natural Resources
SC Johnson College of Business                    arodewald@cornell.edu
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853                                  Catherine L. Kling
irudik@cornell.edu                                Cornell University
                                                  464 Warren Hall
Eric Zou                                          Ithaca, NY 14853
Department of Economics                           ckling@cornell.edu
University of Oregon
1415 Kincaid Street
Eugene, OR 97403
and NBER
ericzou@uoregon.edu
           Conservation Co-Benefits from Air Pollution Regulation:
                                       Evidence from Birds



                                           Yuanning Liang1,
                                            Ivan Rudik1,,*
                                             Eric Zou2,3
                                           Alison Johnston4
                                         Amanda D. Rodewald4,5
                                          Catherine L. Kling1

                                               August 2020



                                                 Abstract
Massive wildlife losses over the past 50 years have brought new urgency to identifying both the
drivers of population decline and potential solutions. We provide the first large-scale evidence that
air pollution, specifically ozone, is associated with declines in bird abundance in the United States.
We show that an air pollution regulation limiting ozone precursors emissions has delivered
substantial benefits to bird conservation. Our estimates imply that air quality improvements over
the past four decades have stemmed the decline in bird populations, averting the loss of 1.5 billion
birds, approximately 20 percent of current totals. Our results highlight that in addition to protecting
human health, air pollution regulations have previously unrecognized and unquantified
conservation co-benefits.




1
  Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management, Cornell University.
2
  Department of Economics, University of Oregon.
3
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
4
  Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Cornell University.
5
  Department of Natural Resources, Cornell University.
*Materials and correspondence: irudik@cornell.edu
These authors equally contributed to this work. We thank Trudy Cameron, Chris Costello, David Evers, Andrew
Farnsworth, Sonja Kolstoe, Kenneth Rosenberg, and seminar participants at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology for
comments and suggestions. We thank Marley Bonacquist-Currin and Angela Zeng for research assistance.


                                                      1
Air pollution is widely recognized as a leading cause of human morbidity and mortality (e.g.,
Dockery et al., 1993; Pope et al., 2002; Chen et al., 2013; Dominici, Greenstone, and Sunstein,
2014; Schlenker and Walker, 2016; Landrigan et al., 2018; Deryugina et al., 2019). Regulation of
anthropogenic emissions, especially the combustion of fossil fuels, is key to alleviating global
health burdens from pollution exposure. Indeed, air pollution policies, such as the United States'
Clean Air Act, have improved ambient air quality, reduced disease incidence, and increased life
expectancy (e.g., Chay, Dobkin, and Greenstone, 2003; Deschênes, Greenstone, and Shapiro,
2017). Quantifying the impacts of both pollution exposure and regulation has been largely
restricted to humans, and our understanding of benefits to non-human species ­ many of which are
sensitive to pollution ­ remains poor. The physiology and unique respiratory systems of birds, in
particular, should make them especially susceptible to air pollution (Rombout et al., 1991; Brown
et al., 1997; Cuesta et al., 2005; Sanderfoot and Holloway, 2017). For this reason, birds are a
useful focal taxon to examine how policy interventions for air pollution may deliver broader
benefits to ecosystems.


We provide the first continental-scale evidence that ground-level ozone negatively affects the
North American avifauna, a group of animals that are well-known indicators of environmental
health and one of the only groups for which abundance data are available at fine resolution across
broad spatial and temporal scales (Morrison, 1986; Gregory et al., 2003; Niemi and McDonald,
2004; Burger and Gochfeld, 2014). We then analyze how the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) NOx Budget Trading Program (NBP), an air quality regulation that was designed
to protect human health by limiting summertime emissions of ozone precursors from large
industrial sources, has provided substantial conservation co-benefits for avifauna.


Current understanding of the impact of air pollution on birds is limited to case- or laboratory-based
studies on the toxicology of pollution exposure, whereas species- or continental-scale impacts are
largely unknown (Newman, 1979; Rombout et al., 1991; Llacuna et al., 1993; Gilmour et al., 2001;
Loomis et al., 2013; Sanderfoot and Holloway, 2017; Isaksson et al., 2017; Salmon et al., 2018).
We expand the spatial and temporal lens of previous studies to better understand the extent to
which pollution contributed to population declines in North American birds, which have lost a
staggering 2.9 billion breeding individuals over the last 50 years (Rosenberg et al., 2019). A rough

                                                 2
calculation based on our estimated ozone response suggests that observed declines in bird
populations would have been 50 percent greater in the absence of reductions in ground-level ozone
since 1980. In short, the regulation of ozone has led to an additional 1.5 billion birds,
approximately 20% of current populations.


There are several ways in which ozone is expected to harm individual birds in ways that can scale
up to affect population size and trends. High levels of ozone can directly impact birds via physical
harm, such as damage to respiratory systems, or indirectly via changes to habitat conditions, food
supplies, and/or species interactions. There exists strong evidence that elevated ozone reduces
primary productivity, inhibits growth rate and biomass of plants (especially deciduous trees),
reduces plant species richness and community composition, chemically impedes plant-pollinator
interactions, changes foliar quality and content of nitrogen, increases plant susceptibility to
damage and disease, impacts soil microbial communities, and increases secondary (defensive)
plant compounds to reduce herbivory by insects, which in turn have lower biomass and higher
rates of mortality (Agathokleous et al., 2020). For example, the literature shows that ozone
damages plants in ways that affect growth, architecture, and chemical composition, including the
secondary compounds used to defend against herbivory from insects. Likewise, Hillstrom and
Lindroth (2008) reported 17% lower arthropod abundance when ozone levels were elevated
compared to normal ambient levels which may harm insectivorous birds. When access to high-
quality habitat or food resources is reduced, mortality of individuals (adults, juveniles, nestlings)
may increase due to immediate health consequences or longer-term impacts that carry over across
seasons. For example, a bird that has insufficient energetic reserves is more likely to die during
migration, which reduces the population by way of the loss of that individual and its future
reproductive productivity. Even in less severe cases, that individual may produce fewer young than
it would have otherwise.


Our analysis is based on bird observations across the contiguous United States between 2002 and
2016, derived from over 11 million eBird checklists (Sullivan et al., 2009). Following Sauer and
Link (2019) and Rosenberg et al. (2019), we develop a statistical model to estimate changes in
bird abundance over time, based on the counts of birds reported. We model the count of birds in
each eBird checklist, whilst accounting for effects of observer effort (e.g. hours spent amassing

                                                 3
observations), and bird detectability (e.g., time of day) (Fig.1). The supplementary information
documents the consistency of our findings with other approaches and their robustness to our
modeling choices. While these adjustments do not estimate actual population sizes, they do
generate data on the relative abundance of bird populations. By studying how the relative
abundance of birds is affected by pollution, we can infer the impacts on absolute abundance by
combining our estimates with independent estimates on bird population sizes.




Fig. 1. The spatial distribution of bird abundance. County colors indicate ventiles of bird
abundance across all years. Darker colors indicate greater abundance. The set of states outlined in
solid blue are those subject to the NOx Budget Trading Program (NBP). The set of states outlined
in dashed black are the control states. The states not within the blue or black areas are omitted
from the analysis due to potential atmospheric transport of pollution (Deschenes, Greenstone, and
Shapiro, 2017). The states omitted from the NOx Budget Trading Program analysis are Georgia,
Iowa, Maine, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Wisconsin.


The abundance estimates are combined with the U.S. EPA's ground-level pollution monitor
readings and states' pollution regulation information. These data allow us to construct a
longitudinal database that tracks month-over-month changes in bird abundance, air quality, and
regulation status for 3,214 counties over a 15-year timespan. The longitudinal nature of our data
allows us to identify the effect of air pollution using a "within" estimator that links a county's
changes in bird abundance to changes in air pollution. We use a research design that flexibly
accounts for spatial (3,214 counties), temporal (15 years), and seasonal (12 calendar months)
patterns in the data, constructing a three-way interactive fixed effects estimator that controls for

                                                 4
all observable and unobservable confounding factors within a county-year, season-year, and
county-season. Specifically, county-year fixed effects control for differences in attributes across
counties within each year, such as conservation policies or land use (e.g., impervious surfaces,
forest, cropland). Season-year fixed effects control for changes in a season from one year to the
next that are common across all counties, such as changes in average summer ozone or mean
abundance of breeding birds. Finally, county-season fixed effects control for all county-specific
seasonal trends, such as local seasonal variation in observer activity and seasonal trends in bird
abundance due to migration. We also control for contemporaneous changes in weather elements
including temperature and precipitation. The weather controls and the rich set of fixed effects
control for a large set of (potentially unobservable) ecologically-relevant factors that affect
abundance, leaving variation in pollution that is as good as random. Importantly, the focus on
changes or trends in relative abundance rather than absolute number of birds allows us to track the
abundance-pollution relationship without having to estimate population sizes. We discuss
estimation details assumptions in supplementary information.




A                                                 B

Fig. 2. The association between bird abundance and different pollutants. The two panels
correspond to ozone (A) and fine particulate matter (B). The line is the estimated best fit line from
a linear regression of bird abundance on both pollutants, weather variables, and fixed effects. The
points correspond to the mean values of the pollutant and bird abundance within each pollutant
decile after removing the effect of the other pollutant, weather variables, and fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the state-season level and robust to heteroskedasticity. The
regressions are weighted by the number of checklists in a given county-year-month. *** p <
0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10. The number of observations is 92,072.


                                                 5
We estimate the effect of ozone (O3) and fine particulate matter (PM2.5) on relative bird abundance
in a single regression, controlling for the other pollutants, fixed effects, and temperature and
precipitation (Fig. 2). We focus on these two pollutants as they are the two most commonly found
to cause health and mortality risks in humans. Ozone is strongly negatively associated with bird
abundance (Fig. 2A). One standard deviation (SD) increase in ozone concentrations (8.4 parts per
billion) is associated with a 0.117 SD decrease in bird abundance [P < 0.01, 1 SD bird counts per
checklist = 98.4], and the relationship is linear over the range of ozone levels in our dataset. We
find no evidence for an association with PM2.5. Importantly, this initial analysis of
contemporaneous (i.e., "month-of") effects of pollution on relative abundance of birds does not
capture longer-term damage caused by pollution.


We next investigate avian responses to changing ozone levels in response to the NOx Budget
Trading Program (NBP), which imposes a cap on emissions of ozone precursors from May 1st
through September 30th. The NBP has affected approximately 1,000 combustion units in the
Eastern and Midwestern U.S. starting in 2003 (Fig. 1). To estimate the impact of the NBP, we use
a "triple difference" approach that explores treatment-versus-control comparisons along three
dimensions: (1) states that participated in the NBP versus states that did not, (2) summer months
when the NBP restrictions are in place versus winter months when they are not, and (3) years after
2003 when the NBP came into effect versus years before it went into effect (Deschenes,
Greenstone, and Shapiro, 2017). In combination, these comparisons allow us to isolate the changes
in pollution and bird abundance that are specific to NBP-affected states and specific to months
when the NBP market is operating (Supplementary Information). The triple difference approach
is robust to differential trends in bird abundance due to differences in species composition in NBP
states versus control states. For example, the triple difference approach allows us to still estimate
the causal effect of the NBP despite the observed differential declines in western versus eastern
birds (Rosenberg et al., 2019). The critical assumption is that, in the absence of the NBP program,
the difference in summer bird abundance trends between NBP and control states would have
evolved similarly to the difference in winter trends.




                                                 6
Fig. 3. (A) Effects of the NOx Budget Trading Program on ozone and bird abundance in standard
deviation units. (B) Implied effects of ozone from results in (A), as calculated using an
instrumental variable approach that combines the effect of the NOx Budget Program on ozone and
the effect of predicted ozone on bird abundance. Birds are classified into groups following
Rosenberg et al. (2019). Bird groups by mass are divided into 4 quartiles according to their mass
distribution. The black bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the
state-season level and robust to heteroskedasticity. The regressions are weighted by the number of
checklists in a given county-year-month. The IV first stage F-statistics in estimating the effect of
NBP on bird groups from the second to the last row range from 22.39 (mass: < 16g) to 22.67
(shorebird). *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.


The NBP decreased ambient ozone concentrations in the average county by 0.496 SD (4.2 parts
per billion) [P < 0.01] and increased bird abundance by 0.235 SD [P < 0.01] (Fig 3A). The NBP
had a positive effect on landbird abundance [0.270 SD, P < 0.01], while the estimated impacts on
waterfowl [-0.057 SD, P = 0.585], shorebirds [0.056 SD, P = 0.327], and waterbirds [-0.002 SD,
P = 0.972] are small and not statistically significant. In addition, we find statistically significant
positive effects of the NBP on birds with a mass less than 142 grams, which is approximately the
mass of a northern flicker Colaptes auratus cafer or a ring-necked dove Streptopelia capicola.
Birds with mass less than 142 grams correspond to the first three quartiles of bird mass distribution


                                                  7
(less than 16 grams [0.217 SD, P < 0.01], 16-38 grams [0.201 SD, P < 0.01], and 38-142 grams
[0.235 SD, P < 0.01]). We do not find evidence that birds weighing more than 142 grams are
affected by the NBP [0.016 SD, P = 0.819]. This is consistent with the positive effect on landbirds,
which mostly fall into the smaller bird groups (85.6% of landbirds in our sample are less than 142
grams). One potential mechanism consistent with previous research is that ozone reduces insect
abundance (Hillstrom and Lindroth, 2008), and would thus reduce abundance of landbirds which
tend to be the most insectivorous group. We further find that the effect on migratory birds [0.149
SD, P=0.030] is greater than on resident birds [0.104 SD, P=0.064], although the estimates are not
statistically distinguishable from each other.


Our results suggest that environmental regulations primarily designed to protect human health can
generate substantial conservation co-benefits for other species. To further explore the generality
of bird-ozone relationships at national scales the since 1980, we use a three-pronged approach (see
Supplementary Information for a full description of the Instrumental Variable approach used).
First, by converting the NBP program's effects on ozone and bird abundance into the direct effect
of ozone on bird abundance, we show that each 0.496 SD increase in ozone is associated with a
0.235 SD decrease in bird abundance (Fig. 3A), translating to a 0.235/0.496 = 0.474 SD decrease
in bird abundance for every one SD increase in ozone (Fig. 3B). Second, we simulate a back-of-
the-envelope counterfactual scenario in which ambient ozone pollution is held constant at its 1980
level, the year when ozone was first measured and regulated by EPA, instead of following the
actual pollution trajectories driven by air quality regulations like the NBP and Clean Air Act.
Third, we then compare this counterfactual with recent estimates by Rosenberg et al. (2019), who
reported the loss of 2.9 billion birds from 1970 to 2018.


Ozone has, on average, declined by 0.13 parts per billion per year between 1980 and 2018, with
the largest declines seen in the eastern states that were regulated by the NBP (Fig. 4B). In the
absence of regulation-driven ozone reductions between 1980 and 2018, bird populations would
have declined by an additional 1.5 billion: 50% more than if ozone concentrations had remained
the same (Fig. 4A). As such, 20% of the current bird population of approximately 7 billion
individuals can thus be attributed to improvements in ozone concentrations over the past 40 years.
The observed and counterfactual bird trends begin diverging more rapidly in the 2000s when

                                                 8
pollution regulation policies, such as the NBP, accelerated ambient ozone concentration
improvements.




 A                                         B


Fig. 4. (A) shows the observed trend in bird populations from Rosenberg et al. (2019) as a solid
line and the counterfactual trend if ozone concentrations held at their 1980 levels as a dashed line.
The shaded areas correspond to the 95% confidence interval for each where the 95% confidence
intervals are derived from the cluster-robust standard errors associated with the top estimate in Fig.
3B. (B) shows the state-wide average annual change in ozone concentrations at U.S. EPA monitors
between 1980 and 2018. Blue indicates decreases in ozone; red indicates increases in ozone.


Several points on the interpretation of our abundance-decline results bear mentioning. Birds'
responses to air pollution are likely to occur through a number of mechanisms and at a number of
different timescales. We expect some mechanisms may result in rapid effects, for example,
reduced ability to forage, movement to a less optimal local habitat, or the death of birds in poorer
health. However, some mechanisms may take time, such as increased mortality of healthier birds
due to long-term accumulation of pollution throughout a year, or reduced reproductive productivity
due to poorer body condition. The measures of relative bird abundance will reflect a combination
of these short-term and long-term processes.


Although we are unable to pin down the exact mechanisms in this study, we can rule out several
alternative explanations. First, our results are unlikely to be explained by reduced visibility or
detectability of birds during high-ozone events. Ozone is a part of smog, but is effectively invisible.
The visibility effects of smog come from particulates like PM2.5 (e.g., black carbon), which we


                                                  9
have controlled for in our regressions (Fig. 2 and Table S4). Also, most bird detections during
surveys are based on auditory, not visual, cues (e.g., songs, calls) making visibility less of an issue
for detection. Second, it is possible that high levels of ozone may cause birds to hide or reduce
their propensity to sing, and thus reduces the likelihood that they are spotted. However, these
hiding behaviors are most likely to be transient, as it is not feasible for birds to change their
behavior at a monthly scale ­ they need to forage, defend territories, and feed their young.
Therefore, even if an extreme ozone event did affect behavior briefly, effects would not be
consistent over the month, which is the time frame of our analysis. Finally, we note our findings
are not explained by a change in human birding effort, such as time spent birding, or distance
traveled, which we controlled for in constructing the abundance measure (Fig. 1).


As individual countries and the global community writ large struggle to address a multitude of
complex social and environmental problems with limited resources, we are challenged to identify
interventions that can deliver benefits on multiple fronts. We have shown that air quality
improvements in the US have significantly stemmed the decline in bird populations. This suggests
that further improvements in air quality could meaningfully contribute to efforts to halt or reverse
widespread declines in wildlife populations. We contend that these conservation co-benefits from
air pollution regulation may be substantial.


Although our study investigated the impact of pollution regulations on bird populations, we did
not examine the ultimate value of the associated changes in ecosystem services provided by more
robust bird populations. These bird-provisioned ecosystem services, which include pollination,
seed dispersal, insect control, and nutrient transfer, can be substantial at local and regional scales
(Clucas et al., 2014; Kolstoe and Cameron, 2016; Haefele et al., 2019). Yet these co-benefits are
rarely acknowledged in cost-benefit analyses of air pollution regulation, though they are clearly
required for accurate assessment of the full suite of benefits. Fully estimating the economic value
of species conservation is imperative to the design and implementation of well-designed air
pollution policy. This work provides a first step toward quantifying these values.




                                                  10
Methods:

Data

Our data on bird counts come from the eBird Reference Dataset (ERD). The ERD is a citizen
science dataset consisting of reports from eBird users detailing information on characteristics of
their birding trips as well as the species and quantity of birds seen. We call each separate report of
birds in the dataset a "checklist."

Our data on pollution come from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Air Quality System
database, which documents ground monitor readings of ambient pollution levels.1 We measure
pollution concentrations for each county by spatially averaging readings from all monitors within
20 miles of the county's centroid, with the inverse of distance as weights. We use data on states'
NOx Budget Trading Program (NBP) regulation status from Deschenes, Greenstone, and Shapiro
(2017).

Methods: Bird Abundance Estimation

Our basis for estimating bird abundance is a database of 11 million eBird checklists across the
United States. These data reflect birding effort and preferences in addition to objective bird counts.
Controlling for birding checklist characteristics is thus important for recovering bird abundance
(Boakes et al., 2010; Sullivan et al., 2014; Xue et al., 2016). We estimate the relationship between
bird abundance and air pollution by first adjusting for birder effort in the eBird dataset.

We begin by using complete checklists in the eBird data to predict the average count of birds in a
county-month-year (e.g. May 2015 in Orange County, CA) conditional on reported characteristics
of the checklist and effort by the birder group. We model bird counts in the eBird data as a Poisson
process that is jointly determined by a function f of birder effort, detectability of birds, true bird
abundance, and a random component  (Sauer and Link, 2011):

                        # birds observed = exp{f(effort, detectibility, abundance, )}.

To take this model to the data, we proxy for effort and detectability using data reported in the eBird
checklists:

     # birds observedcohdmy
                    = exp(d hourscohdmy + n number of observerscohdmy + h + cmy + cohdmy ).

The left-hand side is the number of birds reported in an eBird checklist by birder group o in county
c, at hour of day h, on day of month d, in month of year m, and in year y. The control variables in
the Poisson model address different margins for how observers can affect the number of birds they
see per trip. hourscohdmy is the time spent birding by the group, which controls for the length of
time spent observing. number of observerscohdmy is the number of people in the group, which
addresses the group's intensity at any given time. h is an hour-of-day fixed effect that controls for

1
    https://aqs.epa.gov/aqsweb/airdata/download_files.html

                                                         11
all variables common across days within an hour of day, such as average bird detectability or
ability to observe birds in day versus night; these controls address differential bird activity or
observer ability to detect birds depending on the time of day. cohdmy is the random error term.

We are interested in the cmy estimates, i.e., the county-by-month-by-year fixed effects, which
captures bird abundance at the county-month-year level after conditioning on the effort variables
and hour-of-day fixed effect.

To operationalize the estimation, we log-linearize the Poisson equation and estimate the model
with ordinary least squares (Sauer and Link, 2011):

 log(#birds observedcohdmy )                                                      (1)
               = d hourscohdmy + n number of observerscohdmy + h + cmy + cohdmy .

We then recover the estimated fixed effects cmy , which are our measures of bird abundance in
each county-month-year.

The choice of model specification in equation (1) is meant to be simple and transparent, and it does
not capture all effort margins. Importantly, because our goal is to estimate how bird abundance
changes with air quality rather than bird abundance per se, the effort adjustment variables included
in the estimation need not be comprehensive as long as the omitted determinants of eBird counts
from equation (1) do not systematically correlate with month-over-month changes in air pollution.
As we detail further below, Table S3 reports that our estimation results are robust to alternative
model specifications, such as models using raw bird counts per checklist without any effort or
detectability adjustments, or models with data-driven variable choice (Least Absolute Shrinkage
and Selection Operator, LASSO) using a large set of potential effort variables.

Methods: The Association Between Air Pollution and Bird Abundance (Ordinary Least Squares)

After we have recovered an estimate of     cmy , we estimate the following model with (weighted)
ordinary least squares for results reported in Fig. 2 and SM Table S2 Panel A:

                  std()     = ozone std(ozone)cmy + PM std(PM2.5 )cmy                             (2)
                        cmy
                       +g(weathercmy , ) + sy + cy + sc + cmy .


The left-hand-side variable std(  )cmy is the estimated adjusted bird count at the county-month-
year level, standardized to mean zero and standard deviation one (i.e., a z-score) so that coefficient
estimates are more easily interpretable. Our variables of interest are std(ozone)cmy and
std(PM2.5 )cmy , standardized monthly average concentrations of ozone and fine particulate matter.
We use the standardized values so that we can compare the relative magnitudes of ozone and PM ,
since the different pollutants have different units of measurement. The coefficients can be
interpreted as the standard deviation change in bird abundance from a 1 standard deviation increase
in ozone or particulate matter. g(weathercmy , ) is a set of weather variables--average daily
temperature and precipitation in a county-year-month--that flexibly control for how weather may
                                                 12
affect pollutant concentrations and bird abundance. For temperature, we include 10 bins
corresponding to each decile of the temperature distribution; for precipitation, we include 5 bins
corresponding to each quintile of the precipitation distribution. sy is a set of season-by-year fixed
effects that control for common characteristics of seasons in all counties in a year, such as weather
or pollution seasonality. cy is a set of county-by-year fixed effects that control for unobserved
factors common within a county in a given year, such as county-level conservation policies, county
average annual trends in pollution, or county-level year-to-year changes in habitat. sc is a set of
season-by-county fixed effects that control for county-specific seasonal fluctuations in pollution
and other factors that may affect bird abundance. This model specification is adapted from
Deschenes, Greenstone, and Shapiro (2017), who used the exact same set of controls, combined
with an Instrumental Variable approach (which we discuss below), to study the impact of the NBP
program on human healthcare use and health outcomes, cmy is the error term. In all specifications,
the estimated standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and clustered at the state-season level
which allows for arbitrary correlation in the error term within a state-season. We weight
observations by the number of checklists in a county-year-month.

Several econometric assumptions are required for estimates of ozone and PM to be unbiased and
consistent. The first assumption is that E[std(ozone)cmy × cmy |controls, fixed effects] = 0 and
E[ std(PM2.5 )cmy × cmy |controls, fixed effects] = 0 . In words, variation in air pollution is
orthogonal to omitted determinants of bird abundance after conditioning on the weather controls
and the set of fixed effects we included in equation (2). If an omitted variable is time-invariant
(e.g., location) or varying within a county annually (e.g., year-over-year changes in annual
migration patterns), it is controlled for by the county-by-year fixed effects. If an omitted variable
is a recurring seasonal trend within a county (e.g., breeding behavior in the summer), it is
controlled for by the county-by-season fixed effects. If an omitted variable is varying over time in
a way that is common across all counties (e.g. federal conservation policy), it is controlled for by
the season-by-year fixed effects. For our first econometric assumption to be violated, there must
be a variable omitted from the regression that is correlated with both pollution and our estimates
of bird abundance    cmy while also varying within a county, within each year, and within each
season.

The second econometric assumption is that there is no non-classical measurement error induced
by the effort adjustment procedure such that it becomes correlated with pollution conditional on
our OLS controls and fixed effects. We can write the cmy estimate as a combination of the true
log average bird abundance in a county-month-year log(#      ) , and measurement error
                                                                      
 
     which may be a function of other variables that we do not control for in estimating equation
(1):

                             cmy = log(# 
                                          ) + 
                                               .                                                 (3)

Our second econometric assumption states that [    
                                                      × std(ozone)cmy |controls, fixed effects] = 0
and [ × std(PM2.5 )cmy |controls, fixed effects] = 0. In equation (3), any systematic errors in
        

our estimates of bird abundance that occurs at the county-year level (e.g. we systematically over
or underestimate actual bird abundance in Los Angeles County in 2006) will be controlled for by

                                                 13
county-by-year fixed effects. If the error systematically occurs at the county-season level (e.g. we
systematically over or underestimate actual bird abundance in Los Angeles County every summer)
it will be controlled for by the county-by-season fixed effects. If the error systematically occurs
across all counties in a given season (e.g. we systematically over or underestimate bird abundance
in all counties in Summer 2009) it will be controlled for by season-by-year fixed effects. The
econometric assumption is thus similar to the previous one: that any omitted variable correlated
with actual bird abundance (which will be captured by     
                                                               in equation (3)) is not varying within
a county, within each year, and within each season, after controlling for the weather variables.

Under these econometric assumptions, ozone and PM reflect changes in bird abundance given
changes in ozone and PM2.5. Importantly, these assumptions do not require estimation of the true
"level" of abundance, only that any variation in estimated bird abundance that is correlated with
pollution, after conditioning on the weather controls and fixed effects, is not caused by other
factors.

While the validity of these assumptions cannot be directly tested, we report two sets of robustness
checks in SM Tables S2 and S3. First, we report ozone (both OLS estimates and Instrumental
Variable estimates as detailed below) from a range of alternative fixed effects in the estimation of
equation (3), such as state-by-year fixed effects, quarter-of-sample fixed effects, and/or month-of-
sample fixed effects. Second, we estimate alternative versions of equation (1) using different
effort-adjustment specifications ­ such as using raw bird counts per birding checklist without effort
adjustments, a Poisson regression without log-linearization, models with data-driven choice (Least
Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator, LASSO) of effort variables ­ and we report ozone
estimates with these alternative effort-adjustment specifications.

In the next section, we describe an instrumental variable (IV) approach to estimate the impact of
the U.S. EPA's NOx Budget Trading Program (NBP) on air pollution, bird abundance, as well as
the implied effect of air pollution on bird abundance. Unlike the OLS approach which uses all
variation in ozone after parsing out fixed effects and weather controls, the IV approach further
restricts to policy-induced pollution variation. Under the assumption that the NBP is a valid
instrument for air pollution (i.e., the NBP strongly affects air pollution, and it influences bird
abundance only through changes in air pollution), the IV provides consistent estimates of ozone
that are free from omitted variable and classical measurement error concerns.

Methods: The Effect of the NOx Budget Trading Program (Instrumental Variables)

In Fig. 3 and SM Table S2 Panel B we employ an instrumental variables (IV) approach. The IV
serves two general purposes. First, it tells us the impact of the NBP on air pollution and bird
abundance. Second, under the exclusion restriction assumption that NBP affects bird abundance
only through its impact on air pollution, the IV approach overcomes potential omitted variable bias
and classical measurement error problems we mentioned in the previous section, and it yields
consistent estimates, i.e., that the estimator converges in probability to the true parameter value,
of the impact of air pollution on bird abundance (Wooldridge, 2010).

In the first stage of the IV we estimate the effect of the NBP on monthly average ozone:


                                                 14
                                                                                                 1st stage
            std(ozone)cmy = NBP 1(NBPcmy ) + g(weathercmy , ) + sy + cy + sc + cmy                           .

std(ozone)cmy is the standardized monthly average ozone concentration in county c, month-of-
year m, and year y. 1(NBPcmy ) is an indicator variable equal to 1 if county c is in a state under NBP
regulation and if the current month-year is one where the NBP is in effect.2 The rest of the variables
                                          st stage
are identical to the previous equation. 1cmy       is the error term. NBP is the effect of the NBP on
ozone concentrations and is the top estimate in Fig. 3A.

In the second stage of the IV we estimate the effect of predicted ozone from the previous equation
on adjusted bird counts:
                                                                         nd
      std( )cmy = IV          )cmy + g(weathercmy , ) + sy + cy + sc + 2
                  ozone std(ozone
                                                                            stage
                                                                                  .
                                                                       cmy


IV ozone recovers the effect of ozone on bird abundance using variation in ozone concentrations
generated by the NBP. Results from this specification are plotted in Fig. 3B. Depending on the
outcome, std(  )cmy accounts for either total bird counts, waterfowl, landbirds, shorebirds,
waterbirds, migrants, residents, birds with mass under 16g, birds with mass 16-38g, birds with
mass 38-142g, or birds with mass over 142g.

The rest of the estimates in Fig 3A come from the reduced form version of the IV, where we regress
adjusted bird counts directly on the NBP indicator variable and our set of controls and fixed effects:

       std( )cmy = NBP 1(NBPcmy ) + g(weathercmy , ) + sy + cy + sc + reduced form .
                                                                      cmy


This estimates the effect of the NBP directly on the abundance of different bird groups.

Methods: Trends in the Bird Population under Counterfactual Pollution Levels

In Fig. 4A, we compute trends in the total bird population under the counterfactual scenario in
which the ground-level ozone concentration is held constant at its 1980 level. The trends are
computed using the following steps.

First, we estimate annual trends in ozone concentrations between 1980 and 2018. We begin with
monitor-year level ozone concentrations, and we use the following equation to estimate year-to-
year changes:



2
  This is essentially a triple difference strategy that compares counties in and out of NBP-affected states, summer
season (May through September) and non-summer season, before and after year 2003. We use one year (2002) of pre-
treatment data, which is the first year when eBird data became available. In unreported analysis, we have confirmed
that both our OLS and IV findings are qualitatively unchanged if we drop 2002 data and instead use a double difference
strategy (NBP and non-NBP counties, summer and non-summer seasons). These additional results are available upon
request. We prefer the triple difference strategy as it helps address pre-existing differences in pollution and bird
abundance across the treatment and comparison groups prior to the introduction of the NBP program. Any year-to-
year changes in data quality from 2002 are accounted for by county-by-year fixed effects.

                                                         15
                                     =1980  1(y = ) + i + iy .
                           Ozoneiy = 2018

The dependent variable is the average 8-hour concentration of ozone at monitor i in year y. Because
monitors differ by their initiation date, we include monitor fixed effects (i ) to account for cross-
sectional differences in average pollution levels across monitors in the unbalanced panel. iy is the
error term. Intuitively, the  's (with the regression constant added back) tell us the average annual
level of ozone across all monitors by exploiting variation within a monitor and over time.

Next, for each year since 1980, we calculate the percentage difference between the estimated ozone
                                 -
level and the 1980 level: ( 1980   ) × 100. The predicted percentage change in bird population--
                              1980
that is, the difference between the observed and counterfactual populations if ozone is held at its
1980 level--is given by:

                                                   IV(%)     1980 -
                           %(Population ) = ozone × (         1980
                                                                      ) × 100,

        IV(%)
where ozone is the percentage change in birds per 1 percentage point change in ozone, an
"elasticity" version of the original IV
                                     ozone estimate on a SD bird ­ SD ozone scale. We then convert
percentage population change %(Population ) to population change (Population ) using
historical population estimates provided by Rosenberg et al. (2019). The counterfactual trends are
thus

                Populationcounterfactual
                                         = Populationobserved
                                                              + (Population ),

where Populationobserved
                            is from Rosenberg et al. (2019). To derive the 95% confidence interval
of the counterfactual trends, we repeat the steps above while using the upper/lower 95% confidence
interval of the IV
                 ozone estimates as reported in Fig. 3B. Finally, to smooth out noise in the trends
estimates due to year-to-year fluctuations in ozone levels, we estimate a locally weighted
regression (LOWESS) of Populationcounterfactual
                                                     on  and plot the smoothed value in Fig. 4A.




                                                 16
References:
1.    Dockery, D.W. et al. 1993. New England Journal of Medicine, 329(24): 1753-1759.
2.    Pope III, C.A. et al. 2002. JAMA, 287(9): 1132-1141.
3.    Chen, Y. et al. 2013. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(32): 12936-12941.
4.    Dominici, F. et al. 2014. Science, 344(618): 257-259.
5.    Schlenker, W. and W. R. Walker. 2016. The Review of Economic Studies, 83(2): 768-809.
6.    Landrigan, P. J. et al. 2018. The Lancet, 391(10119): 462-512.
7.    Deryugina, et a. 2019. American Economic Review, 192(12): 4178-4219.
8.    Chay, K. et al. 2003. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(3): 279-300.
9.    Deschênes, D. et al. 2017. American Economic Review, 107(10): 2958-89.
10.   Rombout, P.J.A. et al. 1991. Environmental Research, 54(1): 39-51.
11.   Llacuna, S. et al. 1993. Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, 24(1): 59-66.
12.   Brown, R.E. et al. 1997. Environmental Health Perspectives, 105(2): 188-200.
13.   Cuesta, N. et al. 2005. Journal of Histochemistry & Cytochemistry, 53(6): 773-780.
14.   Sanderfoot, O.V. and Holloway, T. 2017. Environmental Research Letters, 12(8): 083002.
15.   Grooten, M. and Almond, R.E.A. 2018. Living Planet Report-2018: Aiming Higher.
16.   Díaz, S. et al. 2020. Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
      Services.
17.   Morrison, M.L. 1986. Current Ornithology: 429-451.
18.   Gregory, R.D. et al. 2003. Ornis Hungarica, 12(13): 11-24.
19.   Niemi, G.J. and McDonald, M.E. 2004. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and
      Systematics, 35:89-111.
20.   Burger, J. and Gochfeld, M. 2004. EcoHealth, 1(3): 263-274.
21.   Newman, J.R. 1979. Biological Conservation, 15(3): 181-190.
22.   Gilmour, M.I et al. 2001. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(4): 619-622.
23.   Loomis, D et al. 2013. Lancet Oncology, 14(13): 1262.
24.   Isaksson, C. et al. 2017. Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 5: 44.
25.   Salmon, P. et al. 2018. Science of the Total Environment, 622: 635-643.
26.   Rosenberg, K.V et al. 2019. Science, 366(6461): 120-124.
27.   Agathokleous et al. 2020. Science Advances 6(33):eabc1176.
28.   Hillstrom and Lindroth. 2008. Insect Conservation and Diversity. 1(4):233-241.
29.   Sullivan, B.L et al. 2009. Biological Conservation 142: 2282-2292.
30.   Sauer, J.R. and Link, W.A. 2011. The Auk, 128(1): 87-98.
31.   Clucas, B. et al. 2014. Urban Ecosystems, 18(1): 251-266.
32.   Kolstoe, S. and T.A. Cameron. 2016. Ecological Economics, 137: 1-12.
33.   Haefele, M. et al. 2019. Ecological Economics, 157: 321-331.

Methods References:

34. Sullivan, B.L. et al. 2014. Biological Conservation, 169:31-40.
35. Boakes, E.H. et al. 2010. PLoS Biology 8.
36. Xue, Y. et al. 2016. May. Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Autonomous
    Agents & Multiagent Systems: 776-785.
37. Fink, D. et al. 2016. The eBird Reference Dataset, Version 2016.
38. Wooldridge, J.M. 2010. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT press.




                                                  17
                                Supplemental Information for:
                Conservation Co-Benefits from Air Pollution Regulation


Supplementary Text

Summary Statistics

Table S1 displays summary statistics for the data. Since pollution monitors are not in every county
we have fewer pollution observations than bird abundance observations.


Robustness and Sensitivity Checks: OLS and IV Fixed Effects

Table S2 shows the robustness of our main results when using different sets of fixed effects to
control for different kinds of unobservable variables and using alternative levels of clustering to
control for arbitrary within-cluster correlation in error terms. Our results are highly robust to the
choice of fixed effects except in the case of month-of-sample and county-by-month fixed effects
for the OLS approach where the estimates are attenuated. Our results are also robust to whether
we cluster at the summer-state level, or more conservatively at just the state level. In all cases the
Kleibergen-Paap F-Statistic suggests the instrument is strong.


Robustness and Sensitivity Checks: Bird Abundance Estimation Method

Table S3 shows the robustness of our OLS and IV results when using alternative approaches to
log-linearization when estimating bird abundance. Column 1 shows results from the simplest
approach where we use the average number of birds per checklist for each county-year-month
without any effort or detectability adjustments. Column 2 corresponds to using equation (1) to
estimate bird abundance, where it is estimated using Poisson Pseudo Maximum Likelihood instead
of log-linearizing the equation. Column 3 corresponds to our preferred log-linearized approach for
comparison. Column 4 uses LASSO to select a set of effort and detectability variables to include.
In this approach, we include all possible interactions of linear, quadratic, and cubic functions of
hours, numbers of observers, distance covered, and area covered. We also include the set of 24
hour-of-day fixed effects, a dummy variable for if distance covered was 0 indicating that the
checklist corresponds to a stationary count, and a dummy variable for if there was just one observer
for the checklist. Estimates are strongly negative across all possible specifications for both the
OLS and IV approach.

Robustness and Sensitivity Checks: Spatial Displacement

One potential threat to our approach is that we may simply be picking up on spatial displacement
where birds move into neighboring counties but are not physically harmed by the pollution itself.
This would move birds from high ozone counties to low ozone counties, and, as an artifact, we
would estimate a negative relationship between bird abundance and ozone. This mechanism would
be a violation of the Stable Unit Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA). We test for SUTVA
                                                 18
violations in Table S4. Column 1 shows our main OLS results. Column 2 is a spatial lag model
that includes additional variables capturing the average ozone and PM2.5 levels across all border
counties. If there was a SUTVA violation we would expect the estimated coefficients on average
border county ozone to be positive, indicating that birds are moving to avoid higher ozone levels.
The negative ozone estimate indicates that there is unlikely to be a SUTVA violation. Column 3
tests for SUTVA violations in an alternative way by averaging pollution across a county and all of
its border counties so it acts as a larger geographical unit. If there was a SUTVA violation we
would expect this estimated coefficient to be smaller than the estimates in Column 1, however it
is approximately the same size. Column 4 is similar to our main IV result with an additional
variable capturing the PM2.5 level of own county. Column 5 replicates the test in Column 3 but
using the IV strategy. Again, the IV estimates in Columns 4 and 5 are similar, suggesting that there
is little to no spatial displacement caused by ozone that is confounding the interpretation of our
results.

Robustness and Sensitivity Checks: Alternative weighting of observations

Table S5 shows the robustness of our OLS and IV results when assigning sample weights using
an alternative function of the number of checklists in a given county-year-month. We explore
functions of the following form: sample weight = min(cap, number of checklists) where cap is
some level at which we cap the maximum weight. This is in order to test whether our results are
driven by a few counties with large numbers of checklists (Fig. S1A). Column 1 caps the number
of checklists in the weighting to be 20, which is approximately the median in the distribution of
checklist counts. Column 2 and 3 cap the number of checklists in the weighting at 90th and 99th
percentile, which is 185 and 781 checklists respectively. Both the OLS and IV estimation results
in the three columns are comparable to our preferred specification where we do not assign any
specific cap at the number of checklists in the weighting. The robustness check shows that our
results are not driven by a small number of counties with lots of checklists.


Checklist Statistics and Locations

Figs. S1A-S1C show the spatial distribution of checklists and birder effort. Checklist locations and
effort are concentrated near population centers, illustrating the potential need for effort-adjusted
counts.


Species Maps

Fig. S2A-S2F shows abundance maps for six different bird species of different sizes, ranges, and
seasons. The abundance distributions match closely to the distributions obtained from alternative
modeling approaches like the Spatial-Temporal Exploratory Model (STEM) developed for eBird
data, which provided rich geo-spatial details in the abundance estimates. The drawback of using
these alternative approaches like STEM in our study context is that they often do not provide time
series variation in abundance which is key to our implementation of the "within" (i.e., fixed effects)
estimation that exploits month-over-month variation in air pollution.



                                                 19
Fig. S1.
The number of eBird checklists (A), total hours spent birding (B) and total distance covered (C)
per county in percentiles.




                                              20
Fig. S2.
Year-round abundance map for California Quail (A), Black-Capped Chickadee (B), European
Starling (C). Breeding season abundance map for Osprey (D), Great Blue Heron (E), and Sandhill
Crane (F). County colors indicate ventiles of bird abundance across all years. Darker colors
indicate greater abundance.
Note: Counties in the lower ventiles often all have effectively zero abundance. For example,
outside the top ventile for California Quail, all counties have effectively 0 observations in the
checklist and variation in color is just statistical noise.




                                               21
                                      Summary statistics.

                                                              (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                       Observations        Mean          S.D.
 Total number of checklists                                 276,685        41.04        113.87
 Birding time per checklist (hours)                         276,685         1.62         1.57
 Number of observers per checklist                          276,685         2.08         3.31
 Most common birding time of day                            276,685        8 AM            -
 Total bird counts per checklist                            276,685       149.61        227.42
      Migrants                                              279,764       120.14        191.54
      Residents                                             279,663         9.54        10.73
      Waterfowl                                             279,797        21.70        52.36
      Landbirds                                             279,526        59.79        68.78
      Shorebirds                                            280,197         4.07        12.86
      Waterbirds                                            279,934        21.23        53.78
      Mass: < 16g                                           279,853         8.83        11.93
      Mass: 16 ­ 38g                                        279,780        18.54        23.55
      Mass: 38 ­ 142g                                       279,575        30.20        43.89
      Mass: > 142g                                          279,879        39.88        82.32
 Air Quality Index (AQI)                                    207,210        40.19        13.27
 Ozone                                                      157,091         0.03         0.01
 SO2                                                        105,177         1.89         2.01
 CO                                                         78,967          0.36         0.22
 NO2                                                        82,048          9.73         6.01
 PM2.5                                                      156,742         9.43         3.74

Table S1. The number of observations in column 1 is the number of county-by-year-by-month-
level observations for each variable. The analysis drops the largest 1% bird counts within each
bird group to eliminate outlier counts.




                                              22
 OLS (Panel A) and IV (Panel B) specifications varying the fixed effects included in the model.




Table S2. The entries in Panel A are the coefficient estimates of the associations between air
pollution and bird abundance using ordinary least squares regressions. The entries in Panel B are
the coefficient estimates from the triple difference estimator. Column 2 is the preferred
specification. Additional control variables are listed at the bottom of this table. Reported standard
errors are clustered at the state-season level in column 1-6. In column 7, the reported standard
errors are clustered at the state level. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity. The
regressions are weighted by the number of checklists in a given county-year-month. The data used
is from 2002 to 2016 for 1,900 counties. Both bird count and air pollution variables are
standardized to be mean zero, SD one. All regressions use binned temperature and precipitation as
weather controls. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10.




                                                 23
      OLS (Panel A) and IV (Panel B) specifications varying the effort adjustment method.




Table S3. The entries in Panel A are the coefficient estimates of the associations between air
pollution and bird abundance using ordinary least squares regressions. The entries in Panel B are
the coefficient estimates from the triple difference estimator. Column 1 is from regressing the
number of birds observed on county-month-year fixed effects to estimate bird abundance. Column
2 corresponds to estimating the multiplicative version of equation (1) with Poisson Pseudo
Maximum Likelihood to estimate bird abundance. Column 3 is the preferred specification and
corresponds to using equation (1) to estimate bird abundance. Column 4 corresponds to equation
(1) but uses LASSO with 10-fold cross validation to select the set of control variables to address
effort and detectability. All regressions use county-by-year, summer-by-year, county-by-summer
fixed effects, and binned temperature and precipitation as weather controls. Reported standard
errors are clustered at the state-season level and are robust to heteroskedasticity. In column 4,
LASSO selected 27 out of 275 possible effort variables. The regressions are weighted by the
number of checklists in a given county-year-month. The data used are from 2002 to 2016 for 1,900
counties. Both bird count and air pollution variables are standardized to be mean zero, SD one.
*** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10.




                                               24
  OLS and IV estimates testing spatial displacement of birds and Stable Unit Treatment Value
                                    Assumption violations.




Table S4. The entries in Column 1-3 are the coefficient estimates of the associations between air
pollution and bird abundance using ordinary least squares regressions. The entries in Column 4-5
are the coefficient estimates from the instrumental variable design. All regressions use county-
by-year, summer-by-year, county-by-summer fixed effects, and binned temperature and
precipitation as weather controls. Reported standard errors are clustered at the state-season level
and are robust to heteroskedasticity. The regressions are weighted by the number of checklists in
a given county-year-month. The data used are from 2002 to 2016 for 1,900 counties. Both bird
count and air pollution variables are standardized to be mean zero, SD one. *** p < .01, ** p <
.05, * p < .10.




                                                25
     OLS (Panel A) and IV (Panel B) specifications varying the weighting of observations.




Table S5. The entries in Panel A are the coefficient estimates of the associations between air
pollution and bird abundance using ordinary least squares regressions. The entries in Panel B are
the coefficient estimates from the instrumental variable design. All regressions use county-by-
year, summer-by-year, county-by-summer fixed effects, and binned temperature and precipitation
as weather controls. Reported standard errors are clustered at the state-season level and are robust
to heteroskedasticity. The regressions are weighted by the number of checklists in a given county-
year-month. Column 1 caps the number of checklists in the sample weighting to be 20, which is
roughly the median. Column 2 caps the number of checklists in the weighting at the 90th percentile,
which is 185 checklists. Column 3 caps the number of checklists in the weighting at the 99 th
percentile, which is 781 checklists. The data used is from 2002 to 2016 for 1,900 counties. Both
bird count and air pollution variables are standardized to be mean zero, SD one. All regressions
use binned temperature and precipitation as weather controls. *** p < .01, ** p < .05, * p < .10.




                                                26
