                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             BETTING ON THE HOUSE:
                 SUBJECTIVE EXPECTATIONS AND MARKET CHOICES

                                       Nicolas L. Bottan
                                     Ricardo Perez-Truglia

                                      Working Paper 27412
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27412


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We are thankful for excellent comments from Emi Nakamura, Jon Steinsson, Bradley Nathan,
Jerry Nickelsburg and seminar discussants at UC Berkeley. Perez-Truglia was employed at
University of California, Los Angeles while much of this paper was written. We thank funding
from the UCLA's Ziman Center for Real Estate's Rosalinde and Arthur Gilbert Program in Real
Estate, Finance and Urban Economics and UCLA Anderson's Behavioral Lab. Zhihao Han
provided excellent research assistance. This project was reviewed and approved in advance by the
Institutional Review Boards at University of California Los Angeles (#18-001496 and
#19-000945) and Cornell University (#1811008440). The experiments were pre-registered in the
AEA RCT Registry (#0003663). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nicolas L. Bottan and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Betting on the House: Subjective Expectations and Market Choices
Nicolas L. Bottan and Ricardo Perez-Truglia
NBER Working Paper No. 27412
June 2020
JEL No. C81,C93,D83,D84,R31

                                           ABSTRACT

Home price expectations play a central role in macroeconomics and finance. However, there is
little direct evidence on how these expectations affect market choices. We provide the first
experimental evidence based on a large-scale, high-stakes field experiment in the United States.
We provided information by mail to 57,910 homeowners who recently listed their homes on the
market. Collectively, these homes were worth $34 billion dollars. We randomized the information
contained in the mailing to create non-deceptive, exogenous variation in the subjects' home price
expectations. We then used rich administrative data to measure the effects of these information
shocks on the subject's market choices. We find that, consistent with economic theory, higher
home price expectations caused the subjects to delay selling their homes. These effects are
statistically highly significant, economically large in magnitude, and robust to a number of sharp
checks. Our results indicate that market choices are highly elastic to expectations: a 1 percentage
point increase in home price expectations reduced the probability of selling within six months by
2.45 percentage points. Moreover, we provide evidence that this behavioral elasticity would be
even higher if it were not for the presence of optimization frictions.


Nicolas L. Bottan
Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
435A Kennedy Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
nicolas.bottan@cornell.edu

Ricardo Perez-Truglia
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
ricardotruglia@berkeley.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/3663
1       Introduction
Consumer expectations play a central role in modern macroeconomics and finance, and they
are of special interest to policymakers (Bernanke, 2007). Homeowners' expectations about
the future growth in home prices, also known as home price expectations, are especially
important. Because homes account for a large fraction of households' assets, home price
expectations can have major welfare and policy implications. Moreover, home price expecta-
tions played a central role in the accounts of the U.S. housing crisis of the late 2000s (Shiller,
2005; Glaeser and Nathanson, 2015; Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2018; Kaplan et al., 2019).
    According to economic theory, home price expectations should be a key input for home-
ownersâ decision-making in the real estate market. In particular, homeowners should be less
willing to sell their homes when they have more optimistic home price expectations, com-
pared with more pessimistic home price expectations. Despite their central role, there is little
direct evidence on whether home price expectations have a causal effect on the decision to
sell a property. In this paper, we fill this gap in the literature using a large-scale, high-stakes,
pre-registered natural field experiment.
    The relationship between home price expectations and market choices is plagued with
challenges to causal identification. For example, consider the time-series evidence that aver-
age home price expectations co-move with home prices. The direction of causality is difficult
to determine. Do home prices increase because of the increase in expectations, or do ex-
pectations rise in response to higher home prices? To make matters worse, other potential
omitted-variable biases could go in either direction.1 Without experimental data, quantifying
the causal effect of home price expectations on market choices is challenging.
    In the ideal experiment, we would take a sample of homeowners who are considering selling
their properties. Before they start receiving offers, we would flip a coin to randomize their
expectations. For example, if the coin falls heads up, the homeowner would be persuaded
that median home prices will appreciate by 1% over the next year. If it falls tails up,
the homeowners would be persuaded that median home prices will appreciate by 10% over
the next year. Six months after the randomization, we would measure which owners sold
their homes. According to economic models, the homeowners who were randomly assigned
to the 1% home price expectation should be more likely than their counterparts to sell
their properties within that time horizon. Moreover, the magnitude of the difference in
behavior between those two conditions indicates how elastic homeowners' behavior is to their
expectations, that is, how much less likely the decision to sale is for each percentage point
(pp) difference in home price expectations.
    1
     For instance, survey data are often subject to substantial measurement error, which can lead to attenu-
ation bias and thus an under-estimation of the causal effect of expectations on behavior.

                                                     2
    We designed a field experiment that closely mimics this ideal experiment. We mailed
letters to homeowners in the United States who had recently listed their houses on the
market. These letters included information on the current level and evolution of median home
prices for comparable homes (i.e., homes in the same ZIP Code and with the same number
of bedrooms). Some information in the letters was randomized to create non-deceptive,
exogenous shocks to the subjectsâ home price expectations. We then used publicly available
administrative records to check when homeowners sold their homes. We used these data to
measure whether the exogenous shocks to home price expectations induced by our letters
affected the subjectsâ subsequent market choices.
    The shocks to home price expectations were based on an information-provision experi-
ment. All letters included information about the current median home price. The letters
could differ on two features, which were cross-randomized. First, we randomized whether the
letter included or did not include additional information on the evolution of home prices, here-
inafter referred to as the disclosure-randomization. Second, we randomized the source used
for the information on the price evolution, hereinafter referred to as source-randomization.
We used five sources that have significant effects on home price expectations, according to
prior survey experiments (Armona et al., 2019; Fuster et al., 2018): the average price change
over the past year, the average price change over the past two years, or one of three forecasts
about the price change in the next year (according to three alternative statistical models).2
To illustrate the exogenous shocks induced by the source-randomization, consider a subject
selling a 2-bedroom home in ZIP Code 33308. That homeowner could be randomly allocated
to one of the following five signals of home price growth: an annual growth rate of 1.2%
over the past one year; an annual growth rate of 3.6% over the past two years; an annual
growth forecast of 2.6% (according to statistical model 1); an annual growth forecast of 4.1%
(model 2); or an annual growth forecast of 3.5% (model 3). Relative to receiving the first
signal (1.2%), receiving the second signal (3.6%) should result in more optimistic home price
expectations. Moreover, we can quantify the intensity of the information shock. Relative to
receiving the first signal, receiving the second signal should amount to an information shock
of 2.4 pp (= 3.6 - 1.2); likewise, relative to the first signal, receiving the third, fourth, or
fifth signals should amount to information shocks of 1.4, 2.9, or 2.3 pp, respectively. The
exogenous shocks induced by the disclosure-randomization operate in a similar fashion as the
source-randomization, except that they exploit heterogeneity in signals within information
sources (i.e., across markets) rather than heterogeneity across information sources.
    We implemented the field experiment with a sample of individuals who had recently listed

   2
     All letters, regardless of the source, were based on real data that homeowners could access from publicly
available sources.

                                                      3
their homes for sale. We identified this subject pool using publicly available information from
a major online listing website. Using unique identifiers for the property, we merged those
records with rich administrative data from county assessors. These public records include
detailed information about the property and its owners, such as their full names and mailing
addresses. We then used that contact information to mail a letter to the owners of the listed
properties. Using the same unique identifiers, we then used public records to track whether
and when each property was sold over the next 6 months. In June 2019, we mailed the
letters to 57,910 unique homeowners in 36 counties across seven U.S. states. The homes were
collectively valued at $34 billion dollars.
    The field experiment was designed to measure how the information shocks contained in
the letters affect subsequent market choices. To aid in the interpretation of the main findings
from the field experiment, we also designed a supplemental survey experiment to measure
the effects of the information shocks on home price expectations. This supplemental survey
experiment exposed 1,400 additional subjects to the exact same information treatments used
in the field experiment. After the information provision experiment we elicited the subjects'
home price expectations using standard survey methods. The supplemental survey was part
of the same randomized control trial pre-registration as the field experiment, and it was also
conducted on the same month as the field experiment.
    The data from the supplementary survey experiment confirmed that our information
shocks had the expected effects on home price expectations, with the expected sign and with
a significant magnitude. A 1 pp information shock increased the one-year-ahead home price
expectations by 0.205 pp (p-value=0.001). The degree to which individuals incorporated the
information provided in the experiment is comparable in magnitude with the findings from
survey experiments on home price expectations (Armona, Fuster, and Zafar, 2019; Fuster,
Perez-Truglia, Wiederholt, and Zafar, 2018) and other macroeconomic expectations (Cavallo
et al., 2017).
    Most important, the results from the field experiment confirm that the information shocks
affected actual, high-stakes market choices and in the direction predicted by economic theory.
A larger information shock (i.e., making expectations more optimistic) reduced the speed at
which the properties were sold. This effect was highly statistically significant and large in
magnitude: a 1 pp higher information shock caused a 0.330 pp drop in the probability that
the property was sold within 12 weeks (p-value=0.001), implying a behavioral elasticity of
-0.33.
    The results from the field experiment are robust to a number of sharp checks. We use
an event study analysis to exploit variations in the timing of when subjects received and
read our letters. First, we estimate the effects on the outcomes right before the letters were


                                              4
delivered. Because the letters had not reached the subjects yet, they should have no effect
on the sales outcome. As expected, the effects of the information shocks were precisely
estimated around zero in the pre-treatment period. Moreover, we exploit the fact that not
all letters were delivered and read at the same time but instead were gradually opened over a
period of seven weeks. We show that, as expected, the effects of the letters intensified during
that period and stabilized thereafter. Moreover, the event-study analysis shows that the
effects of our information shocks were highly persistent. For instance, behavioral elasticity
estimated at 28 weeks post-treatment (-0.325, p-value=0.002) was close to the previously
reported elasticity estimated at 12 weeks post-treatment (-0.330, p-value=0.001).
     For an additional falsification test, we estimated placebo regressions that are identical to
the baseline specification, except using dependent variables as pre-treatment characteristics,
such as the number of days the property had been listed prior to our experiment or the
original listing price. Because those outcomes were determined prior to the letter delivery, it
should be impossible for the randomization of the information shocks contained in the letter
to affect them. As expected, we find placebo effects that were close to zero, statistically
insignificant, and precisely estimated. We provide a number of additional robustness checks.
For example, we use binned scatterplots to show that our main effects were linear and not
driven by outliers. We show that our results are consistent if, instead of combining the
disclosure-randomization and source-randomization variation, we look at those two sources
of experimental variation separately.
     The reported elasticities (e.g., -0.330 elasticity at 24 weeks post-treatment) constitute
an intention-to-treat effect. We provide estimates of the treatment effect on the treated, ad-
dressing two main forms of non-compliance. First, conditional on subjectsâ reading the letter,
the information shock introduced in the letter may not affect their home price expectations.
For example, the subjects may not update their expectationsbecause they have confidence
in their prior beliefs. We used the results from the supplemental survey experiment as a
measure of the rate of pass-through from information shocks to expectations. Second, some
subjects may not have read the letter (e.g., letters may have been lost in the mail, discarded
without opening, or read too late, such as after selling the property). Using data from our
own mailing campaign and statistics from the U.S. Postal Office, we estimate that around
35.1% of subjects were affected by this form of non-compliance.
     After correcting for the two sources of non-compliance, the estimated elasticity between
                                                                                  -0.328
expectations and the probability of selling in the next six months is -2.45 (= 0.205 ·0.649
                                                                                            ). This
result indicates that subjects were highly elastic to their expectations: increasing home price
expectations by 1 pp caused a reduction in the sales probability of 2.45 pp. When combined
with the high variation in home price expectations across individuals and over time, our


                                                5
experimental estimates suggest that home price expectations are a major driver of market
choices. For example, according to our supplemental survey, the standard deviation in home
price expectations was 5.39 pp. An increase in expectations of this magnitude (5.39 pp)
would reduce the sales probability by 13.21 pp (= 2.45 · 5.39).
    Finally, we provide evidence that some subjects would like to react more strongly to
changes in home price expectations but cannot do so due to optimization frictions. We study
the (pre-registered) heterogeneity in the effects of information shocks between properties that
were owner-occupied (78.4% of subjects) and non-owner-occupied (21.6% of subjects). We
argue that, relative to the subjects who occupied the properties, subjects who do not live
on their properties face fewer optimization frictions. To start with, subjects living on their
properties need to move out of the property after selling. Moreover, they may need to move
out by a deadline due to work or school. Moreover, the subjects moving out of the property
may plan to buy another home in the same or nearby neighborhoods, or may have already
bought one. As a result, whether they expect home values to appreciate in the neighborhood
or not may not be a relevant factor in the decision to sell, because they will be exposed to
the same appreciation regardless of whether and when they sell their properties. On the
contrary, owners who are not occupying the property own them as investments and thus do
not face the same constraints. They do not need to move out of the property or stay in the
same neighborhood, and they can do whatever they want with the money after selling the
property, such as buying real estate in other neighborhoods or investing in mutual funds.
    We find that the effects of information shocks are qualitatively consistent for subjects who
are occupants and those who are not occupants, as they have the same sign and are statisti-
cally significant. Consistent with the above conjecture, however, we find that the effects are
quantitatively quite different: the effects are almost three times as large for subjects who do
not live in the home as they are for subjects who do. For example, at 28 weeks after the start
of the letter delivery, the effect of information shocks is -0.637 (p-value=0.003) for the non-
occupant-owner and -0.225 (p-value=0.066) for occupant-owner, and the difference between
these two coefficients is statistically significant (p-value=0.095) and persistent. This large
difference suggests that, in the absence of frictions, the elasticity of behavior to expectations
would be even larger.3
    This study relates and contributes to various strands of literature. Most important, this
study relates to literature on the role of subjective expectations on the housing market. Some
non-experimental studies link survey expectations to decisions such as whether to buy or rent
or the size of the mortgage (Bailey, Cao, Kuchler, and Stroebel, 2018; Bailey, Davila, Kuchler,


   3
       For evidence on the role of optimization frictions in other contexts, see for example Giglio et al. (2019).

                                                         6
and Stroebel, 2018).4 To our knowledge, the only experimental work on this topic is based
on survey experiments and laboratory games (Armona, Fuster, and Zafar, 2019).
    We contribute to this literature by measuring the effects of home price expectations on
market behavior with nearly ideal experimental data. Rather than using survey data to mea-
sure behavior, which is subject to many criticisms, such as experimenter demand effects, we
combined the information experiments with rich behavioral data from administrative records
to measure the effects on real, high-stakes market behavior. This is a naturally occurring
context, as a large fraction of Americans face decisions about selling a home.5 This also is
a high-stakes context, as the decision accounts for a large fraction of the net worth of the
decision maker. Indeed, buying or selling a home is arguably one of the biggest decisions
that Americans make, financially and otherwise (Brooks, 2017). Our large-scale experiment
involving nearly 60,000 subjects allows us to provide precise estimates and sharp falsification
tests, such as providing an event-study analysis of the information provision experiment.
Last, in addition to providing a qualitative test of the causal effect of expectations on behav-
ior, our field experiment also allows for a meaningful quantification of the magnitude of the
elasticity between expectations and market choices.
    Our study also relates to a broad and growing literature using information-provision
experiments to study subjective macroeconomic expectations. These survey experiments
have been implemented along various dimensions of macroeconomic expectations, including
home price expectations (Armona et al., 2019; Fuster et al., 2018), inflation expectations
(Armantier et al., 2016; Cavallo et al., 2017; Coibion et al., 2018), and GDP growth (Roth
and Wohlfart, 2019). These studies typically provide a random subset of respondents with
a piece of information and measure the corresponding effects on their subsequent survey
responses, including their posterior beliefs, attitudes, or even small-stakes laboratory choices
(Armantier et al., 2015; Armona et al., 2019). We contribute to this literature by assessing
the effects of macroeconomic expectations on actual behavior in a high-stakes and naturally
occurring context.
    Additionally, we intend to make a methodological contribution. Our field experiment
can be implemented to study not only home price expectations but countless questions from
macroeconomics, urban economics, finance, real estate economics, and behavioral economics.
Our experimental framework does not have high barriers to entry, as we rely on data sources
that are publicly available and easily accessible. The experiment can be implemented in just
a few weeks for less than $0.25 per subject, and it is potentially scalable to up to a million

   4
      For example, Bailey et al. (2018) presents evidence that individuals are more likely to transition from
renting to owning after geographically distant friends experience large recent home price increases.
    5
      According to the U.S. Census data for the fourth quarter of 2019, the homeownership rate was 65.1%.
According to data from the National Association of Realtors, 5.34 million homes were sold in 2019.

                                                     7
subjects per experiment.


2     Research Design
2.1    Hypothesis
We seek to test a simple prediction from economic models: higher home price expectations
should increase the reservation value of the seller and thus, on average, it should take longer
for those properties to be sold. This basic prediction from an asset pricing model requires
minimal assumptions. For illustration purposes, we provide a simple version of this model
in Appendix A. The intuition behind this model is straightforward. The individual holds a
real asset (i.e., the home) and can sell it at any time. If the individual expects the price of
the home to appreciate, the decision to sell involves a simple trade-off between the expected
appreciation and the risk from price volatility. An increase in the expected appreciation
makes it optimal to wait for a more attractive offer. Thus, on average, it takes longer for the
owner to get rid of the asset.


2.2    Econometric Model
In this section, we discuss the econometric model around which we designed the field exper-
iment.
    In the field experiment, we could randomize whether subjects received a signal about
the future annual growth rate of home prices. Assume we randomized the provision of a
fixed signal that takes the value %. The effect on the subsequent home price expectations
and market choices depends on the prior beliefs of the individual. For subjects whose prior
home price expectations were below %, we expect the signal to cause them to update
their home price expectations upward (and thus take longer to sell their homes). On the
contrary, subjects whose prior home price expectations exceeded % should update their home
price expectations downward (and put their homes up for sale homes faster). If the prior
expectations were exactly %, then recipients should not update home price expectations
(and should not change their market choices).
    The challenge in our field experiment is that it is infeasible to measure the prior be-
liefs of tens of thousands of homeowners. Thus, we used a type of information-provision
experiment that does not rely on information about prior beliefs (e.g., see Bottan and Perez-
Truglia (2017), Bergolo et al. (2017) and Perez-Truglia and Troiano (2018)). We propose a
simple design based on two sources of randomization: disclosure-randomization and source-
randomization.

                                              8
    Let Yipost be the outcome of interest. In the field experiment, Yipost indicates if the
homeowner sold the property by a given date; in the survey data, Yipost corresponds to the
home price expectations. The subscript i indexes individuals, and the superscript post refers
to an outcome that was measured in the post-treatment period.
    Let Eij be a signal about the future growth of home prices, where the subscript i notes
that this signal pertains to individual i and the superscript j = 1, ..., J corresponds to the
information source. For example, j = 1 could be the annual price change over the past one
year, and j = 2 could be the annual price change over the past two years. Each individual
is randomly assigned to one information source, denoted by ji . Moreover, we randomized
                                                           j
whether the signal produced by that information source (Ei i ) is disclosed to the subject. Let
Di be an indicator variable that equals one if the chosen signal is disclosed to the subject
and zero otherwise.
    The regression of interest is as follows:

                                          j
                      Yipost = 0 + 1 · Ei i · Di + 2 · Di +        j · Eij + i                 (1)
                                                               j

    We used this baseline specification in the analysis. For the sake of brevity, this equation
controls linearly for Eij . In practice, we controlled for it flexibly by including, in addition to
the linear terms, sets of decile dummies.
                                          j
    The main variable of interest is Ei i · Di , which we call the information shock. Its cor-
responding coefficient, 1 , measures the effect of the information shocks on the outcome of
                                                                                   j
interest. The orthogonality assumption, required for causal inference, is E [Ei i · Di · i ] = 0.
                    j
Given that both Ei i and Di are randomly assigned, the orthogonality assumption should be
satisfied.
    The causal identification exploits two distinct sources of exogenous variation: disclosure-
randomization and source-randomization. To illustrate the source-randomization, we focused
on the special case in which the information is disclosed to everyone (i.e., Di = 1 for every i)
and thus the disclosure-randomization is irrelevant. Equation (1) then becomes the following:

                                                 j
                             Yipost = 0 + 1 · Ei i +       j · Eij + i                         (2)
                                                       j

    Each individual could be randomly assigned to one of many signals, some more optimistic
than others. This specification asks, what is the effect of having been assigned to the signal
that was randomly chosen, after controlling for each signal that the subject could have been
                                                          j
assigned? Without loss of generality, we can normalize Ei i by differencing it out with respect
to the first information source (j = 1). Define 1 = 1 + 1 and j = j for j = 2, ..., J . We
then re-express equation (2) as follows:

                                                9
                                                j
                          Yipost = 0 + 1 · [Ei i - Ei1 ] +       j · Eij + i                        (3)
                                                             j

                                                j
    To illustrate the information shock, [Ei i - Ei1 ], consider a subject selling a 2-bedroom
home in ZIP Code 33308. That homeowner could be randomly presented with one of the
following five signals: an annual growth rate of 1.2% over the past one year (j = 1); an
annual growth rate of 3.6% over the past two years (j = 2); an annual growth forecast of
2.6% according to statistical model 1 (j = 3); an annual growth forecast of 4.1% according
to model 2 (j = 4); or an annual growth forecast of 3.5% according to model 3 (j = 5). The
             j
variable [Ei i - Ei1 ] equals zero if ji = 1 and 2.4 if ji = 2. That is, relative to receiving the first
signal, receiving the second signal means an information shock of 2.4 pp (= 3.6 - 1.2). The
information shock equals 1.4, 2.9, and 2.3 pp when ji = 3, ji = 4, and ji = 5, respectively.
Note that we need variation in signals across information sources for identification in this
case.
    The exogenous shocks induced by disclosure-randomization operate similarly to the source-
randomization, except that they exploit heterogeneity in signals within information sources
(i.e., across markets) rather than heterogeneity across information sources. To illustrate the
disclosure-randomization, consider the case with a single signal (i.e., J = 1) and thus the
source-randomization is irrelevant. In that case, equation (1) becomes the following:

                         Yipost = 0 + 1 · Ei1 · Di + 2 · Di +  · Ei1 + i                            (4)

    The parameter  measures the relationship between the signal (Ei1 ) and the Yipost for
individuals who are not shown the signal. The idea is that if individuals react to this sig-
nal, this relationship becomes even stronger among those who were shown the signal. The
parameter 1 measures precisely that: how much stronger that relationship is for individuals
who were shown the signal (Di = 1), relative to individuals who were not shown the signal
(Di = 0). Note that this approach relies on heterogeneity in signals across subjects. If, for
example, all subjects lived in the same neighborhood (i.e., the signal took the same value for
every i), there would be no variation to identify 1 .
    As stated in the pre-registration, our baseline specification pools the two sources of ran-
dom variation to maximize statistical power. We also estimated the parameter of interest
using the two sources of variation separately to assess whether the results were consistent
across the two sources of exogenous variation. To isolate the source-randomization, we re-
estimated the baseline model, restricted to all the i's with Di = 1. To isolate the disclosure-
randomization, we estimated the baseline specification from equation (1) but included an
                               j
additional control variable, Ei i , which eliminated the source-randomization variation. Con-

                                                    10
ditional on disclosing information, the effect of being assigned to one source or another was
               j
absorbed by Ei i . Thus, the only remaining variation identifying 1 is that the signal is shown
only to some individuals (i.e., the disclosure-randomization).


2.3     Mailing Design
All subjects in the field experiment were sent a letter by mail. Figure 1 shows a sample of the
envelope. We took a number of measures to communicate that the letter, though unsolicited,
came from a legitimate source. The top-left corner of the envelope included the logo for the
University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) and a note about the research study. The
top-right corner of the envelope included non-profit organization postage.
    Appendix C includes a sample letter (for a fictitious subject). Figure 2 shows the boil-
erplate content, including the front page (Figure 2.a) and back page (Figure 2.b). The
boilerplate content comprised the official UCLA logo in the header, contact information in
the footer, a physical correspondence address, and a URL of the study's website with addi-
tional information (general study information without specifying any hypotheses and contact
information for the researchers and institutional review board). A copy of this website was
hosted on UCLA's official website (see Appendix D).
    Figure 2 shows the placeholders (marked as «Information» and «Information Details»)
for the two pieces of information that differed across treatment groups. The «Information»
section included a table with information about home prices. Figure 3 shows a sample table
for each of the six treatment groups (discussed below). The emph«Information Details»
section included methodological notes for the table, such as data sources and statistical
models used. Appendix Figure B.1 shows the six corresponding methodological notes.
    All letters contained information on the current median home value of similar properties.
For example, subjects who listed a 3-bedroom home in ZIP Code 90210 received a letter
indicating Zillow's estimated median home value for 3-bedroom homes in ZIP Code 90210.
We used the same property types as those used by online real estate market platforms:
1-bedroom, 2-bedroom, 3-bedroom, 4-bedroom, and 5+ bedroom.6
    In addition to information about the current median home values, the table could include
information on to the evolution of median home values, which individuals could use in forming
their home price expectations. Homeowners were randomized into one of six treatment
groups. These treatment groups differ in whether the table includes additional information

   6
     In a small minority of properties, the number of bedrooms was not available and thus we used a separate
category ("all homes") that aggregated all previous categories. Also, Zillow does not produce estimates of
median home values for some combinations of ZIP codes and bedrooms, in which case we used the estimates
for "all homes" instead.

                                                    11
on the price evolution and the source of said information:

      Baseline: no additional information on price evolution

      Past-1: price change over the past year

      Past-2: price change over the past two years

      Forecast-1: price change forecast over the next year using statistical model 1

      Forecast-2: price change forecast over the next year using statistical model 2

      Forecast-3: price change forecast over the next year using statistical model 3

    We choose two types of information sources for price changes, recent price changes and
statistical forecasts, which have been proven to have significant effects on home expectations
in survey experiments. For example, Fuster et al. (2018) show that, upon being shown one
of these types of information, subjects update their expectations in the expected direction.
Fuster et al. (2018) also show that most households are willing to pay positive amounts for
these information sources, which suggests that they find them both useful. Beyond survey
experiments, additional theoretical and empirical evidence suggests that these information
sources may be relevant when forming expectations. According to the backward-looking
expectations model, individuals form beliefs by looking at recent price changes (Case and
Shiller, 1989; Shiller, 2005). According to models of rational expectation, households form
expectations based on professional forecasts (Carroll, 2003).
    The price changes over the past one year (Past-1) and past two years (Past-2) corre-
sponded to the raw Zillow data. The three statistical forecasts (Forecast-1, Forecast-2, and
Forecast-3) were based on the same Zillow data. All three forecasts were estimated using
year/ZIP Code-level data on the Zillow Home Value Index for 1997â2019. All three mod-
els are autoregressive, but they differed in the set of explanatory variables chosen. These
differences in specification yielded slightly different forecasts. The first model used five lags
of the dependent variable. The second model used five lags of the dependent variable plus
five lags of the state-level average of the dependent variable. The third model used three
lags of the dependent variable, three lags of the city-level average of the dependent variable,
and three lags of the city-level employment rate. Appendix B.3 presents more details about
the information sources, including a comparison of the out-of-sample predictive power over
recent years. All five information sources were informative to a reasonably similar degree: all
had similar predictive power and were comparable to the predictive power of Zillow's official
forecasts.

                                               12
    Each panel of Figure 3 corresponds to the hypothetical table that a subject would receive,
depending on the assigned treatment group. It shows real examples based on an individual
selling a 2-bedroom home in ZIP Code 33308. Panel (a) shows the baseline letter, which
includes the current median price level only. The following five panels add information
on the price evolution: panel (b) shows an annual growth rate of 1.2% over the past year
(Past-1 treatment); panel (c) shows an annual growth rate of 3.6% over the past two years
(Past-2 treatment); panel (d) shows the annual growth of rate 2.6% projected by Model 1
(Forecast-1 treatment); panel (e) shows the annual growth rate of 4.1% projected by Model
2 (Forecast-2 treatment); and panel (f) shows the annual growth rate of 3.5% projected by
Model 3 (Forecast-3 treatment). As discussed in Section 2, our identification strategy requires
heterogeneity in signals across individuals and across information sources, which we show in
Section 3 below.
    As shown inside the blue box at the bottom of Figure 2.a, the letter includes a URL to
an online survey. To verify that the respondents were legitimate subjects and to link survey
responses at the individual level, we included a unique 5-letter survey code in the letter.
Respondents had to enter the survey code in the first screen of the survey (see Appendix E)
before they could answer any questions. The main goal for including the survey link was
to provide a proxy for the dates when recipients opened the letters, as in Perez-Truglia and
Cruces (2017) and Perez-Truglia and Troiano (2018).


2.4    Design of Supplemental Survey Experiment
The main hypothesis relates to the effect of the information provided in the letters on mar-
ket behavior. We supplemented that evidence with a survey experiment. Specifically, we
wanted to confirm that the information shocks affected home price expectations in the ex-
pected direction. Moreover, we wanted to quantify the effects of the information shocks on
expectations to aid in the interpretation of the field experiment results.
    Ideally, we would use the survey responses. However, based on experiences in previous
projects, we anticipated an extremely low response rate and endogenous selection into the
survey. For example, Perez-Truglia and Troiano (2018) conducted a mailing intervention
in the context of tax compliance that included a link to an online survey, similar to ours.
Only 0.2% of the subjects who received the letter responded to the survey. In anticipation
of these challenges, we designed and implemented a supplemental survey experiment that
randomized the same information included in the field experiment but was designed to be
conducted on an auxiliary sample of respondents recruited from an online platform. The full
survey instrument was included in the same pre-registration used for the field experiment
and was conducted around the same date as the field experiment.

                                              13
    Appendix F includes the full survey instrument. The structure of the online survey was
as follows:7

        Step 1 (Elicit Property Details): To provide randomized information relevant
        to the respondent, we asked respondents about their current residency, such as their
        number of bedrooms and 5-digit ZIP code.

        Step 2 (Elicit Prior Belief): Respondents were shown the current median home
        value (in May 2019) for a similar home (same number of bedrooms and ZIP code) and
        asked to provide the expected median value one year later (in May 2020).

        Step 3 (Information-Provision Experiment): All respondents were told that some
        survey participants will be randomly chosen to receive information about home prices.
        On the following screen, respondents find out the information selected for them. Re-
        spondents were assigned to one of the same six treatment groups from the field exper-
        iment described in Section 2.3.

        Step 4 (Elicit Posterior Belief): On the following screen, subjects were told that
        all participants can reassess their guess about future home prices, regardless of what
        they guessed initially or the information that they received from us. We re-elicited the
        same question about their expectations of the median price one year later, as well as
        an additional question on their expectations five years later. As a placebo outcome,
        respondents were asked about their stock market expectations (respondents were told
        the closing price of the Dow Jones on May 31st and asked what they expect the price
        to be one year later).


3       Data Sources and Implementation Details
3.1      Data Sources
To implement the mailing experiment, we combined two sources of data: data on active real
estate listings and data for the property tax rolls from the county assessor. We used publicly
available data on real estate listings from a major listing website. These data included rich
information about the listed properties, such as address, listing price, property characteristics
(number of bedrooms, bathrooms, size, days on market), and the assessor's unique parcel
number (APN) for the property. We used the APN to match each listing to its corresponding

    7
     The survey included some additional questions that could be useful for disentangling mechanisms and
for heterogeneity analysisâ (see Appendix B.5 for more details).

                                                  14
record in the county assessor's tax rolls. Tax rolls contain rich information on the properties
and owners. Most important for our experiment, the tax rolls include the names of the owners
and their mailing addresses (for more details on the data sources, see Appendix B.1).
    By law, tax rolls are publicly available for every county in the United States. However,
accessibility to the tax rolls varies widely. Some counties post the data online. For example,
raw data from many counties in Florida can be easily downloaded at any time using a file
transfer protocol (FTP) address. Other counties, such as Alameda County in California,
provide this information only in person and on a one-by-one basis. Many others, such as Los
Angeles County, require filling out a short form and paying a fee to obtain a Compact Disc
with the raw data.
    For this field experiment, we selected a set of 36 counties to obtain a large enough subject
pool and for which all the required information from the tax rolls (e.g., owner's name and
mailing address) was easily accessible. These counties are distributed across seven states
and include 30 counties in Florida, Los Angeles County in California, Maricopa County in
Arizona, Clark County in Nevada, Cuyahoga County in Ohio, King County in Washington,
and Harris County in Texas. In practice, many other U.S. counties likely would be feasible
to include in this type of experiment.


3.2    Implementation of Mailing Experiment
On May 28, 2019, we obtained the information on the active real estate listings and the
latest available version of the secured tax rolls. Of the 173,708 active listings scraped, around
164,298 included the APN. For these listings, we merged nearly all listings (164,176 out of
164,298) with the county assessor's data. As the number of individuals in this initial sample
was substantially higher than the number of subjects needed for our experiment, we adopted
a conservative approach and excluded individuals who were not ideal for the experiment.
For example, we excluded non-residential properties and residential properties owned by
businesses, because it was unclear whether our letter would be delivered to the person making
selling decisions (e.g., the mailing address may correspond to the firm's lawyer). Similarly,
we excluded individuals who recently moved, according to the latest mail-forwarding data
from the U.S. Postal Services, and individuals who owned multiple properties in the same
county (for more implementation details, see Appendix B.2).
    After applying these filters, our pool of potential subjects consisted of 61,176 individuals.
From those, we selected a random sample of 60,000 individuals to send a letter. After
processing the data through the U.S. Postal Service, we excluded a minority (3.4%) of subjects
whose mailing addresses were flagged as undeliverable or vacant (1,193) or whose updated



                                               15
tax rolls indicated that we sent the letter to a former rather than current owner (845).8 The
final subject pool comprised 57,910 individuals to receive letters. These individuals were
randomly assigned to the following treatments: 20% to Baseline, 15% each to Past-1 and
Past-2, and 16.6% each to Forecast-1, Forecast-2, and Forecast-3. All letters were mailed on
June 10, 2019.


3.3       Descriptive Statistics and Randomization Balance
Table 1 shows some basic descriptive statistics about the sample. Column (1) presents the
average characteristics for the whole subject pool of 57,910 recipients. The average property
was on the market for 86 days, was listed for $575,000, had three bedrooms, 2.6 bathrooms,
2,300 sq. ft. of living space, and a lot size of 12,000 sq. ft. Additionally, columns (2) through
(7) of Table 1 break down the average characteristics by each of the six treatment groups.
The last column reports p-values for the null hypothesis that the average characteristics were
equal across all six treatment groups. The results indicate successful random assignment and
that the observable characteristics were balanced across treatment groups.
    Appendix B.4 presents some descriptive statistics about the subjects based on an inde-
pendent source of proprietary data: the average age was 58 years old, 31.9% were female,
68.8% were white, and their average annual household income of $128,000. We also show
that our sample is representative of the universe of homeowners in the United States in terms
of the observable characteristics of the owners and their properties. The main exception is
home values, which were on average twice as large for the subject pool as for the country as
a whole. We show that this difference arises mechanically, because the subject pool includes
several counties with high property values (e.g., Los Angeles County).


3.4       Variation in Signals
As explained in Section 2, the identification strategy relied on variations in signals within and
across information sources. In this section, we show that there was plenty of such variation.
    Figure 4 presents the results. Figure 4.a shows the variation within information sources,
which is relevant for the disclosure-randomization. This figure shows a histogram of the signal
that subjects would have received had they been assigned to the Past-1 treatment. The results
show plenty of variation. Subjects in the 10th percentile lived in areas where median home
values declined by -0.7% in the previous 12 months, and subjects in the 90th percentile lived
in areas where property values increased by 8.6%. The degree of heterogeneity is comparable
to the other four sources (e.g., the standard deviation in signals across individuals is 3.8 pp
   8
       The tax rolls were updated with a lag, thus 845 letters were sent to previous owners.

                                                      16
for Past-1, and the corresponding figure ranges from 1.2 to 4.0 for the other sources.) For
more details, see Appendix B.6.
    Figure 4.b presents the heterogeneity in signals across information sources, which is most
relevant for the source-randomization. This scatterplot shows the relationship between the
signals that the subjects would have received if they had been assigned to the Past-1 treatment
(i.e., annual growth rate over the past one year) versus the Past-2 treatment (i.e., annual
growth rate over the past two years). For example, this figure highlights a specific example:
for 2-bedroom homes in ZIP Code 33308, the recipient would have been shown a price change
of 1.2% if randomly assigned to the Past-1 treatment group and a price change of 3.5% if
randomly assigned to the Past-2 treatment group. The two signals are highly correlated: on
average, an extra 1% increase in the annual price change over the past one year is associated
with an extra 0.659% increase in the annual price change over the past two years. This
relationship is partly mechanical (the y-axis is an average that includes the x-axis) and partly
due to the well-known momentum in home prices. In any case, the most important fact is
that the relationship between these two potential signals is far from perfect: the R2 = 0.659 is
high but substantially below one. Moreover, in addition to the variation between the Past-1
and Past-2 treatments, significant variation occurs across other pairs of information sources
(see Appendix B.6 for more details).


3.5     Letter Delivery
The letters were mailed on June 10, 2019. To make the experiment more affordable, we used
non-profit postage. According to the U.S. Monitor Non-Profit Standard Mail Delivery Study,
it takes non-profit mailings about 10 days to be delivered, with some letters arriving as much
as a month after mailing (U.S. Monitor, 2014).9 As such, some subjects received and read
the letter a few days after that date, whereas others took weeks to receive and read the letter.
Even after delivery, it may take days or even weeks for the typical subject to open and read
the letter. Some subjects were travelling while the letter was delivered to their homes; some
subjects received the letter right away but put it away and did not open it until weeks later;
etcetera.
    Following Perez-Truglia and Cruces (2017) and Perez-Truglia and Troiano (2018), we
used the distribution of dates when the surveys included in the letter were completed as
a proxy for when the letters were actually read; hereafter, we refer to these dates as the
"read-receipt."10 Figure 5.a presents the results. The first survey response was received on

   9
      This delivery time is more than twice that of first-class mail, which is handled first, followed by presort
standard and finally non-profit mail.
   10
      Our proxy probably had some upward bias, because some people may have read the letter and waited a

                                                       17
June 15, thus marking the start of letter delivery. Indeed, this date coincided with the best
guess provided by the mailing company and was based on the location of the shipping facility
(Lombard, Illinois) and the location of the letter recipients. This figure suggests that the
letters were opened gradually from the start of the letter delivery until eight weeks later. The
median time from the start of the letter delivery until the read-receipt was approximately
three weeks.


3.6     Outcome Variable: Home Sales
To measure the behavioral outcomes, we scraped the administrative data for the real estate
listing website on a weekly basis, from two weeks before the start of letter delivery until 28
weeks after the start of letter delivery. We continue to scrape the data on a weekly basis, so
in a future version we may be able to look at even longer time horizons.
     Administrative records indicate whether the property was sold and on what date. Confir-
mation of property sale came from either the Multiple Listing Service (MLS) or the county
assessor records.11 This information is the source for our main outcome variable, the proba-
bility that a property is sold by a given date, as listed in the American Economic Association
randomized controlled trial pre-registry.
     Figure 5.b shows the evolution of the sales outcome for the subject pool. Note that the
fraction of homes sold increases smoothly over time. By 12 weeks after the start of letter
delivery, 38.8% of homes had been sold. By 20 weeks after the start of letter delivery, 50.6%
of homes had been sold. By 28 weeks, the end of our panel data, 57.5% of the properties had
been sold.


3.7     Implementation of the Supplemental Online Survey
For the supplemental online survey, we recruited subjects from Amazon's Mechanical Turk
(AMT) online marketplace. We followed several best practices for recruiting participants in
online surveys and experiments via AMT to ensure high-quality responses (Crump et al.,
2013). We restricted participants to those who resided in the United States. We offered
a $0.75 participation reward for a 5-minute survey and collected responses from June 21
to June 24.12 The final AMT sample included 1,404 respondents, who were assigned to
treatment groups using the same probabilities as in the main experiment (20% to the Baseline,

few days to respond to the survey. Another potential source of bias, which may be upwards or downwards,
is that survey respondents could open the letters more or less slowly than survey non-respondents.
    11
       If we had confirmation from both sources, we used the earliest date for which we had confirmation. Our
records usually included both sources, and the two dates were normally just a few days apart.
    12
       The survey included a short follow-up module. For details, see Appendix B.5.

                                                     18
15% each to Past-1 and Past-2, and 16.6% each to Forecast-1, Forecast-2, and Forecast-3).
Appendix B.5 presents more details about the AMT sample. For example, we show that
relative to the field experiment sample and the universe of U.S. homeowners, the online
sample is younger, less wealthy, and lives in smaller and cheaper homes. Consistent with
successful random assignment, the observable characteristics were balanced across treatment
groups.


4     Main Results
4.1    Effects on Survey Expectations
Our main interest was to study the effects of information on market choices. We first analyzed
the effects of information on home price expectations. This exercise confirmed that the
information shocks affected expectations in the expected direction and would be useful to
interpret the magnitude of the results from the field experiment.
    Table 2 presents the main regression results. All regressions shown in this table use the
exact same econometric specification corresponding to equation (1) from Section 2, with the
                                                             j
key independent variable being the Information Shock : Ei i · Ti . The only difference between
the different columns is that they can be based on different databases (the supplemental
survey in columns (1)â(4) and the field experiment in columns (5)â(8)) and that each column
uses a different dependent variable.
    Columns (1) through (4) of Table 2 were estimated using data from the supplemental
online survey. In column (1), the dependent variable is the posterior belief about the local
                                 post
home price one year ahead (H1     y ). In other words, the coefficient on Information Shock
measures how a 1 pp increase in the information shock affects the subsequent one-year-
ahead expectation of the respondents. The coefficient on Information Shock from column
(1) is positive (0.205) and statistically significant (p-value=0.001). A 1 pp increase in the
information shock causes an increase in home price expectations of 0.205 pp. In other words,
there is a 20.5% "pass-through" from the information shocks to the expectations. The fact
that the coefficient on Information Shock is significantly greater than zero implies that the
subjects found the information provided in the experiment relevant to form their home price
expectations. The fact that the coefficient on Information Shock is significantly less than
one suggests that the information provided to the subjects was not the only information they
considered. Some subjects may have ignored the information given to them because they
already knew it, because they did not trust the information source, or because they did not
pay enough attention to the survey.


                                             19
     The baseline specification from equation (1) assumes that the relationship between the
outcome of interest and the information shock was linear and symmetric around zero. Indeed,
a simple Bayesian learning model predicts this type of relationship when the outcome is the
posterior belief (i.e., column (1) of Table 2). This linear relationship has been found to fit
the data almost perfectly in a variety of information-provision experiments, including home
price expectations (Armantier et al., 2016; Cavallo et al., 2017; Bottan and Perez-Truglia,
2017; Fuster et al., 2018; Cullen and Perez-Truglia, 2018). We used binned scatterplots to
assess whether the implicit functional form assumptions provided a good fit for the data.
Figure 6.a shows the binned scatterplot version of the results from column (1) of Table 2.
The results indicate that the linear specification was a reasonable approximation. This figure
also suggests that the results were not driven by outliers.13
    Columns (2) through (4) of Table 2 present the effects on other survey outcomes. The
dependent variable in column (2) is identical to the dependent variable in column (1), except
that it corresponds to the expectation for five-years-ahead instead of one-year-ahead. The co-
efficient on Information Shock is positive (0.167) and statistically significant (p-value=0.017).
This result implies that when a subject receives an information shock, it propagates to the
more immediate expectation (one-year-ahead) and to the longer-term expectations (five-
years-ahead). The point estimate from column (1) is smaller in magnitude than the point
estimate from column (2), suggesting that the information shocks affect more immediate
expectations more strongly; however, that comparison must be considered in context, as
the coefficients from column (1) and (2) are statistically indistinguishable from each other
(p-value=0.560).
    Columns (3) and (4) of Table 2 present some falsification tests. The dependent variables
from columns (1) and (3) are identical, except that the outcome variable from column (1) is
a posterior belief (i.e., elicited after the information-provision experiment) and the outcome
variable from column (3) is a prior belief (i.e., the home price expectations elicited before
the information-provision experiment). The information shock has not been administered
to the subject yet, so it should have no effect on prior beliefs. As expected, the coefficient
on Information Shock from column (3) is close to zero (-0.014), statistically insignificant (p-
value=0.837), and precisely estimated. Moreover, we can reject the null hypothesis that the
baseline coefficient from column (1) is equal to the falsification coefficient from column (3),
with a p-value<0.001.14
  13
      In Appendix B.7, we provide further results on how subjects update beliefs based on the information
provided to them.
   14
      This equality test between two coefficients is based on the same data but different regressions. To
allow for a non-zero covariance between these two coefficients, we estimate a system of seemingly unrelated
regressions. In the remainder of the paper, when comparing coefficients from the same data but different
regressions, we always use this method.

                                                    20
    Column (4) of Table 2 presents the other falsification test. The dependent variables in
columns (1) and (4) are both posterior beliefs (i.e., elicited after the information-provision
experiment). However, whereas the dependent variable from column (1) corresponds to
the home price expectations, the dependent variable from column (4) corresponds to stock
market expectations. Because the information shock is specific to local home prices, we do not
expect individuals to extrapolate this information to the stock market expectations, and if
they do, it suggests spurious motives behind the belief updating, such as numerical anchoring
or experimenter-demand Cavallo et al. (2017). As expected, the coefficient on Information
Shock from column (4) is close to zero (0.017), statistically insignificant (p-value=0.899), and
precisely estimated.


4.2    Effects on Market Choices
Next, we turn to the effects of information shocks on market behavior. The main regression
results are presented in columns (5) through (8) of Table 2, which are estimated with the data
from the field experiment. Our main outcome of interest is whether the property was sold at
a given post-treatment date. Note that our information shock cannot have an instantaneous
effect on the sales outcome. Most likely, a few weeks should go by from when the letter is read
until the information contained in the letter could influence the sales outcome. Typically,
after reading the letter the seller will have to wait a couple of weeks to get some offers on the
house. And even after the seller accepts an offer, a couple of additional weeks must go by
until the sale shows up in the administrative records, due to the standard real estate closing
process.
    In column (5) of Table 2, the dependent variable equals 100 if the property was sold by
12 weeks after the start of letter delivery and zero otherwise. This is just a starting point.
Below, we report estimates for all the possible time horizons. According to the read-receipt
proxy from Section 3.5, virtually all subjects read our letter within eight weeks after the start
of the letter delivery. As a result, when looking at the sales outcome at 12 weeks after the
start of the letter delivery, most subjects had been "exposed" to the information for 4â11
weeks, allowing plenty of time for the information to affect sales outcomes. Moreover, around
37% of the properties were sold within this time horizon, allowing plenty of variation in this
outcome to identify the effects of our information.
    The coefficient on Information Shock from column (5) of Table 2 is negative (-0.330)
and highly statistically significant (p-value=0.001). This negative sign is consistent with the
prediction from economic theory (i.e., a positive shock to expectations should decrease the
probability that the property is sold). This coefficient is also economically large. A 1 pp
larger information shock causes a 0.330 pp drop in the probability that the property is sold

                                               21
within 12 weeks. This estimate implies a behavioral elasticity between the sales probability
and the information shock of 0.33. Note that this elasticity corresponds to an intention-
to-treat effect, because the information shocks do not fully materialize based on changes in
expectations. In Section 4.4, we provide estimates of a more relevant elasticity between home
price expectations and market choices.
    As previously discussed, the baseline specification implicitly assumes a relationship be-
tween information shocks and sales outcomes that is linear and symmetric around zero. In
practice, this may not be a good approximation: for example, individuals may find it easier
to react to good news than bad news, or they may care about their expectations only when
they are too optimistic or too pessimistic. To explore these possibilities, Figure 6.b presents
the binned scatterplot version of the results from column (5) of Table 2. The results indicate
that the baseline specification fits the data perfectly. Moreover, this binned scatterplot shows
that outliers do not drive the results.
    Column (6) of Table 2 is identical to column (5), except that the dependent variable
indicates if the property was sold within 28 weeks, instead of within 12 weeks, after the
start of letter delivery (i.e., the longest horizon we can assess with the currently available
data). These results indicate if the effects of the information shocks were short-lived (e.g.,
some owners waited an additional few weeks) or persistent. The coefficient on Information
Shock from column (6) is negative (-0.325) and statistically highly significant (p-value=0.002).
Indeed, the coefficient for 28 weeks later (-0.325, from column (6)) is almost identical and
statistically indistinguishable from the corresponding coefficient for 12 weeks later (-0.330,
from column (5)). These results indicate that the effects of the information shocks were
highly persistent and remained as strong at six months after the start of letter delivery as
they were at three months after the start of the letter delivery.
    Columns (7) and (8) of Table 2 present some falsification tests. Column (7) is identical
to column (1), except that the horizon is one week pre-treatment instead of 12 weeks post-
treatment. In other words, the dependent variable in column (7) equals 100 if the property
was sold right before the start of letter delivery and zero otherwise. As the information
shocks had not been administered to the subjects at that point, the information shocks
should have no effect on those market choices. As expected, the coefficient on Information
Shock from column (7) is close to zero (0.014), statistically insignificant (p-value=0.469), and
precisely estimated. Indeed, we can reject the null hypothesis that the falsification coefficient
(0.014, from column (4)) is equal to the baseline coefficient (-0.330, from column (1)), with
a p-value<0.001.
    We further assess whether the timing of effects relates to the timing of delivery of letters,
as expected. To do so, we present an event-study analysis of the effects of our information


                                               22
intervention. The top half of Figure 7 presents the results. This figure reproduces the results
from columns (5) and (6) of Table 2, corresponding to the horizons at 12 weeks after and 28
weeks after the start of letter delivery, as well as the corresponding results for every other
time horizon, from two weeks before the start of letter delivery (when the administrative data
was first downloaded to create the letters) until 28 weeks after the start of letter delivery
(the last date on which we collected the administrative data). To facilitate the comparison of
timing of read-receipts and the effects of the information, the bottom half of Figure 7 shows
the evolution of read-receipts (i.e., a reproduction of Figure 5.a).
    The evidence indicates that the timing of the experimental effects is largely consistent
with the timing of letter delivery. First, the information should not have any effects prior
to the start of the letter delivery. Indeed, Figure 7 shows effects of information that are
close to zero and statistically insignificant for each of the two weeks prior to the start of
letter delivery. We do not expect the information shocks to materialize immediately after
the start of letter delivery for two reasons. First, the effects should build up over time as
letters are opened. Second, even after all letters were read (around week 8, according to our
read-receipt proxy), a few additional weeks must go by for the information to potentially
affect sales outcomes. In other words, sellers must receive offers over the following weeks,
and if they accept one, it takes another couple of weeks for the closing process. The timing of
the effects of information shown in Figure 7 are as expected. The effects of the information
started to build up at two weeks after the start of letter delivery and intensify during the
period in which the letters were gradually opened, finally stabilizing a month after all letters
were read.
    Column (8) of Table 2 presents an additional falsification test. In Section 3.3, we show that
the pre-treatment characteristics were balanced across the six treatment groups. However,
given that our econometric model focused on treatment heterogeneity, this test was not the
most relevant balance test. A more direct falsification test would consist of reproducing
the same regression as in the baseline specification (column (5) of Table 2), using the pre-
treatment characteristics as dependent variables. An example of this type of falsification test
is provided in column (8) of Table 2. In that specification, the dependent variable is the (log)
number of days that the property was listed prior to the start of our experiment. Because
this outcome was determined before the letters were mailed, the information shocks should
have no effect on it. As expected, the coefficient on Information Shock from column (8) is
close to zero (0.001), statistically insignificant (p-value=0.755), and precisely estimated. We
cannot compare the coefficient on Information Shock from column (8) to the corresponding
coefficient from column (5), because the two dependent variables have different scales. To
make that quantitative comparison possible, we normalized the coefficients. We constructed


                                               23
a standardized coefficient by multiplying it by 100 and then dividing it by the standard
deviation of the corresponding dependent variable (reported at the bottom of Table 2). The
standardized coefficients are -0.683 (p-value=0.001) on the sales probability at 12 weeks
post-treatment and 0.068 (p-value=0.755) on the pre-treatment number of days listed. The
difference between the two is highly statistically significant (p-value=0.023).
    Figure 8 extends this falsification analysis to other pre-treatment characteristics. All co-
efficients in this figure are standardized as described above to make them comparable to each
other. The two leftmost coefficients correspond to the two post-treatment outcomes shown in
columns (5) and (6) of Table 2: whether the property was sold at 12 weeks after or 28 weeks
after letter delivery. The six estimates to the right are based on six different pre-treatment
characteristics: the (log) number of days the property was listed (as in column (8) of Table 2),
the (log) initial listing price, the number of bedrooms, the number of bathrooms, the square
footage of the building, and lot size square footage. Consistent with the results from column
(8) of Table 2), the effects on the pre-treatment outcomes are close to zero, statistically in-
significant, precisely estimated, and statistically different from the corresponding effects on
the post-treatment outcomes.


4.3    Additional Robustness Checks
Table 3 presents some additional robustness checks. Column (1) is the baseline specification,
identical to column (5) from Table 2. The specification from column (2) is identical to that of
column (1), except that it includes additional control variables: the (log) number of the days
the property was on the market prior to the experiment, the (log) initial listing price, a set of
four indicator variables for the number of bedrooms, four indicator variables for the number
of bathrooms, the (log) square footage built, the (log) lot size, and six indicator variables for
the state where the property is located. Note that the R2 increases substantially, from 0.034
in column (1) to 0.111 in column (2), meaning that the control variables have substantial
explanatory power. Because the treatment is randomized, controlling for additional variables
should not make a significant difference for the coefficient on Information Shock. As expected,
the point estimate (-0.325, from column (2)) is almost identical to the baseline coefficient
(-0.330, from column (1)), and the difference is statistically insignificant (p-value=0.990).
    In the baseline specification, one of the control variables is an indicator variable that
equals one if the information was disclosed to the subject. Because the letters disclosed
information from different sources, we controlled for each type of disclosure separately. The
specification from column (3) of Table 3 is identical to that of column (1), except that instead
of controlling for one treatment indicator, it controls for a set of five treatment indicators
(i.e., one indicator for each treatment, with Baseline being the omitted category). The results

                                               24
are almost identical under this alternative specification. The coefficient from this extended
specification (-0.325, from column (3)) is almost identical to the baseline coefficient (-0.330,
from column (1)), and the difference is statistically insignificant (p-value=0.999). Indeed,
controlling for additional disclosure indicators does not add any explanatory power: the R2
is identical between columns (1) and (3).
    As discussed in Section 2, the baseline specification combines the two sources of exoge-
nous variation: disclosure-randomization and source-randomization. Columns (4) and (5)
of Table 3 provide estimates that rely on the two sources of variation separately to assess
whether the results are similar across both sources of identification. Column (4) provides
an estimate that exploits only the disclosure-randomization: as discussed in Section 2, this
specification is identical to that of column (1), except for an additional control for the value
of the signal chosen for the subject and without the interaction with the disclosure indicator.
Column (5) provides an estimate that exploits only the source-randomization by dropping
the observations corresponding to the baseline group. The results from Table 3 indicate that
the results are robust across the two identification strategies. The coefficients are similar in
the baseline specification (-0.330, from column (1)), in the specification that only uses the
disclosure-randomization (-0.286, from column (4)), and in the specification that only uses
the source-randomization (-0.330, from column (5)). These three coefficients are statistically
significant on their own (p-values of 0.001, 0.049, and 0.005) and statistically indistinguish-
able from each other.
    In column (5) of Table 3, we show the results when excluding the Baseline treatment
group. In columns (6) through (10), we explore whether the results are sensitive to dropping
one of the other five treatment groups. Relative to the baseline specification, the resulting
coefficients are a bit less precisely estimated, because dropping one treatment group means
throwing away between 15% and 20% of the subjects. However, most important, the results
are not driven by any individual treatment group. The six coefficients (-0.330, -0.338, -0.257,
-0.325, -0.382, and -0.320 from columns (5) through (10), respectively) are consistent in
magnitude to the corresponding baseline coefficient (-0.330, from column (1)) and robust in
terms of statistical significance.15
    Due to space constraints, the results for the secondary outcomes are presented in the
Appendix. In the previous analysis, the outcome variable is the probability that property is
sold at a given point in time. An alternative outcome variable would be the number of days

  15
      A related question is whether the information about the past (Past-1 and Past-2 treatments) was more or
less compelling than the information about the forecasts (Forecast-1, Forecast-2, and Forecast-3 treatments).
For example, if most subjects have backward-looking expectations, they may be more elastic to information
about the past than to the forecasts (Case and Shiller, 1989; Shiller, 2005). In Appendix B.9, we provide
some suggestive evidence that the information about the past was more effective than the forecasts.

                                                     25
elapsed from the start of letter delivery to the sale of the property. As we anticipated in the
pre-registration, a problem with this outcome is that it is truncated: the 42% of properties
in the sample that were not sold by the end of the sample window could have been sold one
week or 1,000 weeks later. By looking at the probability of selling at a given point in time,
we avoided the biases caused by truncation. In any case, as reported in Appendix B.8, the
results are qualitatively and quantitatively robust if we estimate the effects using duration
models.
    The data that we scraped to construct the main outcome of interest contained other
information that can be used to construct secondary outcomes. Appendix A presents the
effects on these secondary outcomes. One of those outcomes, which is listed in the pre-
registration, is sale price. As anticipated in the pre-registration, however, the challenge with
this outcome is that it is censored: we did not observe the sale price for 42% of the sample,
because those properties were not sold. In Appendix B.10, we show that the evidence is
inconclusive, because the results were sensitive to different approaches used to deal with the
bias caused by censoring this dependent variable.16 In addition to sale price, our scraped
data included other weekly outcomes related to the listings, such as whether the property
remained listed on the website or the listing price changed. Appendix B.11 presents the
results for these outcomes.


4.4     Elasticity of Behavior to Expectations
In this section, we discuss the magnitude of our findings. The main object of interest is
how elastic the sellers' decisions to sell were in relation to their home price expectations.
A good starting point is how elastic sellers' decisions were to the information shocks. The
results presented in column (6) of Table 2) suggest that a 1 pp higher information shock
decreased the probability of selling within 28 weeks after the start of letter delivery by 0.325
pp. This estimate can be interpreted as a behavioral elasticity of -0.325. However, the
challenge is that this elasticity between behavior and information shocks is an intention-to-
treat estimate, because part of the information shocks do not translate into changes in home
price expectations. This imperfect compliance implies that the elasticity of -0.325 is just a
lower bound. Thus, we propose an approach to scale up the intention-to-treat elasticity into
treatment-on-the-treated elasticity.
    First, conditional on reading the letter, the information shock introduced in the letter
may not fully materialize in the reader's home price expectations. For example, a subject

  16
     If in the future we collect administrative data for a time horizon longer than 28 weeks after the start of
letter delivery, the degree of censoring may be less severe, because more homes would be sold in the longer
horizon).

                                                      26
may not react to the information provided in the letter for several reasons (e.g., they have
already seen the information, they do not trust the source, or they feel confident in their
prior beliefs). In Section 4.1, we use the auxiliary survey to estimate the rate of pass-through
from information shocks to expectations: a 1 pp higher information shock increased home
price expectations by 0.205 pp. The results from this auxiliary sample should be taken in
context, however, because the incentives to pay attention to information about home prices
may be much lower than it is in the sample used for the field experiment. However, if we
extrapolate the results from the auxiliary survey, these estimates imply that a 1 pp increase
                                                                  .325
in home price expectations causes a decline of 1.59 pp =( 0      0.205
                                                                       ) in sales probability (i.e., a
behavioral elasticity between expectations and sales probability of 1.59).
    The second source of non-compliance is that some letters may not have been delivered,
were delivered but not read, or were read after the property already sold. To correct for
this type of non-compliance, as in Perez-Truglia and Cruces (2017), we estimated a reading
rate (i.e., the share of recipients who read the letter in time). According to the U.S. Monitor
Non-Profit Standard Mail Delivery Study, around 5% of standard non-profit mailers fail to be
delivered (U.S. Monitor, 2014). Based on data from the U.S. Postal Service Household Diary
Survey (Mazzone and Rehman, 2019), we estimate that, conditional on delivery, around 26%
of our letters were not read by the recipient.17 Based on the timing of survey responses and
the timing of sales in the baseline group, we estimated that roughly 7.7% of the letters were
not read until after the property was sold. Combining these three estimates leads to a reading
rate of 64.9% (= 0.95 · 0.74 · 0.923). If anything, this estimate is likely conservative, as it could
be a bit smaller under alternative assumptions and thus could lead to an even larger scale-up
factor. See Appendix B.12 for more details. To account for this source of attenuation bias,
the scaled-up behavioral elasticity between expectations and sales probability becomes 2.45
(= 01..649
       59
           ).
    This elasticity of -2.45 between market choices and home price expectations suggests
that sellers were highly elastic to their expectations. Moreover, this estimate implies that
the large variation in expectations typically seen in survey data across individuals and over
time could influence market choices and equilibrium outcomes. For example, according to
the prior belief measures in our supplemental survey, the standard deviation in home price
expectations across individuals is 5.39 pp.18 According to the elasticity of -2.45, an increase
in home price expectations of this magnitude (5.39 pp) would reduce the probability that

  17
      This 26% figure is based on the 2018 HDS Recruitment Sample and corresponds to the estimate of
treatment of advertising mail reported in Figure 5.3 of (Mazzone and Rehman, 2019).
   18
      This measure corresponds to the raw standard deviation. The results are similar (5.51 instead of 5.39)
if we instead use the standard deviation within a given property type (i.e., same ZIP code and number of
beds).

                                                    27
one of our subjects sells the property within 28 weeks by 13.21 pp (= 2.45 · 5.39).


4.5     Role of Optimization Frictions
Because these estimates pertain to the population as a whole, they may mask meaningful
heterogeneity. In particular, some subjects may want to react more strongly to changes in
their home price expectations, but they may be unable to due to optimization frictions. To
explore this hypothesis, we study the (pre-registered) heterogeneity of the effects of infor-
mation by assessing whether the listed property is owner-occupied (78.4% of subjects) or
non-owner-occupied (21.6% of subjects).
    We argue that, relative to subjects who live on the listed property, those who do not face
fewer optimization frictions. First, the occupants are likely to have less flexibility regarding
when they can sell their properties, as the decision to sell is consequential for their daily
lives: they have to move out after selling it, or the occupants may be selling for time-
sensitive reasons, such as a new job or school, because they already bought another home, or
because of marriage, divorce, or the birth of a child. For the non-occupants, the decisions on
whether and when to sell usually are based purely on investment motives. Second, the owner-
occupant is likely less flexible regarding where (or if) to buy another house, especially if they
need to buy (or already bought) another home in the same or similar neighborhood.19 As a
result, whether these sellers expect home values to appreciate in their current neighborhood
may not be relevant in their decisions to sell, because they will be exposed to the same
neighborhood appreciation regardless of when or if they sell their current property. On the
contrary, non-occupant-owners do not need to buy again in the same neighborhood and can
instead buy real estate in other neighborhoods that they expect to appreciate more or make
entirely different investments, such as in the stock market.
    Occupant and non-occupant owners differ markedly in their optimization frictions but
are otherwise similar in observable characteristics, such as age, ethnic composition, income,
and education. Despite some differences, the timing of sales outcomes does not look dra-
matically different: the probability of selling the property at 28 weeks post-treatment was
52.89 pp for non-occupant owners versus 57.99 pp for occupant owners (for more details, see
Appendix B.13).
    Figure B.6 presents the heterogeneity results. This figure shows the event-study analysis
of the effects of the information shocks, broken down by owner occupancy status. We find
that the effects of information shocks are qualitatively similar for occupant owners (depicted

  19
     For example, according to mail forwarding data from the U.S. Postal Services, a significant fraction
of owner-occupants in our sample moved to another home in the same or adjacent neighborhoods (results
presented in Appendix B.13).

                                                   28
in blue circles) and non-occupant owners (depicted in red diamonds): they point in the
same direction and are both statistically significant. Consistent with the above conjecture,
however, we find that the effects are quantitatively quite different: the effects are almost
three times as strong for the non-occupant owners as for the occupant owners. For example,
at 28 weeks after the start of letter delivery, the coefficient on the information shock is -0.637
(p-value=0.003) for the non-occupants and -0.225 (p-value=0.066) for the occupants, and
the difference between these two coefficients is statistically significant (p-value=0.095). This
large difference suggests that, in the absence of optimization frictions, the market choices of
individuals would be substantially more elastic to their expectations. Indeed, this evidence
on the role of optimization friction is consistent with suggestive evidence from other contexts
such as the choice of how much equity to hold (Giglio et al., 2019). When we apply the same
corrections for the previous pass-through rate (0.205) and reading rate (0.649), the coefficient
for the non-occupant owners (-0.637) implies an elasticity between expectations and market
                         -0.637
choices of -4.79 pp =( 0.205 ·0.649
                                    ): that is, a 1 pp increase in home price expectations causes
a decline of 4.79 pp in the probability of selling the home within 28 weeks. This estimate
shows that, in the absence of optimization frictions, home price expectations can have an
even larger effect on market choices. Additionally, this evidence supports the widespread
view that non-owner-occupied properties have a disproportionate influence on speculation in
the housing market (Gao et al., 2020).
    Our favorite interpretation for the heterogeneity by occupant status is based on the two
previously mentioned frictions. However, we cannot rule out alternative interpretations.
Perhaps non-occupant owners are more responsive because they are different in other respects,
such as financial sophistication, and thus more likely to understand the information and use
it correctly.20 However, the similarities in these two groups across observable characteristics,
including income and education, constitute evidence against this alternative interpretation.


5        Conclusions
We provide the first experimental evidence on the causal effects of home price expectations
on market choices. We conducted a large-scale, high-stakes, field experiment involving 57,910
U.S. individuals who recently listed their homes on the market. We sent letters to them with
randomized information about their home prices to generate exogenous shocks to their home
price expectations. We then used the administrative records to measure the effects of those
information shocks on the recipients' decisions to sell their homes. Consistent with economic

    20
    Also, perhaps non-occupant owners are more likely to incorporate the information shocks into their
expectations because they are less informed about local home prices due to not living in the area.

                                                 29
theory, we found that higher home price expectations caused the owners to delay selling their
homes. Moreover, the magnitude of this reaction indicates that market choices were highly
elastic to expectations: a 1 pp increase in home price expectations reduced the probability
of selling within six months by 2.45 pp.
    Our estimates address an open question that is central to the literature on macroeco-
nomics and finance: what are the causal effects of expectations on market choices? We
believe our experimental framework can be adapted to study other questions in a range of
fields, such as macroeconomics, urban economics, finance, real estate economics, and behav-
ioral economics. The information provided in the mailings does not need to be related to
home prices. The letters can provide any type of information that the researcher hypothesizes
may be relevant to the decision to sell. Our experimental framework also has several advan-
tages that could warrant its widespread adoption. For example, it provides causal inferences
based on experimental variation. Also, the effects on behavior are measured using objective
data from administrative records in a naturally occurring context and based on high-stakes
choices. Our framework has practical advantages, too. Following our detailed instructions,
the experiment can be implemented relatively quickly after a few weeks of preparation, and
the results can be ready in a few months. The experiment is relatively cheap, costing less
than $0.25 per subject. Last, the experiment can be implemented at massive scales, with
potentially up to 1 million subjects at a time.21


References
Armantier, O., W. Bruine de Bruin, G. Topa, W. van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2015). Infla-
  tion Expectations and Behavior: Do Survey Respondents Act on their Beliefs? International
  Economic Review 56 (10), 505­536.

Armantier, O., S. Nelson, G. Topa, W. van der Klaauw, and B. Zafar (2016). The Price Is Right:
  Updating Inflation Expectations in a Randomized Price Information Experiment. Review of
  Economics and Statistics 98 (3), 503­523.

Armona, L., A. Fuster, and B. Zafar (2019). Home Price Expectations and Behaviour: Evidence
  from a Randomized Information Experiment. Review of Economic Studies 86 (4), 1371­1410.

Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2018). The Economic Effects of Social Networks:
  Evidence from the Housing Market. Journal of Political Economy 126 (6), 2224­2276.



  21
      For example, Zillow Research (https://www.zillow.com/research/data/) shows 1,705,251 unique active
listings in May 2019. County assessor records likely include data for most of these listings.

                                                  30
Bailey, M., E. Davila, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel (2018). House Price Beliefs And Mortgage
  Leverage Choice. The Review of Economic Studies 86 (6), 2403­2452.

Bergolo, M. L., R. Ceni, G. Cruces, M. Giaccobasso, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017, 7). Tax Audits as
  Scarecrows: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment. NBER Working Paper No. 23631 .

Bernanke, B. S. (2007). Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting. Cambridge, MA: Speech
  at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the NBER Summer Institute.

Bottan, N. and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Choosing Your Pond: Location Choices and Relative
  Income. NBER Working Paper No. 23615 .

Brooks, D. (2017). The Home Buying Decision. New York Times, January 6, 2017 .

Carroll, C. (2003). Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional Forecasters. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 118 (1), 269­298.

Case, K. and R. Shiller (1989). The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes. American
  Economic Review 79 (1), 125­137.

Cavallo, A., G. Cruces, and R. Perez-Truglia (2017). Inflation Expectations, Learning, and Su-
  permarket Prices: Evidence from Survey Experiments. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics 9 (3), 1­35.

Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and S. Kumar (2018). How Do Firms Form Their Expectations?
  New Survey Evidence. American Economic Review 108 (9), 2671­2713.

Crump, M. J. C., J. V. McDonnell, and T. M. Gureckis (2013). Evaluating Amazon's Mechanical
  Turk as a Tool for Experimental Behavioral Research. PLOS ONE 8 (3), 1­18.

Cullen, Z. and R. Perez-Truglia (2018). How Much Does Your Boss Make? The Effects of Salary
  Comparisons. NBER Working Paper No. 24841 .

Fuster, A., R. Perez-Truglia, M. Wiederholt, and B. Zafar (2018). Expectations with Endogenous
  Information Acquisition: An Experimental Investigation. NBER Working Paper No. 24767 .

Gao, Z., M. Sockin, and W. Xiong (2020). Economic Consequences of Housing Speculation. The
  Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming .

Gennaioli, N. and A. Shleifer (2018). A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and Financial
  Fragility. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Giglio, S., M. Maggiori, J. Stroebel, and S. Utkus (2019). Five Facts about Beliefs and Portfolios.
  NBER Working Paper No. 25744 .


                                                 31
Glaeser, E. L. and C. G. Nathanson (2015). Housing Bubbles. In G. Duranton, J. V. Henderson,
  and W. C. Strange (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5, Chapter 11,
  pp. 701­751. Elsevier.

Kaplan, G., K. Mitman, and G. L. Violante (2019). The Housing Boom and Bust: Model Meets
  Evidence. Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming .

Mazzone, J. and S. Rehman (2019). The Household Diary Study Mail Use and Attitudes in FY
  2018. Retrieved March 28, 2020, from https://www.prc.gov/dockets/document/109368 .

Perez-Truglia, R. and G. Cruces (2017). Partisan interactions: Evidence from a field experiment in
  the United States. Journal of Political Economy 125 (4), 1208­1243.

Perez-Truglia, R. and U. Troiano (2018). Shaming Tax Delinquents. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 167, 120­137.

Roth, C. and J. Wohlfart (2019). How Do Expectations About the Macroeconomy Affect Personal
  Expectations and Behavior? Review of Economics and Statistics .

Shiller, R. (2005). Irrational Exuberance. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

U.S. Monitor (2014).       7 Myths of Direct Mailing.         Retrieved March 28, 2020, from
  https://www.targetmarketingmag.com/promo/7MythsofDM.pdf .




                                               32
                                                 Figure 1: Sample Envelope




                    Axel Foley
                    9816 Easton Drive
                    Beverly Hills, CA 90210
33




     Notes: Screenshot of the outside of the envelope used in the field experiment.
                                                  Figure 2: Sample Letter
                           a. First Page                                                                b. Second Page




                                                                    Your household was randomly chosen to receive this letter. We will not send you
                                                                    any more letters in the future.
             Axel Foley,
                                                                    If you have any questions about the study, you can find contact information on our
                                                                    website: www.anderson.ucla.edu/housinqstudy.


                                                                    Thank you for your attention!


                                                                    Ricardo Perez-Truglia                                 Nicolas Bottan
                                                                    Assistant Professor of Economics                      Post-Doctoral Associate
                                                                    University of California, Los Angeles                 Cornell University

                                                                    If you have questions about your rights as a research subject, or you have concerns or suggestions and you
                                                                    want to talk to someone other than the researchers, you may contact the UCLA Office of the Human Research
                                                                    Protection Program by phone: (310) 206-2040; by ema/1: partlcipants@research.ucla.edu or by mail: Box
                                                                    951406, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1406.



                                                                    Methodological Notes:
34




                                                                                             <<INFORMATION DETAILS>>




     Notes: Screenshot of the letter used in the field experiment. The two placeholders (marked as «Information» and
     «Information Details») indicate the placement of the two components that were randomly allocated. Their samples,
     by treatment group, are presented in Figures 3 and B.1 respectively. Appendix C shows a sample of the final product.
                                                  Figure 3: Sample Information Tables

                      a. Baseline                                                                                    b. Past-1
                  Median Price                                                                                 Median Price

        2-bedroom home in ZIP Code 33308                                                             2-bedroom home in ZIP Code 33308

                                                                                                     May 2018:                 $339,000
              May 2019: $343,000                                                                                                                                   +1.2%
                            Notes: for more details, see the notes in the back of this page.         May 2019:                 $343,000

                                                                                                                         Notes: for more details, see the notes in the back of this page.




                         c. Past-2                                                                                d. Forecast-1
                  Median Price                                                                                 Median Price
        2-bedroom home in ZIP Code 33308                                                             2-bedroom home in ZIP Code 33308

        May 2017:                 $320,000                                                           May 2019:              $343,000
                                                                      +5.9%                                                                                      +2.6%
        May 2018:                 $339,000                                                           May 2020:              $352,000
                                                                      +1.2%                          (forecast)
        May 2019:                $343,000
                                                                                                            Notes: for more details, see the notes in the back of this page. The forecasts
                                                                                                              originate from our own statistical models and as such are subject to error.

                            Notes: for more details, see the notes in the back of this page.




                     e. Forecast-2                                                                                f. Forecast-3
                  Median Price                                                                                 Median Price
        2-bedroom home in ZIP Code 33308                                                             2-bedroom home in ZIP Code 33308
       May 2019:                $343,000                                                             May 2019:               $343,000
                                                                    +4.1%                                                                                        +3.5%
       May 2020:               $357,000                                                              May 2020:               $355,000
        (forecast)
                                                                                                     (forecast)

               Notes: for more details, see the notes in the back of this page. The forecasts               Notes: for more details, see the notes in the back of this page. The forecasts
                  originate from our own statistical models and as such are subject to error.                 originate from our own statistical models and as such are subject to error.




Notes: Each panel corresponds to the hypothetical table that a given individual would
receive under the different treatment groups. The table is then placed in the middle of
the first page of the letter, in the location of the placeholder «Information» from Figure
2. See Figure B.1 for the methodological notes accompanying each table.




                                                                                                35
                                   Figure 4: Heterogeneity in Signals Within and Across Information Sources

                                   a. Past-1                                                                b. Past-1 vs. Past-2




                                                                                 20
               15




                                                                                                   Weighted data
                                                                                                   OLS
                                                                                                   45 deg. line




                                                                                  15    10
               10




                                                                          Past-2 Signal
     Percent




                                                                                5
                                                                              3.5%                                    2BR - 33308




                                                                                  0
               5




                                                                                  -5
                                                                                                                                                  = 0.852 (0.017)
36




                                                                                                                                                 R2 = 0.659




                                                                                 -10
               0




                    -10   -5   0            5        10   15     20                          -10    -5             0 1.2%         5         10    15          20
                                     Past-1 Signal                                                                          Past-1 Signal



     Notes: Panel (a) shows the distribution of the signals that the 57,910 subjects would have received if they had been assigned to
     the Past-1 treatment (i.e., the annual growth rate over the past year). The bins have a width of 1 pp and are truncated at -10%
     and +20%. Panel (b) is a scatterplot showing the relationship between the signals that the 57,910 subjects would have received
     if they had been assigned to the Past-1 treatment (i.e., the annual growth rate over the past year) versus the Past-2 treatment
     (i.e., the annual growth rate over the past two years). The size of the circles are proportional to the number of observations,
     and the signals are truncated at -10% and +20%.
                                                Figure 5: Timing of Read-Receipt and Property Sales

                                                                         a. Read-Receipt
                                             100%
                                                       Start of
                                               90%     Letter Delivery
                                               80%
             Share of Letters Read (Proxy)



                                               70%

                                               60%

                                               50%

                                               40%

                                               30%

                                               20%

                                               10%

                                                0%
                                                   -2
                                                   -1
                                                   +1
                                                   +2
                                                   +3
                                                   +4
                                                   +5
                                                   +6
                                                   +7
                                                   +8
                                                  +19
                                                  +10
                                                  +11
                                                  +12
                                                  +13
                                                  +14
                                                  +15
                                                  +16
                                                  +17
                                                  +18
                                                  +29
                                                  +20
                                                  +21
                                                  +22
                                                  +23
                                                  +24
                                                  +25
                                                  +26
                                                  +27
                                                    8
                                                   +




                                                                    Weeks Since Start of Letter Delivery



                                                                         b. Property Sales
                                               100%
                                                       Start of
                                               90%     Letter Delivery
                                               80%
                    Share of Properties Sold




                                               70%

                                               60%

                                               50%

                                               40%

                                               30%

                                               20%

                                               10%

                                                0%
                                                      -2
                                                      -1
                                                      +1
                                                      +2
                                                      +3
                                                      +4
                                                      +5
                                                      +6
                                                      +7
                                                      +8
                                                     +19
                                                     +10
                                                     +11
                                                     +12
                                                     +13
                                                     +14
                                                     +15
                                                     +16
                                                     +17
                                                     +18
                                                     +29
                                                     +20
                                                     +21
                                                     +22
                                                     +23
                                                     +24
                                                     +25
                                                     +26
                                                     +27
                                                       8
                                                      +




                                                                     Weeks Since Start of Letter Delivery



Notes: The red line indicates the estimated delivery date for the first letter (June 15 2019).
Panel (a) shows the evolution of the responses to the online survey included in the letter.
These dates constitute our read-receipt: i.e., our proxy for the dates when the letters were
actually read. Panel (b) shows the fraction of the properties in the subject pool that were
sold at each point in time, according to the administrative records.


                                                                                37
                                                              Figure 6: Effects of Information Shocks on Expectations and Behavior: Binned Scatterplots

                                                              a. Effects on Expectations                                                                                b. Effects on Behavior
                                              5%                                                                                                     40%
     Housing Expectations, Posterior Belief




                                                                                                                P(Sold at 12 weeks post-treatment)
                                                                                                                                                     39%


                                              4%                                                                                                     38%
                                                    Slope = 0.205 (0.055)
                                                                                                                                                     37%
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Slope = -0.330 (0.104)

                                              3%                                                                                                     36%


                                                                                                                                                     35%
38




                                                                                                      N=1,404                                                N=57,910
                                              2%                                                                                                     34%
                                                   0%    1%       2%        3%    4%       5%   6%   7%    8%                                              -1%   0%     1%   2%      3%     4%        5%   6%      7%     8%
                                                                            Information Shock                                                                                     Information Shock



     Notes: Panel (a) corresponds to a regression given by equation (1) from Section 2. This binned scatterplot focuses on the key
                                                    j
     independent variable, Information Shock (Ei i · Ti ). Results are based on 1,404 subjects from the AMT supplemental survey.
     The dependent variable is the posterior belief (i.e., elicited after the information-provision experiment) about the expected
     growth rate of the median home value over the following year. Panel (b) corresponds to a regression given by equation (1).
                                                                                                j
     This binned scatterplot focuses on the key independent variable, Information Shock (Ei i · Ti ). Results are based on 57,910
     subjects from the field experiment. The dependent variable is an indicator variable taking the value 100 if the property was sold
     at 12 weeks after the start of the letter delivery and 0 otherwise. Each panel reports the slope with heteroskedasticity-robust
     standard errors in parentheses.
         Figure 7: Effects of Information Shocks on Behavior: Event-Study Analysis

                                          .1
                                                                                                             Treatment Effect
                                                                                                             90% CI
               Effect on Information Shock on P(Sold)
                                              0


                                   -.1


                                   -.2


                                   -.3
                             0%
                          30




                                   -.4


                                   -.5
                                                        Start of
                                                        Letter Delivery
                                   -.6
                                                     -2
                                                     -1
                                                     +1
                                                     +2
                                                     +3
                                                     +4
                                                     +5
                                                     +6
                                                     +7
                                                     +8
                                                    +19
                                                    +10
                                                    +11
                                                    +12
                                                    +13
                                                    +14
                                                    +15
                                                    +16
                                                    +17
                                                    +18
                                                    +29
                                                    +20
                                                    +21
                                                    +22
                                                    +23
                                                    +24
                                                    +25
                                                    +26
                                                    +27
                                                       8
                                                     +




                                                                      Weeks Since Start of Letter Delivery
                          0%
                        10




                                                                               Share of Letters Read
                               %
                             50    0%
                                                         -2
                                                         -1
                                                         +1
                                                         +2
                                                         +3
                                                         +4
                                                         +5
                                                         +6
                                                         +7
                                                         +8
                                                        +19
                                                        +10
                                                        +11
                                                        +12
                                                        +13
                                                        +14
                                                        +15
                                                        +16
                                                        +17
                                                        +18
                                                        +29
                                                        +20
                                                        +21
                                                        +22
                                                        +23
                                                        +24
                                                        +25
                                                        +26
                                                        +27
                                                          8
                                                         +




                                                                      Weeks Since Start of Letter Delivery


Notes: Each coefficient corresponds to a separate regression based on 57,910 subjects from the
field experiment. Every regression corresponds to equation (1) from Section 2, and the coeffi-
cient being graphed corresponds to the coefficient on the key independent variable, Information
          j
Shock (Ei i · Ti ). All regressions are identical except for the dependent variable. The x-axis
indicates the dependent variable used, which is always an indicator variable that takes the value
100 if the property has been sold at a number of weeks after the start of the letter delivery and
0 otherwise. For example, the coefficient on +12 weeks is based on a dependent variable that
takes the value 100 if the property was sold at 12 weeks after the start of the letter delivery. The
red line indicates the estimated delivery date for the first letter (June 15 2019). The smaller
figure at the bottom shows the proportion of the letters from the field experiment that had
been read at every point in time according to our proxy (the responses to the online survey
included in the letter). The 90% confidence intervals are based on heteroskedasticity-robust
standard errors.




                                                                                  39
                                    Figure 8: Effects of Information Shocks on Behavior: Placebo Outcomes

                               1.25                                                                       Post-Treatment Outcomes
                               1.00                                                                       Pre-Treatment Outcomes
                                                                                                          90% CI
                               0.75
   Standardized Coefficient




                               0.50
                               0.25
                               0.00
                              -0.25
                              -0.50
                              -0.75
                              -1.00
                              -1.25
                                          ks



                                                      ks



                                                                      )


                                                                                 e)



                                                                                           ds



                                                                                                       s



                                                                                                                      )


                                                                                                                                  t)
                                                                 ed




                                                                                                                  ilt
                                                                                                     th




                                                                                                                                 Lo
                                                                               ic
                                        ee



                                                    ee




                                                                                          Be




                                                                                                                Bu
                                                                                                    Ba
                                                                 st


                                                                           Pr




                                                                                                                             t.
                                    -W



                                                  -W



                                                             Li




                                                                                      o.




                                                                                                                t.


                                                                                                                            .F
                                                                                                o.
                                                                          st




                                                                                                              .F
                                                             s




                                                                                      N
                                   12



                                               28




                                                                          Li




                                                                                                N




                                                                                                                        Sq
                                                           ay




                                                                                                          Sq
                                                                      g(
                                                         D




                                                                                                                       g(
                               in



                                             in




                                                                  Lo




                                                                                                         g(
                                                       g(




                                                                                                                     Lo
                              ld



                                         ld




                                                                                                     Lo
                                                    Lo
      So



                                        So




                                                                               Outcome Variable

Notes: All the regressions shown in this table correspond to equation (1) from Section 2, based
on data on the 57,910 subjects in the field experiment. Each coefficient corresponds to a separate
but identical regressions, with the only difference being the dependent variables. We report the
                                                                       j
coefficient on the key independent variable, Information Shock (Ei i · Ti ). All the coefficients
have been normalized by multiplying it by 100 and then dividing it by the standard deviations
of the respective dependent variable. Each dependent variable is listed in the x-axis. We use
blue circles to denote the post-treatment outcomes (i.e., that were determined after the start of
letter delivery): Sold in 12-Weeks is an indicator variable that takes the value 100 if the property
was sold at 12 weeks after the start of the letter delivery; and Sold in 28-Weeks is an indicator
variable that takes the value 100 if the property was sold at 28 weeks after the start of the letter
delivery. We use red circles to denote the pre-treatment outcomes (i.e., that were determined
before the start of letter delivery): Log(Days Listed) is the logarithm of the number of days
that the property had been listed for before our experiment; Log(Listing Price) is the logarithm
of the original listing price of the property; No. Beds is the property's number of bedrooms;
No. Baths is the property's number of bathrooms; Log(Sq. Ft. Built) is the logarithm of the
property's built area in square feet; Log(Sq. Ft. Lot) is logarithm of the property's lot size
in square feet. The 90% confidence intervals are based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard
errors.



                                                                                 40
Figure 9: Heterogeneity of Behavioral Effects by Owner-Occupied Status: Event-Study Anal-
ysis

                                            .6                                                        Owner-Occupied
                                                                                                      Non Owner-Occupied
                                            .4
  Effect of Information Shock on P(Sold)




                                                                                                      90% CI

                                            .2

                                            0

                                           -.2

                                           -.4

                                           -.6

                                           -.8

                                           -1
                                                 Start of
                                                 Letter Delivery
                                       -1.2
                                              -2
                                              -1
                                              +1
                                              +2
                                              +3
                                              +4
                                              +5
                                              +6
                                              +7
                                              +8
                                             +19
                                             +10
                                             +11
                                             +12
                                             +13
                                             +14
                                             +15
                                             +16
                                             +17
                                             +18
                                             +29
                                             +20
                                             +21
                                             +22
                                             +23
                                             +24
                                             +25
                                             +26
                                             +27
                                             +28
                                                9
                                              +




                                                               Weeks Since Start of Letter Delivery


  Notes: Each coefficient corresponds to a separate regression. Every regression corresponds
  to equation (1) from Section 2, and the coefficient being graphed corresponds to the coef-
                                                                    j
  ficient on the key independent variable, Information Shock (Ei i · Ti ). All regressions are
  identical except for two features: the dependent variable and the sample. Each of the blue
  circles are based on a regression with the 45,405 subjects from a field experiment who were
  living on the property while the property was listed for sale. Each of the red diamonds
  are based on a regression with the 12,505 subjects from the field experiment who were
  not living on the property while the property was listed for sale. The x-axis indicates the
  dependent variable used, which is always an indicator variable that takes the value 100 if
  the property has been sold at a number of weeks after the start of the letter delivery and 0
  otherwise. For example, the coefficient on +12 weeks is based on a dependent variable that
  takes the value 100 if the property was sold at 12 weeks after the start of the letter delivery.
  The red line indicates the estimated delivery date for the first letter (June 15 2019). The
  90% confidence intervals are based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.




                                                                           41
                   Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and Randomization Balance Test

                           (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)      (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)
                                                             By Treatment Group
                           All     Baseline   Past-1     Past-2      Forecast-1   Forecast-2   Forecast-3   P-value

Days Listed              86.654    85.997     87.212     87.029       85.936       86.208       87.778       0.829
                         (0.477)   (1.017)    (1.298)    (1.253)      (1.093)      (1.203)      (1.191)

List Price ($1,000s)     574.756   575.774    586.787 559.192         574.306      586.835      565.092      0.303
                         (3.914)   (8.517)    (11.445) (9.516)        (8.147)      (10.937)     (9.081)

No. Beds                  3.256     3.249      3.259      3.243        3.254        3.269        3.264       0.582
                         (0.005)   (0.010)    (0.012)    (0.012)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)

No. baths                 2.608     2.607      2.619      2.599        2.608        2.617        2.600       0.678
                         (0.004)   (0.010)    (0.011)    (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.011)      (0.010)

Sq. Ft. Built (1,000s)    2.295     2.292      2.304      2.292        2.287        2.308        2.288       0.820
                         (0.005)   (0.012)    (0.014)    (0.013)      (0.012)      (0.013)      (0.013)

Sq. Ft. Lot (1,000s)     12.958    12.992     12.666     12.934       13.223       13.163       12.730       0.389
                         (0.089)   (0.199)    (0.222)    (0.230)      (0.219)      (0.221)      (0.213)

                         57,910    11,487      8,672         8,669     9,818        9,635        9,629


Notes: Average characteristics on the 57,910 subjects in the field experiment, with standard errors
reported in parentheses. Column (1) corresponds to the entire sample. Columns (2) through (7)
correspond to each of the six treatment groups. Column (8) reports the p-value of the test of equal
means across all six treatment groups. All the variables correspond to pre-treatment characteristics
(i.e., that were determined before the start of letter delivery). Days Listed is the number of days
that the property had been listed for before our experiment. List Price is the original listing price of
the property. No. Beds is the property's number of bedrooms. No. Baths is the property's number
of bathrooms. Sq. Ft. Built is the property's built area in square feet. Sq. Ft. Lot is the property's
lot size in square feet.




                                                        42
                                                      Table 2: Main Regression Results

                                                    Survey Data                                      Behavioral Data
                                        (1)          (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)        (8)
                                         post         post       prior        post
                                       H1 y         H5 y       H1 y         M1 y         S+12w         S+28w         S-1w        Dpre
         Information Shock           0.205         0.167        -0.014      0.017      -0.330        -0.325         0.014       0.001
                                     (0.064)       (0.070)     (0.066)     (0.134)      (0.103)       (0.107)      (0.019)     (0.003)
         Mean Outcome                   3.86         2.31       3.88         3.58        36.99        56.90          0.58        3.81
         Std. Dev. Outcome              4.42        4.36         5.39        9.05        48.28         49.52         7.61        1.28
         Observations                  1,404        1,404       1,404       1,404       57,910        57,910        57,910      57,910

     Notes: Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. Each column cor-
43




     responds to a different regression. All regressions correspond to equation (1) from Section 2, with Information Shock
                                                         j
     referring to the key independent variable: Ei i · Ti . The only difference between columns is that they use a different de-
                                                                                                                        post
     pendent variable. Columns (1) through (4) are based on data from the AMT supplemental survey. H1                    y   is the posterior
     belief (i.e., elicited after the information-provision experiment) about the expected growth rate of the median home value
                                    post
     over the following year. H5     y   is is the posterior belief about the annualized expected growth growth rate of the median
                                                      prior
     home value over the following five years. H1      y    the prior belief (i.e., elicited before the information-provision experiment)
                                                                                                      post
     about the expected growth rate of the median home value over the following year. M1               y   is the posterior belief about the
     annualized expected growth growth rate of the stock market index over the following year. Columns (5) through (8) are
     based on data from the field experiment. S+12w is an indicator variable that takes the value 100 if the property was sold
     at 12 weeks after the start of the letter delivery. S+28w is an indicator variable that takes the value 100 if the property
     was sold at 28 weeks after the start of the letter delivery. S-1w is an indicator variable that takes the value 100 if the
     property was sold at 1 week prior to the start of the letter delivery. And Dpre is the logarithm of the number of days that
     the property had been listed for before our experiment.
                                                  Table 3: Additional Robustness Checks

                                                                           Dep. Var: S+12w
                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)          (9)          (10)
     Information Shock      -0.330     -0.325      -0.325     -0.286    -0.330     -0.338     -0.257    -0.325       -0.382       -0.320
                             (0.103)    (0.100)     (0.111)   (0.146)    (0.119)    (0.118)   (0.137)    (0.110)      (0.111)      (0.106)
     Additional Controls                   Y
     Extended Dummies                                 Y
     Control for Feedback                                       Y
     Group Left Out                                                     Baseline    Past-1    Past-2    Forecast-1   Forecast-2   Forecast-3
     R2                        0.034    0.111       0.034     0.034       0.032     0.035      0.034     0.033        0.034         0.034
     Observations             57,910    57,910      57,910    57,910     46,423     49,238    49,241     48,092       48,275       48,281

     Notes: Significant at *10%, **5%, ***1%. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses. Each column corresponds
     to a different regression. All regressions are based on data from the field experiment and using the same dependent variable: an
44




     indicator variable (S+12w ) that takes the value 100 if the property was sold at 12 weeks after the start of the letter delivery and
     0 otherwise. Column (1) corresponds to equation (1) from Section 2, with Information Shock referring to the key independent
                  j
     variable: Ei i · Ti . Column (2) is identical to column (1) except that it includes some additional control variables: the logarithm
     of the days the property was on the market prior to the experiment, the logarithm of the initial listing price, four dummies for
     number of beds, four dummies for number of bedrooms, the logarithm of square footage built, the logarithm of lot size, and six
     state dummies. Column (3) is identical to column (1) except that instead of controlling for one treatment indicator, it controls
     for a set of five treatment indicators (i.e., one for each of the five treatments that are not Baseline). Column (4) is identical to
     column (1) except that it includes an additional control variable: the value of the signal chosen for the individual without the
                                    j
     treatment interaction (i.e., Ei i ). Column (5) through (10) are identical to column (1) except that they exclude subjects for one
     treatment group at a time.
