                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INFORMALITY, CONSUMPTION TAXES, AND REDISTRIBUTION

                                           Pierre Bachas
                                           Lucie Gadenne
                                           Anders Jensen

                                        Working Paper 27429
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27429


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




The findings and conclusions are those of the authors and do not represent the views of the World
Bank. We would like to thank Michael Best, Anne Brockmeyer, Roberto Fatal, Rema Hanna,
Gordon Hanson, Xavier Jaravel, Michael Keen, Joana Naritomi, Henrik Kleven, Wojciech
Kopczuk, Joel Slemrod, Johannes Spinnewijn, Mazhar Waseem and numerous seminar
participants for helpful comments. We thank Eva Davoine, Elie Gerschel, Mariana Racimo,
Roxanne Rahnama and Alvaro Zuniga for excellent research assistance. We gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs at Harvard
University, the World Bank Development Economics' Research Support Budget, and the IFS's
TaxDev center. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pierre Bachas, Lucie Gadenne, and Anders Jensen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Informality, Consumption Taxes, and Redistribution
Pierre Bachas, Lucie Gadenne, and Anders Jensen
NBER Working Paper No. 27429
June 2020
JEL No. E26,H21,H23,O12,O23

                                           ABSTRACT

Can consumption taxes reduce inequality in developing countries? We combine household
expenditure data from 31 countries with theory to shed new light on the redistributive potential
and optimal design of consumption taxes. We use the type of store in which purchases occur to
proxy for informal (untaxed) consumption. This enables us to characterize the informality Engel
curve: we find that the budget share spent in the informal sector steeply declines with income, in
all countries. The informal sector thus makes consumption taxes progressive: households in the
richest quintile face an effective tax rate that is twice that of the poorest quintile. We extend the
standard optimal commodity tax model to allow for informal consumption and calibrate it to the
data to study the effects of different tax policies on inequality. Contrary to consensus, we show
that consumption taxes are redistributive, lowering inequality by as much as personal income
taxes. Once informality is taken into account, commonly used redistributive policies, such as
reduced tax rates on necessities, have a limited impact on inequality. In particular, subsidizing
food cannot be justified on equity or efficiency grounds in several poor countries.

Pierre Bachas                                     Anders Jensen
The World Bank                                    Harvard Kennedy School
1818 H Street N.W.                                79 JFK Street
Washington, DC 20433                              Cambridge, MA 02138
pierrebachas@gmail.com                            and NBER
                                                  anders_jensen@hks.harvard.edu
Lucie Gadenne
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 7AL
UK
l.gadenne@warwick.ac.uk




A Replication codes is available at https://github.com/pierrebachas/Informality_Taxes_Redistribution
1    Introduction

Inequality in developing countries is higher than in most rich countries and has re-
mained high over the past 30 years (Alvaredo and Gasparini, 2015). To what extent can
tax systems redistribute income in these countries? In this paper, we combine micro-
data and theory to shed new light on the redistributive potential and optimal design
of consumption taxes, the main source of government revenue in developing countries.
We find that consumption taxes are redistributive, lowering inequality by as much as in-
come taxes. These effects are primarily due to different informal (untaxed) consumption
patterns along the household income distribution. We also show that, once informal con-
sumption is accounted for, commonly used redistributive policies such as reduced rates
on necessity goods hardly reduce inequality. Our results stand in contrast to the exist-
ing literature, which does not take into account the existence of informal consumption,
and concludes that consumption taxes have a limited or negative redistributive effect in
developing countries (see for example Lustig, 2018).
    A major constraint in studying informality is that, by definition, informal sector pur-
chases are hard to observe and to link to consumers' incomes. We innovate by us-
ing the types of stores in which households report purchasing items ­ ranging from
home production to street vendors to supermarkets ­ to proxy for consumption from
the informal sector. We create a new micro-database of expenditure surveys from 31
low-and middle-income countries which contains information on the store type at the
transaction-level. The store-type classification is harmonized across countries and con-
sistent with the macro-development taxonomy of traditional versus modern retailers
(Lagakos, 2016). We assign each store type to the formal or informal sector, building on
micro evidence from retail censuses and on the literature showing that large, modern
retailers are much more likely to remit taxes than smaller, traditional retailers (Kleven
et al., 2016). This consumption-based measure of the informal sector complements pre-
existing approaches which focus on informality at the firm and/or worker level.1
    Our paper makes three contributions. First, we produce new stylized facts on con-
sumption patterns across the income distribution and over development. We document
the existence of downward-sloping Informality Engel Curves (IECs): within each coun-
try, the informal budget share declines steeply with household income. The IECs have a
stable, log-linear functional form in all countries and their slopes remain negative even
after controlling for household location and narrow categories of goods. We provide sug-

    1 Our measure is related to the literature in public finance which uses consumption data to infer evasion

behavior (see Pissarides and Weber, 1989; Feldman and Slemrod, 2007; Morrow et al., 2019)

                                                     1
gestive evidence that the residual slopes may be explained by richer households valuing
quality more and formal firms selling higher-quality products.2 The shape of the IECs
implies that the de facto exemption of the informal sector from taxes makes consump-
tion taxes progressive (the taxed budget share increase with income). We find that with a
simple uniform rate on all goods, the richest quintile pays twice as much in taxes as the
poorest quintile in the average country. This 'progressivity dividend' from exempting
the informal sector is largest in the poorest countries and decreases with development.
    We similarly characterize food Engel curves and confirm that they are downward
sloping in all countries, consistent with an extensive literature (for example Deaton and
Paxson, 1998). This shape motivates the frequent use of de jure exemptions of food from
consumption taxes. We find that food exemption makes consumption taxes progressive,
but less so on average than the de facto exemption of the informal sector. The progres-
sivity impact of exempting food is nil in the poorest countries, where poorer households'
food consumption is almost exclusively informal, and increases with development.
    Our second contribution is a simple model that derives the implications of these
consumption patterns for tax policy. We extend the multi-person model of optimal com-
modity taxation of Diamond (1975) in two directions: we introduce formal and informal
(untaxed) varieties of each good and we allow for changes in consumption patterns over
the development path. Allowing for informal varieties increases the efficiency cost of
consumption taxes, because households can substitute to informal varieties when these
taxes increase. It increases their equity benefits, by making consumption taxes progres-
sive as long as IECs are downward sloping. Calibrating the model to the data, we find
that the optimal level of rate differentiation between food and non-food products in-
creases with development.3 This is due to the shape of the formal food Engel curve,
which is flat in low-income countries but negative in middle-income countries. In some
poorest countries, we find that subsidizing food relative to non-food cannot be justified
on equity or on efficiency grounds.
    Our third contribution is to investigate the impact of consumption tax policies on
inequality by combining the calibrated optimal rates with the household data.4 We find
that setting a uniform tax rate on all goods while taking into account the de facto exemp-
tion of the informal sector achieves on average as much inequality reduction as existing
   2 This  is in line with evidence in Faber and Fally (2017) and Atkin et al. (2018b).
   3 This  is true for our baseline value of the elasticity of substitution in consumption between formal and
informal varieties, the parameter which determines the size of the efficiency cost of taxation due to the
existence of an informal sector. We use a baseline value taken from empirical estimates in the literature
and discuss the robustness of our results to alternative values.
    4 The impact of a tax policy on inequality depends not only on its progressivity, but also on the level

of tax rates and size of tax bases which determine the share of taxes in households' budgets.

                                                     2
direct tax policies (income taxes and social security) in developing countries. Moreover,
this policy achieves 75% of the inequality reduction obtained in a counterfactual world
with perfect enforcement in which governments can tax both formal and informal vari-
eties (thereby taxing a much larger base) and optimally differentiate rates between food
and non-food goods. Finally, in the realistic world in which informal varieties cannot be
taxed, the de facto exemption of the informal sector achieves twice as much inequality
reduction as the de jure optimal rate differentiation.
    The results are robust to changing our main assumptions. First, we obtain similar
results when changing the formality assignment for places of purchases for which there
is uncertainty.5 Second, we assume at baseline a zero pass-through of taxes to prices in
informal stores. We use data on the universe of formal and informal retailers in Mexico
to relax this assumption, and find that doing so only slightly reduces the redistributive
effect of informality. Third, our baseline results use total household expenditure to proxy
for household income.6 We obtain similar results using income distributions constructed
with estimates of distributional saving rates. Finally, we discuss the implications of our
modeling assumption that no direct tax instrument is available to the government.
    Our findings have several main implications. First, the result that consumption taxes
reduce inequality in developing countries runs counter to the consensus view in the pol-
icy and academic literatures, which argue that these taxes have little or no redistributive
potential (Sah 1983; Shah and Whalley 1991; Gemmell and Morrissey 2005; Coady 2006).
These previous studies do not account for differences in informal consumption along the
household income distribution, which our results show have large, positive impacts on
redistribution. This negative prior may explain why studies of redistribution in devel-
oping countries often focus on the design of government transfers (Tanzi 1998; Clements
et al. 2015). Our findings suggest more attention should be paid to the redistributive
potential of tax design in these countries. Second, we obtain our results by measuring
informality at the consumer level, while most studies focus on informality at the firm
and/or worker level (DeSoto 1989; De Paula and Scheinkman 2010; Gerard and Gonzaga
2016; Ulyssea 2018). This approach leads to a more nuanced perspective on the welfare
effects of the informal sector, which is often thought to trap the poor in low-productivity
firms (La Porta and Shleifer 2014; Hsieh and Klenow 2014). In particular, our findings
caution that while enforcement policies to reduce informality may yield production effi-
ciency gains (Ulyssea, 2020), they might also have distributional costs by increasing the
    5 This is because the association between budget shares and household income is strongest for places

of purchase which are clearly informal (non-market consumption) or clearly formal (large supermarkets).
    6 This is due to data limitations. Expenditure surveys in developing countries often do not attempt to

directly measure income because of serious measurement issues - see Deaton (1997) for a discussion.

                                                    3
tax burden on poorer households. Third, by combining micro survey data from countries
spanning a wide range of economic development (from Burundi to Chile), we document
new stylized facts on consumption patterns across `modern' and `traditional' retailers as
households get richer within and across countries. Our database could be used to test
competing theories of development and global retail (Bronnenberg and Ellickson, 2015).

    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In the following sub-section, we sum-
marize our contributions relative to existing literatures. Section 2 describes our data
sources and methodology. Section 3 provides new stylized facts on consumption pat-
terns across places of purchase and types of goods as households get richer within and
between countries. Section 4 investigates the implications of these consumption patterns
for tax progressivity. Section 5 develops a model to characterize optimal commodity tax
policy with informal consumption. Section 6 calibrates the model using our data and
investigates the impacts of consumption taxes on inequality. Section 7 concludes.

1.1     Related Literature

Our paper makes three main contributions to the literatures on tax policy and consump-
tion in developing countries. First, we introduce differences in informal consumption
along the income distribution as a novel channel through which consumption taxes are
redistributive. This contrasts with the existing literature, which omits informal con-
sumption and concludes that consumption taxes have, at best, limited redistributive
impacts in developing countries (for recent studies, see Harris et al., 2018 and Lustig,
2018).7 Our approach is thus related to recent papers on the redistributive implications
of differences in consumption patterns across the income distribution, which focus on
developed countries (Faber and Fally, 2017; Jaravel, 2018; Allcott et al., 2019).
    Second, we contribute to the literature on the design of consumption taxes under lim-
ited enforcement capacity (Pomeranz, 2015; Naritomi, 2019; Waseem, 2020).8 We revisit
the redistributive potential of differentiating consumption tax rates across goods. Such
policies are commonly implemented (Ebrill et al., 2001), but papers that study the re-
distribution achieved by optimal rate differentiation only do so on a country-by-country
basis.9 We combine theory and novel data to undertake the first systematic analysis

      7 Two exceptions are Munoz ~    and Cho (2003) and Jenkins et al. (2006) who use retailer information to
classify expenditures as formal or informal, respectively in the Dominican Republic and in Ethiopia.
    8 More generally, we contribute to the growing literature on taxation under weak enforcement (Almu-

                                                                                             ~
nia et al., 2019; Basri et al., 2019; Brockmeyer and Hernandez, 2019; Weigel, 2019; Londono-Velez,    2020).
    9 Including: In the United Kingdom, Sah (1983); in India, Ahmad and Stern (1984), Ray (1986), Srini-

vasan (1989); in Australia, Creedy (2001).

                                                      4
of optimal rate differentiation across goods and its impact on inequality across a large
sample of low and middle-income countries.10 More generally, we build on the litera-
ture on optimal tax design under imperfect enforcement which typically concentrates on
the efficiency costs of taxation (Allingham and Sandmo, 1972; Cremer and Gahvari, 1993;
Boadway and Sato, 2009); we consider instead both the equity and efficiency implications
of informal consumption patterns.11 .
    Finally, this paper speaks to the literature on consumption patterns and develop-
ment. A large body of work documents how budget shares spent on specific goods
vary with income, including the well-established food Engel curve (Deaton and Paxson,
1998; Anker et al., 2011; Pritchett and Spivack, 2013; Alm°as, 2012). We document, in
addition, the association between household income and place of purchase both within
and across countries. Thus, our analysis complements recent studies that document ag-
gregate changes in the retail sector over development (Bronnenberg and Ellickson, 2015;
Lagakos, 2016; Atkin et al., 2018b).12


2     Data and Measurement of Informal Consumption

We use two data sets to present new evidence on consumption patterns in developing
countries and on the redistributive potential of consumption taxes. Our core sample
consists of 31 countries for which the data enable us to proxy for informal consumption
at the household level. Our extended sample consists of 80 countries for which the data
allow us to document food consumption patterns.

2.1    Core Sample

We assemble our core dataset by combining household expenditure surveys from 31
countries that satisfy three selection criteria. First, the survey must be nationally repre-
sentative. Second, the survey must record consumption from open diaries rather than
pre-filled diaries, which only contain information on selected products. This helps to
ensure that the survey covers all expenditures. Third, the diary must ask households to
report the store type that each expenditure is purchased from - the place of purchase - and
this information must be systematically reported in the diaries. This last criterion en-
sures that we can apply our method to robustly measure informal sector consumption,
    10 Our main results focus on food versus non-food rate differentiation, but we also show results for
optimal differentiation between 12 large goods categories.
   11 See Kopczuk (2001) for an exception
   12 Our approach is related to a recent literature which compiles multi-country microdata to study macro

changes over the development path (Bick et al., 2018; Donovan et al., 2018).

                                                    5
as described below.
   Our core sample from 31 countries contains information on over 400,000 households.
Table 1 lists alphabetically the countries in the core sample, with their survey name
and year, the number of households, and the average number of purchases reported
per household. Countries in the sample are principally located in Latin America and
Sub-Saharan Africa. Unfortunately, most household expenditure surveys in Asia do not
contain information on the place of purchase13 Nonetheless, the core sample covers a
wide range of development levels, from Burundi (GDP pc of 250 USD) to Chile (15,000
USD). In Section 3.3, we show that this core sample is very comparable to the large set
of developing countries in the extended sample, along detailed expenditure dimensions
that can be observed in samples.
   Appendix B provides further details on the data sources used. Table B1 shows the
geographical coverage of the core sample, table B2 lists the surveys considered for in-
clusion but ultimately discarded due to selection criteria, and table B3 provides further
details on the structure of the surveys for each country in the core sample.14

2.2   Method: Proxy for Informal Consumption Using Places of Purchase

Our main methodological innovation is to use the place of purchase reported for each
expenditure to assign a probability that it was obtained from a formal (tax remitting)
source. Most recorded expenditures can be classified by place of purchase into seven
categories. The first five pertain to purchases of goods. Ranked by ascending order of
retailer size, these are: (1) non-market consumption (e.g. home production); (2) non
brick-and-mortar stores (e.g. street stalls, public markets); (3) corner and convenience
stores; (4) specialized stores (e.g. clothing stores); and, (5) large stores (e.g. supermar-
kets, department stores). Purchases of services can be allocated to two main categories:
(6) services provided by an institution (e.g. banks, hospitals); and, (7) services provided
by an individual (e.g. domestic services).15 Combined, these categories account for 86%
of total household expenditure. The remaining 14% are items for which no place of
purchase is specified, primarily utilities, fuel and telecommunication (see Figure A3).16

  13 Survey   design appears correlated across countries within regions, showing the influence of regional
development partners and historical ties. Our data contain one Asia/Pacific country - Papua New Guinea
   14 Replication codes for the paper can be accessed here. This includes the cleaning files of each expen-

diture survey and the files generating the tables and figures of the paper. The data are not provided as
we had to require access to the World Bank or Stat Agency for each country. Yet, these data are often
accessible, allowing for a replication of the paper on a subset of countries of interest.
   15 We also use two smaller categories to classify entertainment services into (8) entertainment (e.g.

restaurants) and (9) informal entertainment (e.g. food trucks).
   16 We exclude housing expenditure due to limited data on owner-occupied imputed rents.



                                                    6
    We assign each category to either the formal or informal sector. We define a category
as belonging to the formal sector if it is likely that consumption taxes are remitted on
most purchases from that category. According to this definition, many retailers are
informal because they evade taxes due on their sales. Alternatively, small retailers may
be informal because they are not required to register for consumption taxes due to their
size. We do not distinguish between these channels, as both imply that these retailers
do not remit consumption taxes. In addition, these concepts are closely related: in
countries with low enforcement capacity, the scope for evasion among small firms is
such that the net revenue from bringing them into the tax net is small and outweighed
by administrative and compliance costs (Ebrill et al., 2001; Keen and Mintz, 2004).
    The key assumption behind our assignment method is that larger retailers are more
likely to be formal. This is in part mechanically true, as a frequently used criteria for
compulsory tax registration is firm size. In addition, a large literature argues that larger
firms are less likely to evade taxes. Theoretically, Kleven et al. (2016) develop a model of
tax evasion in which informality must be sustained by collusion between firm managers
and their employees, and show that larger firms are more compliant since collusion costs
increase with firm size. Hsieh and Olken (2014) similarly argue that the effective burden
of taxation in developing countries falls more heavily on larger firms. Empirically, Kum-
ler et al. (2015) find that compliance indeed increases with firm size in Mexico. Naritomi
(2019) provides evidence suggesting that larger retail stores have more customers and
are therefore less able to sustain evasion. Both Bronnenberg and Ellickson (2015) and
Lagakos (2016) categorize retailers as either `traditional' (small, labor intensive retailers
- our categories 1 to 3) or modern (large, capital intensive retailers - our categories 4 and
5), and argue that traditional retailers are mostly informal.17
    We provide direct evidence that formality and firm size are positively correlated. We
use data on formality status and firm size available in the retail firm censuses of four
countries in our core sample (Cameroon, Mexico, Peru and Rwanda). Panel A in Figure 1
shows the share of formal firms as a function of log employment in each country.18 In all
countries, retailers with a few employees are overwhelmingly informal, but more than
80% of retailers with 20 or more employees are formal. In Mexico, the census classifies
retailers in categories which are similar to our broad place of purchase categories. This
enables us to go one step further and directly observe retailer size and formality status.

   17 Relatedly, Gordon and Li (2009) explain the high shares of taxes on capital (such as corporate income

taxes) in developing countries relative to rich countries by the fact that capital is more observable than
labor in these countries. This also implies higher compliance rates among larger retailers.
   18 Formality is defined as 'being registered with tax authority' in Cameroon and Rwanda, and 'paying

value-added-taxes on sales' in Mexico and Peru.

                                                    7
Figure 1 shows for our categories (1) to (5) the log median number of employees (Panel
A) and the share of firms paying value-added taxes on their sales (Panel C). We observe
that non-brick-and-mortar stores and convenience stores are small and rarely formal,
whereas nearly all large stores are formal.
    Given this evidence, our baseline formality assignment assigns categories (1) to (3)
to the informal sector, and categories (4) and (5) to the formal sector. Goods in category
(1) - non-market consumption - are by definition not purchased in markets and are
therefore untaxed. Categories (2) and (3) (non brick and mortar stores and corner stores)
are likely very small and mostly informal, whereas category (5) (large stores) consists
mostly of supermarkets which are unlikely to be non-compliant. Our approach assigns
retailer-types to informality which are all classified as 'traditional' tax-evading retailers
in Lagakos (2016).
    For services, we assume that institutions pay taxes while individual providers do not.
This leads us to assign category (6) to the formal sector and category (7) to the informal
sector. We follow the same logic in assigning expenditures in the unspecified category to
the formal sector: the bulk of these expenditures are utilities typically provided by large
institutions which cannot evade taxes (Figure A3). Appendix B provides more details on
the methodology. Table B4 shows for each country the original names of the places of
purchase, their expenditure shares and our formality assignment.
    We will investigate the robustness of our results to two alternative formality assign-
ment rules. The first alternative is to assign a non-binary probability to each category
that it pays VAT on its sales. We use the share of retailers that pay VAT in each category
in the Mexican census to obtain a probability for each category. These probabilities are
depicted in Panel C of Figure 1.19 This enables us to take into account the fact that some
small retailers pay taxes ­ either because a subset of small retailers are fully formal or be-
cause all small retailers pay VAT on a subset of their transactions. The second alternative
changes specialized stores (category 4) to be fully informal (leaving all other categories
unchanged). This is the category for which there is arguably the most uncertainty about
its true formality status.
    Our formality assignment rule enables us to measure the informal budget share of
each household, defined as the share of its total expenditure purchased from informal
retailers. In what follows we also consider within-product informal budget shares. We
use the UN's detailed COICOP classification of products, which is available at the 2-digit

  19 We assign the following probabilities that the place of purchase is formal to each category: 10% in
category 2; 20% in category 3; 50% in category 4; and 90% in category 5. Other categories are unchanged
from the baseline assignment rule.

                                                   8
level (12 products), 3-digit level (47 products) and 4-digit level (117 products).20

2.3   Extended Sample for Food Expenditures

We complement our core dataset with microdata from the World Bank's Global Con-
sumption Database (GCD). The GCD compiles household expenditure surveys across
countries and harmonizes product categories across all surveys at the 2-digit COICOP
product level. 21 Merging this dataset with our core sample, we obtain consumption
data for 89 low and middle income countries which account for over 50% of the world
population. While this extended sample does not contain place of purchase informa-
tion, we can use it to characterize food consumption levels and food Engel curves. Food
products are defined as all items pertaining to the COICOP 2-digit category `food and
non-alcoholic beverages'. This category is a good proxy for the set of products which
most governments throughout the world tax at a reduced rate in an attempt to make
consumption taxes more progressive. We also compare food consumption trends in the
core and extended samples and find very similar patterns. This helps us argue that the
documented informal consumption facts, while only observed in the core sample, may
be relevant for the broader sample of developing countries.


3     Engel Curves of Informality and Food across Development

3.1   Informality Engel Curves

The informality Engel curve (IEC) traces the relationship between the informal budget
share and total household expenditure within a given country. As is commonly done
in developing countries, we use household expenditure to proxy for household income
because of issues with measuring income ( Deaton and Paxson, 1998; Atkin et al., 2018a).
We use the logarithm of total expenditure, in line with the large literature on product-
specific Engel curves (starting with Working, 1943; see review in Deaton, 1997).
   For illustrative purposes, Figure 2 plots the IEC for one low-income country (Rwanda)
and one middle-income country (Mexico). These graphs show a local polynomial fit of
household budget share spent in the informal sector on log of household expenditure
per capita in 2010 constant USD. The solid and dashed lines represent the median and

   20 We use crosswalks to convert survey-specific product categories to COICOP categories when neces-

sary. This could not be done for three countries: Brazil, Chad and Peru. For these countries, we use
survey-specific product categories at the 3 and 4 digit levels.
   21 Aggregate statistics are available at http://datatopics.worldbank.org/consumption. Ap-

pendix B.3 provides further information on the dataset and our merge.

                                                  9
top/bottom 5 percentiles of the expenditure distribution, respectively. To investigate
the functional form flexibly, we plot the non-parametric IEC constructed from kernel-
weighted polynomial local regressions. In both countries, the IEC is downward sloping
and approximately linear. In Rwanda, the informal budget share falls from 90% for
the poorest decile of households to 70% for the richest decile. In Mexico, the IEC is
steeper, falling from 55% to 25%. Figure A1 plots the IEC for all 31 countries. We find
two empirical regularities. First, IECs are downward sloping everywhere. Second, IECs
are approximately linear in log expenditure. This suggests there exists a stable func-
tional form relationship between informal budget share and household expenditure in
developing countries.22
    To summarize the information contained in the country-level IECs, we focus on two
empirical moments: i) the aggregate informal budget share; ii) the level-log slope of
the IEC. In Section 4, we explain how these two moments are sufficient to characterize
how consumption patterns affect tax progressivity. We obtain the country-specific slopes
from the following regression:

                           Share In f ormali = ln(expenditurei ) +  i                            (1)

    where Share In f ormali is the informal budget share of household i, expenditurei is its
total expenditure per person. We use household weights from each survey.
    In Figure 3, we plot the aggregate informal budget share (Panel A) and the estimated
IEC slope (Panel B) against countries' per capita GDP. Panel A reveals a large drop in
the aggregate informal budget share, from over 90% in the poorest countries to 20% in
upper-middle income countries. This decrease in the size of the informal sector over
development, obtained using our novel approach based on consumer shopping behav-
ior, is consistent with patterns observed using alternative informality measures, based
on labor markets (La Porta and Shleifer, 2014; Morrow et al., 2019) or money demand
(Enste and Schneider, 2000). In Panel B, we see that the negative IEC slope first increases
in magnitude, between low-income and lower-middle income countries, and then de-
creases, between lower-middle and upper-middle income countries. The average IEC
slope is 9.8, implying a nearly 1 percentage point reduction in informal budget share
when household expenditure increases by 10%.



  22 Alm°
        as (2012) similarly finds a stable Engel relationship between food budget share and household
income around the world. For more dis-aggregated expenditure categories, however, Engel curves have
been found to be non-linear and vary across settings (Banks et al., 1997; Atkin et al., 2018a).

                                                 10
Robustness Our results are robust to using the alternative formality assignment rules
outlined in section 2.2. We re-estimate the informal budget shares and IEC slopes us-
ing these two alternative rules and present results in Figure A2. Our key findings are
unchanged: over development, the aggregate informal budget share decreases steeply
and the IEC slope first increases then decreases in magnitude. In Figures A4 and A5,
we show that this robustness is driven by the fact that those expenditure categories with
least uncertainty surrounding formality status are also those with the steepest Engel
slopes (including non-market purchases, large stores, and institutional services).

3.2     Understanding Differences in Informal Consumption across Households

Why do poorer households consume a higher share of their budget from the informal
sector? This question is important, for at least two reasons. First, by attempting to
answer it we investigate the mechanisms behind the shape of IECs. Second, if differ-
ences in informal consumption across households can be explained by characteristics
that governments can easily observe and target tax reductions or exemptions on, then
de jure redistributive policies and de facto informality exemption may in practice have
very similar redistributive impacts.

3.2.1    Observable Characteristics

To measure how much of the association between household income and informal con-
sumption shares can be explained by observable characteristics, we estimate the follow-
ing regression separately for each country:

                       Share In f ormali =   ln(expenditurei ) +  Xi +  i                            (2)

    where i indexes a household, Xi are household characteristics and each observation
is weighted by the relevant household survey weight. Table 2 shows the average of the
slope coefficients  across countries, the average upper and lower bounds of the 95%
confidence intervals, and the number of countries for which the coefficient is statistically
significant at the 5% level. Column 1 displays results from the specification without
controls. Column 2 controls for household demographics: household size and age, ed-
ucation and gender of the household head.23 We find that these characteristics do not
explain the correlation between informal expenditure and income and, if anything, the
IEC slopes become slightly steeper.
  23 Householdsize controls for economies of scale across households of different size which could affect
where households choose to shop - see Deaton and Paxson (1998).

                                                   11
    Columns 3 and 4 add controls for households' location, either with an indicator
for whether the household lives in a rural area (column 3) or with survey block fixed
effects (column 4).24 These controls allow us to test whether the association between
informal budget shares and household expenditure is due to poorer households living in
areas with worse access to formal retailers. Despite large differences in average informal
budget shares between rural and urban households, controlling for rural locations only
explains 13% of the slopes.25 Controlling for survey blocks explains just over 20% of the
differences in informal budget shares between poor and rich households.
    In columns 5 to 8 we test whether non-homothetic preferences across goods play
a role ­ when richer households spend more on goods predominantly sold in formal
stores. We run a product-level version of specification (2) with goods fixed effects and
compute an average goods-level estimate of  for each country.26 We gradually consider
variations within narrower goods categories: we first consider food vs non-food (column
5), then the 12 good categories of the COICOP 2-digit level classification (column 6), then
the 47 categories of the COICOP 3-digit level (column 7) and finally the 117 categories
at the COICOP 4-digit level (column 8). Preferences across goods explain part of the as-
sociation: controlling for food goods alone explains 35% of the slopes, while controlling
for the 12 broad goods categories explains 41% of the variation. Controlling for narrow
goods categories only slightly reduces the slope further.27
    Finally, column 9 shows the average IEC slope with all controls included. The average
IEC slope is 4.3 and remains statistically significant in all but three countries. Overall,
observable characteristics explain 54% of the association between informal expenditure
shares and household income. We reproduce these results for our two alternative as-
signment rules and find similar results (see Tables A2 and A3).

3.2.2   Quality-Price Trade-off between the Formal and Informal Sectors

The previous analysis shows that observable location and preferences across goods ex-
plain half of the IEC slopes on average, but they remain significantly different from zero
in most countries after including these controls. In six countries in our sample the ex-

  24 The  survey block is the most granular location information and contains on average 74 households in
our surveys. The median survey block is representative on average of 52,900 households.
   25 The informal budget share is on average 67% in rural areas versus 52% in urban areas and IEC slopes

are steeper in urban locations. Figure A7 shows the IECs separately for rural and urban areas.
                                                         ig =   ln ( expenditure g ) +  g +  Xi +  ig where
   26 Formally we run the regression: Share In f ormal

Share In f ormalig is the share of household i's informal expenditure on good g and  g are goods fixed
effects. Each observation is weighted by household survey weights and goods expenditure shares.
   27 Figure A8 displays visually these results for each country by showing the residual IEC slopes when

controlling for increasingly narrow goods categories.

                                                    12
penditure module asks households their main reason for choosing a place of purchase
for each item; the possible reasons are access, price, quality, store attributes and other.28
Table 3 reports the average frequencies for each reason. Column 1 shows that across all
store types, access is chosen for 41% of purchases, suggesting that controlling even at
the survey block might not capture fully the local nature of shopping preferences.29
    Columns 2 and 3 show the same frequencies separately for informal and formal
stores. The key difference that emerges is that households visit informal stores for their
prices and formal stores for their quality.30 This result is robust to a set of controls and
to the inclusion of household fixed effects.31 Figure A9 shows that in each of the six
countries, this taste for quality is more prevalent for richer households, as they are up to
four times more likely to report quality as the reason for choosing any type of store.
    These results suggest that part of the remaining association between informal bud-
get shares and household expenditure in the last column of Table 2 could be due to
richer households valuing high-quality goods more and such goods being sold mainly
in formal stores. This is in line with results in Faber and Fally (2017) who show that
richer households spend more on larger brands in the United States, and Atkin et al.
(2018b) who find that richer Mexican households spend more on high-quality products
sold by foreign retailers. This explanation could imply that formal varieties of a given
good should be more expensive than informal varieties, reflecting quality differences.
We test this hypothesis in the 20 core sample countries which report unit values for each
purchase. We use unit values to proxy for non-quality adjusted prices. We study price
differences between formal and informal stores within the most narrow good classifica-
tion available, location and measurement units, leading us to interpret price differences
as reflecting quality differences (similar to Atkin et al. (2018b)). We limit our analysis
to food products since this mitigates measurement issues and because food items are
typically exempt from consumption taxes, so that any price difference between formal
and informal varieties cannot be due to taxes. Formally, we estimate the price premium
in the formal sector in each country separately as follows:


   28 Inall surveys, seven reasons are listed which we classify into five categories: access is defined as "The
retailer is closer or more convenient" and "The good or service cannot be found elsewhere"; price as "The
good or services are cheaper"; quality as "The goods or services are of better quality"; store attributes as
"The retailer offers credit" and "The retailer is welcoming or is a friend"; and, other as "Others reasons".
   29 This could reflect the fact that many households in our sample cannot invest in costly durables, such

as cars, which may give them access to a wider variety of stores (Lagakos, 2016).
   30 Access is slightly more frequently reported as a reason to visit an informal store, which could reflect

a lack of store choices in poorer rural locations.
   31 Within a given household, formal store purchases appear motivated by higher quality while informal

store purchases appear driven by lower prices.

                                                      13
                        ln(unit value)igmu =  Formaligmu + µ gmu +              igmu                      (3)

   where ln(unit value)igmu is the unit value reported by household i, for good g, in
location m, in units u, and Formaligmu equals one if the good is purchased in a formal
store. We add fixed effects at the good * location * unit of measurement level.
   Table A5 shows that on average, food unit values are 6.7% higher in formal than
informal stores. This formal store premium result is robust to outliers, excluding self-
production, and controlling for household characteristics. These results are consistent
with the hypothesis that formal stores offer high quality varieties at a higher price.32
Formal stores might of course differ in other ways reflected in prices, such as a higher
productivity, which would make it less likely to find positive price differences.

3.3   Food Engel Curves

In this sub-section, we document the shape of the food Engel curve in developing coun-
tries. The shape of the IEC determines how much redistribution can be achieved by de
facto exemption of informal consumption; the shape of the food Engel curve similarly
determines how much de jure exemption of food can redistributive. Because food Engel
curves are typically downward sloping, many governments set reduced rates or fully
exempt food products for redistributive purposes.33 Previous research has studied the
magnitude and approximate log-level linearity of the food Engel curves.34 We combine
our core data with microdata from the Global Consumption Database (discussed in sec-
tion 2.3) to estimate food Engel curves in a uniquely large sample of 89 low and middle
income countries.
    In the top panels of Figure 4, we present the aggregate food budget share (Panel
A) and food Engel slope (Panel B) against countries' GDP per capita. The aggregate
budget share spent on food decreases with development, but the percentage-point drop
over development is less pronounced for food than for informal consumption. Food
Engel curves are typically downward sloping and there is no relationship between the
magnitude of the slope and development. In Panels C and D of4 we show the formal food
aggregate budget share and Engel curve slopes, respectively. The aggregate formal food

   32 Consistent with a quality-gradient in size, we also find that within formal retailers, the larger stores
(category 5) charge higher prices than smaller specialized stores formal category (category 4).
   33 Some countries apply reduced rates or exempt all food goods, while other countries target `basic'

food items. We follow the former approach; targeting narrow items may improve redistribution, but also
increases the scope for cross-goods misreporting and distortions.
   34 Recent studies include 10 countries in Alm° as (2012), 22 in Anker et al. (2011) and 38 in Pritchett and
Spivack (2013).

                                                     14
budget share is small on average (11%) but increases with development. The slope of the
formal food Engel curve is small in magnitude but positive on average in low-income
countries; it becomes negative in upper-middle income countries.
   Finally, Panels A and B show that the levels and slopes of food Engel curves are
very similar between our core sample and extended sample, for countries at the same
level of development. This could suggest that while we can only characterize informal
consumption patterns in our core sample, our results may be relevant for developing
countries more broadly.


4     Progressivity of Consumption Taxes

The consumption patterns described in Section 3 determine the progressivity of con-
sumption taxes both in the average developing country and across development, which
we turn to in this section. We say a tax policy is progressive if the effective tax rate (ratio
of taxes paid to household income) increases with household income.

4.1    Progressivity in the Average Developing Country

Set-up We study the progressivity of three tax policy scenarios. Scenario #1 imposes a
uniform rate on all goods, but assumes informal varieties are not taxed (de facto exemp-
tion). Scenario #2 sets a zero rate on food goods (de jure exemption), but assumes formal
and informal varieties are taxed. Scenario #3 implements both de facto and de jure ex-
emptions by setting a zero rate on food and assuming informal varieties are not taxed.
Scenario #1 illustrates the progressivity of our new informality channel. Scenario #2
corresponds to a counterfactual setting with perfect enforcement capacity; while practi-
cally implausible, it provides an unconstrained benchmark against which to compare the
informality-constrained scenarios (#1 and #3). Scenario #3 captures the combined pro-
gressivity impacts of the government exemption policy and of informality. Importantly,
the difference between scenarios #3 and #1 shows the actual impact of governments im-
plementing a de jure exemption, conditional on the de facto informality exemption. We
assume for each scenario that the government sets rates such that it collects 10% of total
consumption in taxes, thus maintaining total revenue collected constant across scenar-
ios.35 Finally, we assume full pass-through of taxes to final consumers at baseline, but
relax this assumption below.


    35 Distributional
                  analyses are based on the first order impacts of small changes in tax rates, which are
captured by the mechanical effects. Households' behavioral responses to tax changes are second order.

                                                  15
    To build intuition for our results, we rely on the empirical evidence that the Engel
curves of both tax bases (formal goods, non-food goods) are upward sloping and ap-
proximately linear with respect to log household income, as shown in Section 3. With a
log-linear Engel curve, the progressivity of a tax scenario is decreasing in the aggregate
budget share of the tax base, and increasing in the magnitude of the slope of its Engel
curve. Consider two countries with the same positive slopes for a good, but different
aggregate budget shares. When Engel curves are log-linear, the difference in budget
shares spent on the taxed good between rich and poor households is more pronounced
in the country with the lower aggregate share. In other words, for the same Engel curve
slope the lower the average budget share of a taxed good, the more likely is it that any
given purchase of that good is made by a rich household. This means that a purchase
of that good becomes a better tag for household income, leading to a more progressive
tax system. In addition, when two countries have the same budget share of that good
and Engel curves are upward sloping, a steeper slope increases the difference in budget
shares between rich and poor households, making the tax system more progressive.

Results Figure 5 shows the progressivity of each scenario for the average developing
country in our sample. We obtain three main results. First, the existence of the informal
sector makes consumption taxes progressive. Under scenario #1 (red circle line), the
effective tax rate increases sharply with household income and the richest quintile pays
twice as much taxes (as a share of income) as the poorest quintile. This large progres-
sivity is explained by the steep increase of formal expenditure with household income
(Figure 3.) Second, the de facto exemption of the informal sector is more progressive
than the de jure exemption of food goods in the counterfactual setting with perfect en-
forcement. This can be observed by comparing scenario #1 to #2 (green cross line): the
ratio of effective tax rate paid by the richest quintile to that of the poorest quintile is
almost 50% larger under #1 versus #2. This difference is primarily driven by the fact
that formal expenditure constitutes on average a smaller budget share of households'
incomes than non-food expenditure among countries in our sample (Panel A, Figure 4
versus Figure 3). Third, the progressivity achieved by the de jure exemption conditional
on the de facto exemption is small. We can see this by comparing scenario #3 (orange
square line) to scenario #1: exempting food from taxation barely increases progressivity
once the exemption of the informal sector is taken into account.




                                            16
4.2   Progressivity across Development

The evidence presented in Figure 5 for the average country masks considerable hetero-
geneity across countries. We now turn to characterizing how the progressivity of our
policy scenarios changes over the development path. To summarize the progressivity of
a scenario we use the ratio of the effective tax rate paid by the richest quintile to that
paid by the poorest quintile. The higher this metric, the more progressive the tax policy
(a value > 1 implies a progressive tax policy). This metric does not depend on the tax
rate used, and is frequently used in the literature (Sah, 1983; Srinivasan, 1989).
    Figure 6 plots the country-level progressivity for each scenario as a function of coun-
tries' economic development. Panel A shows that the de facto exemption of informal
consumption leads to the most progressivity in the poorest countries, where the top
20% pay on average 3 times as much in taxes as the bottom 20%. In these countries
formal consumption is rare and therefore a strong tag for household income. Over de-
velopment, progressivity decreases. This is primarily driven by the steep increase in
aggregate formal budget shares (Figure 3, Panel A), which makes formal consumption a
worse tag for income as countries become richer. Between low and lower-middle income
countries, this negative budget share effect dominates the positive effect on progressivity
from a rise in the slope of the formal Engel curve (Figure 3, Panel B). Between lower-
middle and upper-middle income countries, the formal Engel slope falls, contributing to
the decrease in progressivity.
    In Panel B of Figure 6, we study progressivity of the de jure food exemption in the
unrealistic setting with perfect enforcement and no informal consumption (scenario #2).
The de jure food exemption is substantially less progressive than the de facto informal
sector exemption (scenario #1) in the poorest countries, while both scenarios achieve
similar levels of progressivity in upper-middle income countries. This is because the
non-food budget share is much larger than the formal budget share in the poorest coun-
tries (making formal consumption a much better tag for household income than non-
food consumption), and grows much less than formal budget shares over development
(Figure 4). Finally, by comparing Panel C (scenario #3) to Panel A (scenario #1), we find
that de jure exemptions have no effect on progressivity in the poorest countries once
the de facto exemption of the informal sector is taken into account. It has a positive
impact however in upper-income-countries. This is because the formal food Engel curve
is roughly flat in poor countries, and downward sloping among the richest countries in
our sample (Figure 4).




                                            17
4.3   Extensions and Robustness

Pass-through of taxes in the informal sector Our analysis thus far assumes zero pass-
through of taxes to prices of informal varieties. This assumption may not hold, for
several reasons. First, if the consumption tax is a VAT, informal retailers may pay taxes
on their inputs from formal suppliers. Second, competition between formal and informal
retailers could lead informal retailers to pass through tax increases to prices. We relax
this assumption by allowing some pass-through of taxes to informal prices. In Appendix
C.6, we show that under a VAT system the pass-through of taxes to informal prices is
equal to the share of formal input costs in informal retailers' total input costs. Using the
Mexican census data described above we find that this share is on average 10% among
all informal retailers.36
    Table A6 summarizes our progressivity results under the assumption of a 10% pass-
through of taxes to informal prices.37 The results are partially affected but our key
findings remain. First, we find that scenario #1 (exemption of informal varieties) remains
very progressive, with the richest quintile paying over 70% more in taxes than the poorest
quintile on average. Second, the de facto exemption of the informal sector continues to
be more progressive than de jure exemption of food (scenario #2), although the difference
in progressivity has decreased. Third, the progressivity impact of the de jure exemption,
conditional on allowing for informal consumption, remains smaller than that of the de
facto exemption.

Distributional savings rates Our baseline results use total expenditures to proxy for
household income, assuming households do not save. Intuitively, allowing for savings
both decreases effective tax rates (as savings are not taxed) and decreases the progressiv-
ity of all tax scenarios if saving rates increase with income.38 The distribution of savings
across income levels is hard to obtain from expenditure surveys, especially in develop-
   36 In the 2013 Census, 85% of retailers are informal by not reporting any payment on VAT. Among infor-

mal retailers, only 8% report paying VAT on inputs, which applies on average to 40% of their intermediate
input purchases. The informal retailers that report positive VAT on inputs account for 25% of all informal
sales. Combined, this leads to our estimate of 10%.
   37 The share of formal inputs used by informal firms is likely to be an upper bound. First, the 10%

number is applied to both fixed and non-fixed establishments, while the latter category (which includes
street stalls) is likely to source fewer inputs from formal firms. For this reason, we maintain a 0% pass-
through for home production. Second, in Mexico, it is the large informal stores which use formal inputs:
The use of formal inputs for smaller stores is closer to 5% on average. Third, segmentation between formal
and informal firms is likely to be even larger in poorer countries, leading to lower average pass-through
in those countries than in Mexico.
   38 Calculations based on annual income may overstate the regressive nature of consumption taxes

since consumption depends on lifetime income, which is less volatile than annual income (Poterba, 1989;
Caspersen and Metcalf, 1994).

                                                   18
ing countries where income is hard to measure. To assess how savings could affect our
results, we use data from the US Consumer Finance Survey, in which savings rates range
from 0% for the poorest households to 15% for the richest quintile.39 Results are pre-
sented in Table A6: allowing for distributional savings decreases the progressivity of all
scenarios, as expected, but our main findings are unchanged.

Alternative formality assignment Finally Table A6 presents our progressivity results
under the two alternative rules for categorizing places of purchases as formal or in-
formal, as described in Section 2.2 (the probabilistic formality assignment based on the
2013 Mexican Census of retailers and the assignment of specialized stores to the informal
sector). Our three main take-aways are unchanged.


5     Optimal Consumption Tax Policy with an Informal Sector

5.1   Set-up

This section studies the implications of the novel consumption facts for optimal tax
policy. We extend the multi-person Ramsey model of commodity taxation (Diamond,
1975) to a context in which informal varieties of each good cannot be taxed. We then
derive optimal tax rates for three policy scenarios and study the changes in optimal rates
as consumption patterns change over development. The scenarios are closely related to
those in Section 4, but studying optimal tax policy enables us to relax the assumption
that differentiating tax rates between food and non-food goods must take the form of
full tax exemption of food. We study instead the optimal level of rate differentiation
between these two goods categories.40 Proofs of results are in Appendix C.

Household preferences There is a continuum of mass 1 of households i with hetero-
geneous exogenous incomes yi . Households have preferences over j goods, and for each
good over two varieties v, which we assume are imperfect substitutes. The subscript
v = 0 indicates a variety produced in the informal sector, v = 1 a variety produced in
the formal sector. In most of what follows we assume informal varieties cannot be taxed.
Producer prices q jv are exogenous, consumer prices are given by p j1 = q j1 (1 + t j ), where

    39 Source: 1985 US Consumer Finance Survey. Savings rates are in the same range in the few developing

countries (China and Chile) for which similar consumer finance surveys are available.
    40 We focus in this section on optimal rate differentiation between these two categories only for simplic-

ity, and because of the policy relevance of this scenario. Our expressions can however be used to consider
a government that optimally differentiates rates across a large number of categories; we show results from
this full rate differentiation in Section 6.2 below.

                                                     19
t j is the tax on good j, and p j0 = q j0 . These consumer prices reflect the commonly made
assumption that there is full (no) pass-through of taxes to formal (informal) consumer
prices.41 We write v( p, yi ) the indirect utility of household i, sijv the budget share that
household i spends on variety v of good j, sij = sij0 + sij1 the budget share it spends on
good j, and j the price elasticity of demand for good j.
      We impose additional structure on household preferences to characterize how the
efficiency cost of taxation changes along the development path. We assume that com-
pensated price elasticities of demand for all goods are equal across households, across
products and with development. We set elasticities of substitution across goods equal to
zero but allow a positive cross-price elasticity of demand across varieties. This enables
us to focus on households' responses that arise in the presence of an informal sector due
to substitution across varieties within each good. This substitution is governed by the
cross-variety price elasticities of demand, which are assumed equal across all goods and
invariant along the development path. We allow for differences in income elasticities
across goods and varieties but assume income effects are fixed across development.
      Imposing this structure on preferences allows us to clearly determine how uncom-
pensated price elasticities, which drive the efficiency costs of taxation, vary across prod-
ucts and along the development path. In Appendix C, we show that the uncompensated
price elasticity of demand for a formal variety of a good, denoted j1 , can be expressed
as a function of compensated price elasticities, income elasticities, and budget shares:

                                                  C
                                         j1   =       -  j1 s j1 - 2 ~ C  j                               (4)

    This elasticity captures the efficiency cost of taxing only the formal variety of good
j and is composed of three components. The first is the compensated price elasticity of
demand for a good, C . The second is an income effect driven by the income elasticity
of demand for the formal variety  j1 and its budget share s j1 . The third is a function of
the compensated cross-price elasticity of demand, denoted ~ C , and the share of informal
consumption in total consumption of good j, denoted  j .42 Intuitively, as the price of
formal varieties increases, households can substitute to informal varieties: this increases
the price elasticity of the formal variety, the more so the more households are willing to
substitute across varieties (higher ~ C ).
   41 Appendix C shows that a simple model in which formal and informal firms compete under monop-

olistic competition yields these patterns of pass-through.
   42 This expression also assumes variety-level own-price elasticities of demand are equal across varieties

for each good, and differences in prices across varieties are negligible, such that p j0  p j1 . Section 3
                                            p
presents evidence regarding the value of p1   0
                                                . In all countries the difference between prices of formal and
informal varieties is small, around 5%.

                                                         20
Government preferences The government chooses the tax rates t j levied on each good
j to maximize:
                                          W=            G (v( p, yi ))di + µ  t j q j1 x j1   (5)
                                                    i                             j

    where x j1 = i xij1 ( p, yi ) is total consumption of the formal variety of good j. Govern-
ment preferences are characterized by µ, the marginal value of public funds, and G (), an
increasing and concave social welfare function. We write gi household i's social marginal
welfare weight, which represents how much the government values giving an extra unit
of income to household i, and g        ¯ is the average social marginal welfare weight (see Saez
and Santcheva, 2016). We assume that gi is decreasing with household income and
                          43

µ = g ¯ . The latter simplifies expressions and corresponds to a government that has no
preference assumption for taxation unless it enables redistribution.

5.2     Optimal Tax Policy over the Development Path

In this sub-section, we consider how optimal tax policies vary with development. We
model development as an increase in all households' income by the same proportional
amount, so that the distribution of income across households does not change, and
assume it leads to the changes in budget shares and Engel curve slopes documented in
Section 3. To build intuition, and consistent with our empirical evidence, we assume
that the Engel curves of all taxed goods are approximately linear with respect to log
household income. We relax this assumption when we calibrate the model to our data.
We first consider optimal uniform taxation in a world in which only formal varieties
can be taxed. We then consider optimal rate differentiation between food and non-food
goods: first in a counterfactual setting with perfect enforcement where all varieties can
be taxed; then, in the realistic setting in which only formal varieties can be taxed.

5.2.1    Optimal Uniform Commodity Taxation

We start by assuming that the government levies a uniform tax rate on all products,
                                                              t
t j = t,  j, but cannot tax informal varieties. Writing  = 1+   t , welfare maximization
yields the following expression for the optimal uniform rate:

                                                                i i 1        si
                                                       i ( g - g )  s1 di
                                                           ¯
                                                     =                                        (6)
                                                             - 1g ¯


                        G (v( p,yi )) v( p,yi )
  43 Formally   gi =     v ( p,y i )    yi
                                                .


                                                                   21
where s1 =  j         i        is the aggregate budget share spent on all formal varieties, i =
                   i s j1 di
yi
y¯ is the ratio of household i's income relative to the average income y     ¯ and 1 is the
uncompensated price elasticity of demand for all formal varieties. Equation (6) shows
that the optimal uniform rate is increasing in the co-variance between household income
and formal budget shares: the more richer households spend on formal varieties relative
to the poor, the more redistribution is obtained from taxing only formal varieties and
the higher the optimal rate on those varieties. The optimal rate is also decreasing in
the absolute value of the uncompensated price elasticity of demand for formal varieties:
the more households respond to changes in formal prices by consuming fewer formal
varieties, the higher the efficiency cost of taxing only those formal varieties.
    The change in the optimal uniform rate over the development path is given by:

                                                  i i 1 si    s1i
                                                                         s1
                                         i ( g - g )  s1 (          -
                                             ¯                i         s1 ) di
                                                             s1                          1
                                     =                                            +              (7)
                                                        gi ) 
                                                                   i
                                                                i s1                     1
                                               i (g -
                                                  ¯               s1   di
    The first and second terms capture, respectively, the change in the redistributive
effect and efficiency cost of taxing only formal varieties. The direction of these changes
is summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 1. Optimal uniform commodity taxation when only formal varieties can be
taxed

     · The redistribution gain from taxing all products uniformly is decreasing over the develop-
       ment path as long as: i) the formal Engel curve is upward sloping, ii) the aggregate formal
       budget share increases more than the slope of the formal Engel curve.

     · The efficiency cost of taxing all products uniformly is decreasing over the development path
       as long as, in addition, ~ C > 21 , where 1 is the income elasticity of demand for all formal
                                        

       varieties ~ C is the cross-variety price elasticity of demand.

     Proof: see Appendix C.

    The first part of Proposition 1 formalizes the intuition (outlined in Section 4) for how
changes in the aggregate formal budget shares and slope of the formal Engel curve af-
fect the redistributive effect of taxing formal varieties. As shown above, formal Engel
curves are upward sloping in all countries. Among poorest countries, the likelihood
that a formal variety purchase is made by rich households is high because the aggregate
formal budget share is small. As this budget share increases with development, formal


                                                      22
purchases become a worse tag for higher household income. This decreases the redis-
tribution gain from taxing all formal varieties, and therefore pushes the optimal rate
on these varieties downwards, as long as the slope of the formal Engel curve does not
increase substantially with development.
    The second part of Proposition 1 states the conditions under which efficiency consid-
erations will on the contrary push the optimal uniform rate upwards over development.
The increase in aggregate formal consumption share over development lowers the op-
portunities for substitution towards informal varieties; this decreases the efficiency cost
of taxing all formal varieties (see equation 4). At the same time, the growth in formal
consumption share increases the responses to changes in prices due to income effects,
which leads to higher efficiency costs. The first effect dominates as long as ~ C > 21 .
                                                                                        

Overall, the presence of large informal sectors in poorer countries tends to increase both
the redistributive gain and the efficiency cost of taxing consumption relative to richer
countries with smaller informal sectors.



5.2.2   Optimal Rate Differentiation When All Varieties Can Be Taxed

We now turn to a government which sets a different rate on food and non-food goods.
We start by considering rate differentiation under the assumption that the government
has perfect enforcement capacity and can therefore tax both formal and informal vari-
eties.44 This unrealistic assumption enables us to consider how optimal rate differen-
tiation would change over the development path in the absence of an informal sector
and provides a 'no enforcement constraint' benchmark against which to compare more
realistic scenarios in the following section. The optimal rate on product j is given by:

                                                                      si
                                                                i i j
                                                       i ( g - g )  s j di
                                                           ¯
                                              j =                                                      (8)
                                                             - jg
                                                                ¯
    This expression shows that the optimal rate is increasing in the co-variance between
household income and budget share spent on good j. We know from Section 3 that the
slopes of all non-food (food) Engel curves are positive (negative). Holding efficiency
considerations constant, this implies that the optimal policy taxes food less than non-
food goods.
    The following proposition characterizes the change in the optimal tax on food relative
to non-food over the development path.

  44 Formally   we assume that t j is levied on both x j1 and x j0 , so that p j0 = q j0 (1 + t j ).

                                                           23
Proposition 2. Optimal rate differentiation when all varieties can be taxed

    · The redistribution gain from taxing food less than non-food goods is increasing over the
      development path as long as: i) food Engel curves are downward sloping, ii) aggregate
      food budget shares decrease, iii) the aggregate food budget share is lower than the aggregate
      non-food budget share, iv) food Engel curves do not flatten too much.

    · In addition, the efficiency cost of taxing food less than non-food products increases with
      development as long as non-food budget shares increase.

    Proof: see Appendix C.

     The first part of proposition 2 states the conditions under which the redistribution
gain from rate differentiation increases over development. Intuitively, for a given Engel
curve slope, this redistribution gain is minimized when food and non-food aggregate
budget shares are equal: in this case, observing a food or non-food purchase yields
little information about a household's income, such that differentiating rates across these
categories has little redistributive effect. This is the situation in the poorest countries in
our sample where food and non-food goods are consumed in roughly equal proportions.
As countries grow the food budget shares fall, so food purchases become a better tag for
household income. This increases the optimal level of rate differentiation (decreasing the
optimal rate on food relative to non-food) over the development path, as long as food
Engel curves do not flatten too much. 45
     The second part of Proposition 2 states that efficiency considerations will on the con-
trary increase the optimal rate on food relative to non-food over development (decrease
rate differentiation). The intuition for this stems from the fact that the average budget
share spent on food falls while that spent on non-food products increases as countries
grow. This decreases the efficiency cost of taxing food relative to non-food products due
to income effects.

5.2.3   Optimal Rate Differentiation When Only Formal Varieties Can Be Taxed

Finally, we consider optimal rate differentiation under the more realistic assumption that
informal varieties cannot be taxed. The optimal rate on product j when only variety j1
can be taxed is now given by:
   45 Conditioniii) is not strictly necessary, but constitutes the relevant empirical setting we observe in Sec-
tion 3: food budget shares are typically smaller than non-food budget shares in our sample. In Appendix
Section C, we show that proposition 2 holds even when the food budget share is higher that the non-food
budget share, as long as the slope of the food Engel curve increase sufficiently in magnitude as countries
develop.

                                                      24
                                                           si
                                                    i i j1
                                           i ( g - g )  s j1 di
                                               ¯
                                   j =                                                       (9)
                                                -      ¯
                                                    j1 g

    The following proposition characterizes the change in the optimal tax on food relative
to non-food products over the course of development when only formal varieties can be
taxed.

Proposition 3. Optimal rate differentiation when only formal varieties can be taxed

   · The redistribution gain from taxing food less than non-food products is increasing over
     the development path as long as: i) the slope of the Engel curve for formal food varieties
     decreases relative to that for formal non-food varieties, ii) the aggregate budget share of
     formal non-food varieties does not increase much faster than the aggregate budget share of
     formal food varieties.

   · The efficiency cost of taxing food less than non-food products increases with development
     as long as, in addition, the informal share of food consumption falls faster than that of
     non-food consumption.

Proof: see Appendix C.

    The first part of Proposition 3 states under what conditions equity considerations
push the optimal rate of food down relative to that on non-food goods over the devel-
opment path. As discussed above, the Engel curve slopes for formal food varieties are
very close to zero in the poorest countries in our sample. In these countries subsidizing
food relative to non-food products will therefore not necessarily be equity-improving.
As countries grow however the Engel curve slopes of formal non-food varieties grow,
whilst those of formal food varieties fall (see Figure 4). This change in slopes increases
the redistributive gain from subsidizing food relative to non-food over the development
path, as long as the aggregate budget share of formal non-food products does not in-
crease too much with development relative to that of formal food products.
    The second part of Proposition 3 states that, in contrast, efficiency considerations tend
to push the optimal relative rate on food down over development. Recall from expression
(4) that the efficiency cost of taxing only the formal variety of a good is increasing in the
share of informal consumption in total consumption of that good. Over the development
path these informal shares fall, lowering the efficiency cost of taxing both food and non-
food products. They fall faster for food products than for non-food products, however


                                              25
(see Figure A12). This implies that the efficiency cost of taxing formal food varieties
drops faster than that of taxing non-food formal varieties as countries grow. 46


6     Implications for Redistribution and Inequality

This section presents the implications of our results for the impact of consumption tax
policy on disposable income inequality in developing countries. The extent to which a
tax policy redistributes across households depends on both its progressivity (studied in
Section 4) and the average effective tax rate levied. The latter is itself a function of the
level of the statutory tax rates, which we obtain from our model, and the size of the tax
base, which varies across tax scenarios. We calibrate the optimal tax rates in section 6.1,
and then calculate the effect of different tax policy scenarios on inequality in section 6.2.

6.1   Calibrated Optimal Tax Rates

This sub-section calibrates the optimal tax rates defined in expressions (6), (8) and (9).
Table 4 summarizes our choice of calibration parameters. We calibrate several param-
eters directly from our data: we use the observed budget shares described in section
3, total household expenditure to proxy for household income, the slopes of the Engel
curves to obtain income elasticities, and the observed informal budget shares for each
good and country.47 We relax our theoretical assumptions that Engel curves are log-
linear and that inequality is fixed, using instead the observed budget shares and income
distributions in each country. We consider a range [1,2] for the cross-variety compen-
sated price elasticity. This is in line with estimates in Faber and Fally (2017) and Atkin
et al. (2018b), and we use 1.5 as our baseline value, while setting a value of -0.7 for the
own-price compensated elasticity of goods. Together, these parameters yield values for
the own-price uncompensated elasticity of goods that are in the [-2.2, -0.7] range, in
line with estimates from the literature (Deaton et al., 1994). Finally, we specify govern-
ment preferences by setting a social welfare weight for households in each decile of the
household expenditure distribution in each country. Our specification implies that gov-
ernments place 10 times more weight on income received by households in the poorest
decile than in the richest decile. Our calibration choices yield optimal uniform rates in
   46 In addition, it must be that the aggregate budget share of formal non-food products does not increase

much faster than that of formal food products over development. This ensures that behavioral responses
to taxation through income effects do not increase much faster for food products.
   47 Our model calls for using budget shares observed under a counterfactual 'no tax or transfers' scenario.

We do not attempt to adjust observed budget shares to take into account the fact that they are affected
by current tax systems as this would require an in-depth understanding of the tax and transfer system in
each country in our sample which is beyond the scope of this paper.

                                                     26
the 10% to 25% range, in line with the range of statutory consumption tax rates set by
developing countries. Appendix D details our calibration choices further.
    Figure 7 plots the country-level ratio of optimal food to non-food rate (the relative
food subsidy) as a function of economic development. The left two panels refer to the
counterfactual scenario where all varieties are taxed; the right panels refer to the more
realistic scenario where only formal varieties are taxed. The top panels show calibrated
rates holding uncompensated price elasticities constant over development: in these fig-
ures all the variation across countries is due to varying redistribution gains from dif-
ferentiating rates. The bottom panels allow price elasticities to vary with development:
here, the variation is due to both redistribution gains and efficiency costs.48
    There are two main take-aways from Figure 7. First, consistent with our model pre-
dictions, we find that over development, equity considerations tend to decrease the rate
on food relative to non-food goods (thus increasing rate differentiation) but efficiency
considerations tend to increase it. Equity effects dominate, so that optimal relative rates
on food fall with development when both effects are taken into account. Second, com-
paring panels B and D, we see that once we take into account the fact that only formal
varieties can be taxed, the optimal policy no longer subsidizes food relative to non-food
in some poor countries (the ratio of food to non-food rates is higher than 1). Once the
impossibility of taxing informal varieties is accounted for, taxing food less than non-
food goods cannot by justified on equity or on efficiency grounds in these countries.
Appendix Figure A14 shows that both of these findings are robust to changing values of
the cross-variety price elasticity.49

6.2   Effect of Consumption Tax Policy on Inequality

Figure 8 presents the effects of different consumption tax scenarios on income inequality
in the average country in our sample. In Panel A we use the calibrated optimal tax rates
for each scenario (allowing efficiency costs to vary with development) and use these
rates to calculate the net of tax income of each household in our data. Our redistribution
metric is the percent change in Gini from the pre-tax income distribution to the net-
of-tax distribution. To benchmark our results against estimates in the literature, Panel

   48 Formally, in the top panels we set the uncompensated price elasticities in expressions equal to -1

for all countries when calibrating expressions (6), (8) and (9). In the bottom panels we calibrate these
elasticities using expression (4) and the parameter values detailed in Table 4.
   49 In Appendix Figure A13 we also show the calibrated optimal uniform rates on all formal varieties.

Consistent with our theory, the optimal uniform rate falls over development for redistributive purposes.
As predicted, allowing efficiency costs to vary with development lowers the optimal rates, especially in
the poorest countries and more so the higher the cross-variety elasticity of substitution.

                                                  27
B reports the inequality impacts of actual tax policies in place in a comparable sample
of developing countries obtained by Lustig (2018). To calculate these effects, we use
their Commitment to Equity (CEQ) database which contains information on income and
estimates of taxes paid (consumption taxes, direct taxes and social security) for each
income decile in 25 developing countries.50 Importantly, their methodology does not
systematically consider the possibility that some places of purchase may be informal,
and therefore cannot take into account the redistributive effect of de facto exemption of
informal consumption.
    Several key results emerge from Figure 8. First, our different optimal consumption
tax policy scenarios achieve substantial inequality reduction. The inequality effects are
large compared to estimates of the effect of current consumption tax policies, which sug-
gest consumption taxes in developing countries achieve very little inequality reduction
(0.3% reduction in Gini, row 1 of Panel B), despite taking into account reduced rates
and exemptions. On the contrary, when we consider the de facto exemption of informal
varieties, simply setting a uniform rate on all goods achieves a non-trivial inequality
reduction (a 2.3% decrease in the Gini, row 1 of Panel A). Second, the amount of re-
distribution achieved by this scenario is still large when we compare it to a scenario
with perfect enforcement in which governments optimally differentiate rates on food
and non-food products (row 2 of Panel A). Comparing rows 1 and 2 of Panel A, we see
that taxing only formal varieties achieves 75% of the inequality reduction obtained under
the perfect enforcement and de jure rate differentiation scenario.51 Third, introducing
rate differentiation on top of de facto exemption of the informal sector further reduces
inequality (row 3 of Panel A). Comparing rows 1 and 3, however, we see that simply
setting a uniform rate on all goods achieves two-third of the redistribution obtained by
optimally differentiating rates once we assume that only formal varieties can be taxed.
    Finally, by comparing panel A to row 2 of Panel B, we find that our estimated ef-
fects of consumption tax policy on inequality have the same magnitude as the effect of




   50 In the first row of Panel B, we calculate the change in Gini from applying general consumption and

excise taxes to disposable income plus indirect subsidies. In the second row of Panel B, we calculate the
change in Gini from applying the direct tax and social security contributions to market income plus direct
cash transfers. These exercises allow us to calculate the marginal Gini impacts of the indirect and direct
tax systems, respectively.
   51 Optimally differentiating rates when all varieties are taxed reduces inequality substantially, despite

the relatively small progressivity achieved by differentiating rates on food and non-food described in
section 4.3. It occurs because this (unrealistic) scenario assumes the government can tax the entire con-
sumption base, which yields much higher effective tax rates.

                                                    28
the direct tax system (income taxes and social security) in developing countries.52 We
note however that the redistributive potential of direct tax systems in these countries is
constrained because they only cover the small share of the workforce which is not self-
employed (Jensen, 2019). Direct tax systems that do not face this constraint have a much
larger effect on inequality.53

6.3   Extensions and Discussion

Full rate differentiation We have thus far only considered scenarios in which gov-
ernments set at most two tax rates, on food and non-food goods. How much more
inequality reduction can be achieved if we allow for different rates on each of the 12
large COICOP 2-digit good categories? To answer this, we calibrate optimal tax rates at
the level of each good and for each country and recompute the changes in Gini.54 The
last two rows of Table A7 display the results. In the realistic case with an informal sector
(last row), the inequality reduction achieved by full rate differentiation is 30% higher
than that achieved by simply differentiating rates between food and non-food goods.
Given that administrative costs from managing multiple rates may be high (Ebrill et al.,
2001), this result further suggests a limited role for rate differentiation across goods in
developing countries.

Robustness Table A7 reports a large range of robustness checks on our inequality re-
sults. First, we show that results are broadly robust to the checks implemented in Section
4 for the progressivity results. In particular, allowing for some pass-through of taxes to
prices in the informal sector has two opposite effects on inequality which tend to cancel
each other out. On the one hand, it decreases the progressivity of consumption tax sce-
narios in which the informal sector is exempt, as seen in Section 4. On the other hand,
it increases the tax base (and therefore the aggregate effective tax rates), which reduces
inequality. The first effect dominates slightly, leading to marginally lower effects on
inequality. Allowing for distributional saving rates reduces the inequality effects, espe-
cially in the counterfactual scenario in which all varieties are assumed to be taxed, but
our main results are unchanged. Changing the rule used to assign a place of purchase
to the formal or informal sector similarly leaves our key results qualitatively unchanged.

  52 Since direct taxes are generally considered most strongly suited for redistribution, our results are
large in magnitude among tax policy impacts. They are, however, smaller in magnitude than the inequality
reduction achieved in CEQ-countries by in-cash and in-kind transfers (Lustig, 2018).
   53 Using data from the OECD Income Distribution Database, we calculate that direct taxes in developed

countries achieve a 11.2% Gini-reduction in inequality.
   54 Formally, we re-calibrate expressions (8) and (9) for each good and country.



                                                   29
Second, in the final two rows of Table A7 we present results using alternative values of
the cross-variety price elasticity of demand. This is the parameter which governs the
strength of the efficiency cost of taxation. Our results are largely unchanged.

Absence of direct tax instruments Our result that optimal indirect taxes are robustly
redistributive is derived in a model where no direct tax instrument is available. A central
result in public finance is that redistribution is better achieved through direct rather than
indirect taxes (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1976; Jacobs and Boadway, 2014). However, this
theoretical result relies on the assumption that income taxes cannot be evaded, which is
at odds with reality in developing countries (Jensen, 2019). When income taxes can be
evaded, a greater redistributive role is found for indirect tax instruments (Boadway et al.,
1994; Huang and Rios, 2016).55 This discussion suggests that an extended model with di-
rect tax instruments, even constrained, would lead to less optimal redistribution through
consumption taxes. Jointly studying the optimal direct and indirect tax instruments over
development would, however, require additional empirical moments, including how op-
portunities to evade income taxes vary along a country's income distribution and as the
country develops. Such an undertaking is beyond the scope of this paper.


7     Conclusion

This paper studies how consumption patterns vary with household income both within
and across countries and derive implications for the optimal design and redistributive
potential of consumption taxes. We consider two channels for redistribution: the de
facto tax exemption of informal expenditure and the de jure tax exemption of necessi-
ties, in particular food. To measure informal expenditure, we harmonize expenditure
surveys across 31 developing countries that contain information on the store type for
each transaction. We assign each store type to the informal or formal sector using a
robust assignment rule, and calculate the informal budget share at the household level.
This enables us to characterize the Informality Engel Curves: we find that informal bud-
get shares decrease with household income in every country. This implies that the de
facto exemption of the informal sector is progressive. We then extend the standard op-
timal commodity tax model to allow for informal consumption and calibrate it to our
data to study the effects of different tax policies on inequality. Contrary to the consen-

    55 For
         example, Huang and Rios (2016) find that incorporating income tax evasion and the existence of a
consumption tax reduces the optimal income tax by 28%. Note that Boadway et al. (1994) and Huang and
Rios (2016) both assume consumption taxes are perfectly enforceable. Given our findings, incorporating
consumption tax evasion in their models would further reinforce the redistributive role of indirect taxes.

                                                   30
sus view, we show that consumption taxes are redistributive and lower inequality by
as much as personal income taxes in developing countries. This effect is mainly driven
by the existence of the informal sector. Once informal consumption is accounted for,
reduced rates on necessities have a limited impact on inequality.
    Our findings have sharp implications for the use of reduced rates on necessities and
on food items in particular. We find that differentiating rates across goods has limited
redistributive potential once informal consumption is accounted for. In particular, these
policies have no redistributive impact in some of the poorest countries. As practice
shows, removing reduced rates on food and other necessities is often met with fierce
resistance. An equity-improving policy would most likely have to combine the removal
of reduced rates with further investments in transfer programs and social protection
(Hanna and Olken, 2018).
    Our results do not imply that tax administrations should abandon their efforts to re-
duce the size of the informal sector. Rather, they caution that any benefits from reducing
the informal sector's size should be weighed against potential equity costs. Our findings
call more generally for future research on tax enforcement policies to take into account
not only their impact on efficiency but also their distributional effects.
    Finally, we note that in most countries firms below a size threshold are exempt from
taxation. This policy is motivated by the large enforcement costs tax administrations
incur when trying to tax these firms, and the compliance costs to the firms themselves
(Keen and Mintz, 2004). The growing availability of digital technologies lowers these
costs and makes it possible to bring increasingly smaller firms into the tax net, thus
removing the administrative rationale for tax exempting small firms (Gupta et al., 2017).
However, our results suggest that this policy can still be justified on equity grounds.




                                           31
References

Ahmad, E. and N. Stern (1984): "The Theory of Reform and Indian Indirect Taxes,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 25, 259­298.
Allcott, H., B. B. Lockwood, and D. Taubinsky (2019): "Regressive Sin Taxes, with an
  Application to the Optimal Soda Tax," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 1557­
  1626.
Allingham, M. G. and A. Sandmo (1972): "Income tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analy-
  sis," Journal of Public Economics, 1, 323­338.
Almas° , I. (2012): "International Income Inequality: Measuring PPP Bias by Estimating
  Engel Curves for Food," American Economic Review, 102, 1093­1117.
Almunia, M., J. Hjor, J. Knebelmann, and L. Tian (2019): "Strategic or Confused
  Firms? Evidence from "Missing" Transactions in Uganda," Working Paper, Mimeo,
  Columbia University.
Alvaredo, F. and L. Gasparini (2015): Recent Trends in Inequality and Poverty in Develop-
  ing Countries, vol. 2 of Handbook of Income Distribution, Elsevier.
Anker, R. et al. (2011): "Engel's Law around the World 150 Years Later," Political Econ-
  omy Research Institute Working Paper, No. 247.
Atkin, D., B. Faber, T. Fally, and M. Gonzalez-Navarro (2018a): "A New Engel on
  the Gains from Trade," NBER Working Paper, No. 26890.
Atkin, D., B. Faber, and M. Gonzalez-Navarro (2018b): "Retail Globalization and
  Household Welfare: Evidence from Mexico," Journal of Political Economy, 126, 1­73.
Atkinson, A. and J. Stiglitz (1976): "The Design of Tax Structure: Direct versus Indirect
  Taxation," Journal of Public Economics, 6.
Banks, J., R. Blundell, and A. Lewbel (1997): "Quadratic Engel Curves and Consumer
  Demand," Review of Economics and Statistics, 79, 527­539.
Basri, M. C., M. Felix, R. Hanna, and B. A. Olken (2019): "Tax Administration vs. Tax
  Rates: Evidence from Corporate Taxation in Indonesia," NBER Working Papers, No.
  26150.
                          ¨
Bick, A., N. Fuchs-Schundeln     , and D. Lagakos (2018): "How Do Hours Worked Vary
  with Income? Cross-Country Evidence and Implications," American Economic Review,
  108, 170­99.
Boadway, R., M. Marchand, and P. Pestieau (1994): "Towards a Theory of the Direct-
  Indirect Tax Mix," Journal of Public Economics, 55.
Boadway, R. and M. Sato (2009): "Optimal Tax Design and Enforcement with an Infor-
  mal Sector," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 1, 1­27.


                                           32
Brockmeyer, A. and M. Hernandez (2019): "Taxation, Information, and Withholding:
  Evidence from Costa Rica," Working Paper, The World Bank.
Bronnenberg, B. J. and P. B. Ellickson (2015): "Adolescence and the Path to Maturity
  in Global Retail," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29, 113­34.
Caspersen, E. and G. Metcalf (1994): "Is a Value-Added Tax Regressive? Annual
  versus Lifetime Incidence Measures," National Tax Journal, 47.
Clements, B., R. Mooij, S. Gupta, and M. Keen (2015): Fiscal Redistribution in Developing
  Countries: Overview of Policy Issues and Options, International Monetary Fund, chap. 4.
Coady, D. (2006): The Distributional Impacts of Indirect Tax and Public Pricing Reforms,
  vol. 2 of Analyzing the Distributional Impact of Reforms: A Practitioner's Guide to Pension,
  Health, Labor Market, Public Sector Downsizing, Taxation, Decentralization and Macroeco-
  nomic Modeling, The World Bank.
Creedy, J. (2001): "Indirect Tax Reform and the Role of Exemptions," Fiscal Studies, 22,
  457­486.
Cremer, H. and F. Gahvari (1993): "Tax Evasion and Optimal Commodity Taxation,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 50, 261­275.
De Paula, A. and J. A. Scheinkman (2010): "Value-Added Taxes, Chain Effects, and
  Informality," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2, 195­221.
Deaton, A. (1997): The Analysis of Household Surveys: a Microeconometric Approach to
  Development Policy, The World Bank.
Deaton, A., K. Parikh, and S. Subramanian (1994): "Food Demand Pattern and Pric-
  ing Policy in Maharashtra: An Analysis Using Household Level Survey Data," Sarvek-
  shana, 17, 11­34.
Deaton, A. and C. Paxson (1998): "Economies of Scale, Household Size, and the De-
  mand for Food," Journal of Political Economy, 106, 897­930.
DeSoto, H. (1989): The Other Path, Harper & Row New York.
Diamond, P. A. (1975): "A Many-Person Ramsey Tax Rule," Journal of Public Economics,
  4, 335­342.
Donovan, K., J. Lu, T. Schoellman, et al. (2018): "Labor Market Flows and Develop-
  ment," in 2018 Meeting Papers, Society for Economic Dynamics, vol. 976.
Ebrill, L. P., M. Keen, J.-P. Bodin, V. P. Summers, et al. (2001): The Modern V     AT, Inter-
  national Monetary Fund.
Enste, D. H. and F. Schneider (2000): "Shadow Economies: Size, Causes, and Conse-
  quences," Journal of Economic Literature, 38, 77­114.
Faber, B. and T. Fally (2017): "Firm Heterogeneity in Consumption Baskets: Evidence
  from Home and Store Scanner Data," NBER Working Paper, No. 23101.


                                             33
Feldman, N. E. and J. Slemrod (2007): "Estimating Tax Noncompliance with Evidence
  from Unaudited Tax Returns," The Economic Journal, 117, 327­352.
Gemmell, N. and O. Morrissey (2005): "Distribution and Poverty Impacts of Tax Struc-
  ture Reform in Developing Countries: How Little We Know," Development Policy Re-
  view, 23, 131­144.
Gerard, F. and G. Gonzaga (2016): "Informal Labor and the Efficiency Cost of Social
  Programs: Evidence from the Brazilian Unemployment Insurance Program," NBER
  Working Paper, No. 22608.
Gordon, R. and W. Li (2009): "Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles
  and a Possible Explanation," Journal of Public Economics, 93, 855 ­ 866.
Gupta, S., M. Keen, A. Shah, and G. Verdier, eds. (2017): Digital Revolutions in Public
  Finance, International Monetary Fund.
Hanna, R. and B. Olken (2018): "Universal Basic Incomes versus Targeted Transfers:
  Anti-Poverty Programs in Developing Countries," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32,
  201­226.
Harris, T., D. Phillips, R. Warwick, M. Goldman, J. Jellema, K. Goraus, and G. In-
  chauste (2018): "Redistribution via VAT and Cash Transfers: An Assessment in Four
  Low and Middle Income Countries," IFS Working Paper, W18/11.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. Klenow (2014): "The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1035­1084.
Hsieh, C.-T. and B. A. Olken (2014): "The Missing 'Missing Middle'," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 28, 89­108.
Huang, J. and J. Rios (2016): "Optimal Tax Mix with Income Tax Non-Compliance,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 144, 52­63.
Jacobs, B. and R. Boadway (2014): "Optimal Linear Commodity Taxation under Optimal
  Non-Linear Income Taxation," Journal of Public Economics, 117.
Jaravel, X. (2018): "The Unequal Gains from Product Innovations: Evidence from the
  U.S. Retail Sector," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 715­783.
Jenkins, G. P., H. P. Jenkins, and C. Y. Kuo (2006): "Is the Value Added Tax Naturally
  Progressive?" Working Paper, Economics Department, Queen's University, No. 1059.
Jensen, A. (2019): "Employment Structure and the Rise of the Modern Tax system,"
  NBER Working Paper, No. 25502.
Keen, M. and J. Mintz (2004): "The Optimal Threshold for a Value-Added Tax," Journal
  of Public Economics, 88, 559 ­ 576.
Kleven, H. J., C. T. Kreiner, and E. Saez (2016): "Why Can Modern Governments Tax
  so Much? An Agency Model of Firms as Fiscal Intermediaries," Economica, 51.


                                          34
Kopczuk, W. (2001): "Redistribution When Avoidance Behavior is Heterogeneous," Jour-
  nal of Public Economics, 81, 51­71.
Kumler, T., E. Verhoogen, and J. A. Fr´    ias (2015): "Enlisting Employees in Improving
  Payroll-Tax Compliance: Evidence from Mexico," NBER Working Paper, No. 19385.
La Porta, R. and A. Shleifer (2014): "Informality and Development," Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 28, 109­26.
Lagakos, D. (2016): "Explaining Cross-Country Productivity Differences in Retail
  Trade," Journal of Political Economy, 124, 579­620.
Londono ~ -Velez, J. (2020): "Can Wealth Taxation Work in Developing Countries? Quasi-
  Experimental Evidence from Colombia," Working Paper.
Lustig, N. (2018): Commitment to Equity Handbook: Estimating the Impact of Fiscal Policy on
  Inequality and Poverty, Brookings Institution Press.
Morrow, P., M. Smart, and A. Swistak (2019): "VAT Compliance, Trade, and Institu-
  tions," CESifo Working Paper Series 7780, CESifo Group Munich.
    ~ , S. and S. S.-W. Cho (2003): "Social Impact of a Tax Reform; The Case of
Munoz
  Ethiopia," IMF Working Papers, No. 03/232.
Naritomi, J. (2019): "Consumers as Tax Auditors," American Economic Review, 109, 3031­
  72.
Pissarides, C. A. and G. Weber (1989): "An Expenditure-Based Estimate of Britain's
  Black Economy," Journal of Public Economics, 39, 17 ­ 32.
Pomeranz, D. (2015): "No Taxation without Information: Deterrence and Self-
  Enforcement in the Value Added Tax," American Economic Review, 105, 2539­69.
Poterba, J. (1989): "Lifetime Incidence and the Distributional Burden of Excise Taxes,"
  American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 79.
Pritchett, L. and M. Spivack (2013): "Estimating Income/Expenditure Differences
  Across Populations: New Fun with Old Engel's Law," Center for Global Development
  Working Paper, No. 339.
Ray, R. (1986): "Sensitivity of `Optimal' Commodity Tax Rates to Alternative Demand
  Functional Forms: An Econometric Case Study of India," Journal of Public Economics,
  31, 253­268.
Saez, E. and S. Santcheva (2016): "Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights for
  Optimal Tax Theory," American Economic Review, 106, 24­45.
Sah, R. K. (1983): "How Much Redistribution is Possible through Commodity Taxes?"
  Journal of Public Economics, 20, 89­101.
Shah, A. and J. Whalley (1991): "Tax Incidence Analysis of Developing Countries: An
  Alternative View," The World Bank Economic Review, 5, 535­552.


                                            35
Srinivasan, P. (1989): "Redistributive Impact of `Optimal' Commodity Taxes: Evidence
  from Indian Data," Economics Letters, 30, 385­388.
Tanzi, V. (1998): "Fundamental Determinants of Inequality and the Role of Govern-
  ment," International Monetary Fund.
Ulyssea, G. (2018): "Firms, Informality, and Development: Theory and Evidence from
  Brazil," American Economic Review, 108, 2015­47.
------ (2020): "Informality: Causes and Consequences for Development," Annual Review
  of Economics, 12, null.
Waseem, M. (2020): "Overclaimed Refunds, Undeclared Sales, and Invoice Mills: Nature
  and Extent of Noncompliance in a Value-Added Tax," CESifo Working Paper, No. 8231.
Weigel, J. L. (2019): "The Participation Dividend Of Taxation: How Citizens In Congo
  Engage More with the State When it Tries to Tax Them," forthcoming Quarterly Journal
  of Economics.
Working, H. (1943): "Statistical Laws of Family Expenditure," Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, 38, 43­56.




                                         36
                                Figure 1: Employment Size, Store Types & Formality

                                              (a) # Employees on Formality in Retail Censuses

                                                    1
                                                    .8
                                     Share Formal
                                                    .6
                                                    .4




                                                                                                         Rwanda
                                                    .2




                                                                                                         Cameroon
                                                                                                         Peru
                                                                                                         Mexico
                                                    0




                                                         0       1         2                  3                          4
                                                                     Log Employment


        (b) # Employees by Store in Mexico                                            (c) % Paying VAT by Store in Mexico


         (1) Non-Market N.A.                                                           (1) Non-Market        N.A.


  (2) Non-Brick & Mortar                                                        (2) Non-Brick & Mortar


 (3) Convenience Stores                                                        (3) Convenience Stores


  (4) Specialized Stores                                                        (4) Specialized Stores


        (5) Large Stores                                                              (5) Large Stores


                           0     1                       2   3   4   5                                   0          .2       .4      .6      .8         1

                               Log of Median Number of Employees                                                Share of Firms Reporting VAT Payments



 These panels shows the association between formality status, employment and firm type. Panel A shows
the share of formal firms as a function of log employment, using retail censuses of four core sample
countries (Cameroon, Mexico, Peru and Rwanda). Formality is defined as 'being registered with the
tax authority' in Cameroon and Rwanda, and 'paying Value-Added-Taxes on sales' in Mexico and Peru.
Panels B and C use the 2013 Mexican retail census, which classifies retailers in similar categories as our
broad place of purchase taxonomy. The figures show the log median number of employees by place of
purchase (Panel C) and the share of firms paying Value-Added-Taxes on sales (Panel C). The data comes
from the following firm censuses, keeping only firms which operate in the retail sector: Recensement
G´en´                                                 ´
    eral des entreprises 2016 (Cameroun), Censo Economico                                           ´
                                                              2014 (Mexico), Censo Nacional Economico
2008 (Peru), Establishment Census 2011 (Rwanda).




                                                                         37
                                                   Figure 2: Selected Informality Engel Curves

                                         (a) Rwanda                                                                              (b) Mexico
                          100




                                                                                                                 100
                          80




                                                                                                                 80
  Informal Budget Share




                                                                                         Informal Budget Share
                          60




                                                                                                                 60
                          40




                                                                                                                 40
                          20




                                                                                                                 20
                          0




                                                                                                                 0




                                        6                    7                  8                                        7                     8                       9
                                Log Expenditure per Person, Constant 2010 USD                                          Log Expenditure per Person, Constant 2010 USD


 These panels show the local polynomial fit of the Informality Engel Curves in Rwanda (Panel A) and
Mexico (Panel B). Per person total expenditure on the horizontal axis is measured in log. Informal budget
share is on the vertical axis. The shaded area around the polynomial fit corresponds to the 95% confidence
interval. The solid grey line corresponds to the median of each country's expenditure distribution, while
the dotted lines correspond to the 5th and 95th percentiles. See Appendix Figure A1 for each core sample
country's informality Engel curve.




                                                                                    38
                                                                    Figure 3: Informal Expenditure Across Countries

                                         (a) Informal Budget Share                                                                                                        (b) Informality Engel Curve Slope
                               100




                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                         BI CD
                                             NE
                                                                TZ
                                                                 BJ
                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                          TD
  Informal Consumption Share
                               80




                                                                                                                                       Informal Consumption Slope
                                                                           SN                                                                                                                                                                       CL
                                                          BF                              CG                                                                                  BI CD
                                                                      ST
                                                               RW          KM                                                                                                                     BJ
                                                     MZ                    CM                                                                                                     NE                                  CG
                                                                                                                                                                    -5

                                                                                 PG                                                                                                                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                             TD
                               60




                                                                                BO                                                                                                                                                        ZA CRBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 TZ         CM PG
                                                                                                                                                                    -10




                                                                                     MA                                                                                                   MZ BF RW          KM BO                    CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SZ                 UY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MX
                                                                                                       PE
                                                                                                    EC RS
                               40




                                                                                               TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TN
                                                                                                                                                                    -15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DO
                                                                                                                  MX                                                                                        SN
                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                                     ME
                                                                                               SZ DO               BR                                                                                            MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ME
                               20




                                                                                                                        CL
                                                                                                                                                                    -20




                                                                                                                 CR                                                                                                             EC
                                                                                                                 UY                                                                                                                  RS
                                                                                                            ZA
                                                                                                                                                                    -25
                               0




                                     5           6                    7                   8                 9                10                                           5           6                7              8                   9              10
                                                 Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 Panel A plots country-level informal budget shares on log per capita GDP. The average informal budget
share is 52%. Panel B shows the slope of the informality Engel curves on log per capita GDP. The average
slope is 9.8. The bars correspond to the 95% confidence interval of the slope coefficient. GDP per capita is
in constant 2010 USD (Source: World Bank WDI).




                                                                                                                                  39
                                                                           Figure 4: Food Expenditure Across Countries

                                              (a) Food Budget Share                                                                                                           (b) Food Engel Curve Slope
                             100




                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                    Core Sample                                                                                                                        Core Sample
                                                                                                    Extended Sample                                                                                                                    Extended Sample




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                             80




                                                                                                                                    Food Engel Curve Slope
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CG
                                              CD            TD                      PG                                                                                                    MZ
  Food Budget Share




                                                                                                                                                                    -5
                                                    MZ                                                                                                                              CD              RW
                                                                       ST
                                               NE                 TZ    SN                                                                                                                                  ST
                             60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PG        SZ             CR
                                         BI                                                        RS                                                                                                                                                BR




                                                                                                                                                                    -10
                                                                         KM         MACG      SZ                                                                                                  TD
                                                                 BJ                                                                                                                                                       MA                               CL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  BF BJ                             TN             UY
                                                                 RW                                                                                                                                              CM                           ZA
                                                            BF                                                                                                                       NE                         KM
                                                                               BO                   PE




                                                                                                                                                                    -15
                                                                                                     ME MX
                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BO                    CO      MX
                                                                             CM               TN EC                                                                            BI                                                        DO  ME
                                                                                                   CO                                                                                                                                    EC PE
                                                                                                        UYBR
                                                                                                 DO ZA CR                                                                                                       SN




                                                                                                                                                                    -20
                                                                                                                     CL
                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                       TZ




                                                                                                                                                                    -25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RS
                             0




                                   5               6                   7                 8                   9            10                                              5              6                  7                  8              9                 10
                                                   Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                             Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


                                       (c) Formal Food Budget Share                                                                                                       (d) Formal Food Engel Curve Slope
                             100




                                                                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                             Core Sample                                                                                              PG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MA           SZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                            SN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             KM                            ME
                                                                                                                                                                                             MZ   TD TZ                        CG   TN EC PE
                                                                                                                                    Formal Food Engel Curve Slope




                                                                                                                                                                                    CD            BF RWBJ ST CMBO
                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                               BI                                                                  CR
                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                     NE                                                DOCO        UY
  Formal Food Budget Share




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RS        MXBR

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZA
                                                                                                                                                                    -5
                             60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CL
                                                                                                                                                                    -10
                             40




                                                                                                                                                                    -15




                                                                                              SZ
                             20




                                                                                                         ME
                                                                                                                                                                    -20




                                                                                  PG          TN        RS CR
                                                                                                           ZA UY
                                                                                                               MX
                                                                                    MA              CO          BR
                                                       MZ              ST                                            CL
                                                            TD TZ           SN
                                                                             KM                    DO
                                                                                                   EC
                                                                             CMBO                                                                                                                                                              Core Sample
                                                                                                                                                                    -25




                                             NE                                                         PE
                                         BI CD              BF RWBJ                      CG
                             0




                                   5               6                   7                 8                   9            10                                              5              6                  7                  8              9                 10
                                                   Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                 Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 This figure combine two sources: data from the core-sample of 31 countries and data from the Global
Consumption Database (GCD) which adds 58 developing countries not included in the core-sample. Panel
A shows each country's food budget share, plotted against log per capita GDP. The average food budget
share in the core sample is 49%, while the average in the GCD sample is 48%. Panel B shows the country-
specific slope of the food Engel curve, plotted against log per capita GDP. The average slope in the core
sample is 12.5, while the average in the GCD sample is 13. The lines correspond to local polynomial
fits. GDP per capita is in constant 2010 USD (Source: World Bank WDI). Panels C and D are constructed
similarly to Panel A and B, but for formal food expenditure which can only be measured in the core
sample.


                                                                                                                               40
                                            Figure 5: Progressivity of Tax Policy Scenarios
                                      .16




                                                                    Uniform rate, only formal taxed
                                                                    Food exempt, formal & informal taxed
                                      .14




                                                                    Food exempt, only formal taxed
                 Taxed Budget Share
                                      .12
                                      .1
                                      .08
                                      .06
                                      .04




                                            1    2     3        4          5         6         7           8   9   10
                                                           Decile of Expenditure Distribution



 This figure plots the share of expenditures that is paid in taxes (effective tax rates), by decile, for each
tax scenario. The three scenarios are simulated in all 31 countries, each point corresponds to the average
effective tax rates of each decile across all countries in our sample. The red-circle line corresponds to a tax
scenario where a uniform tax is levied on all goods, but where purchases in informal stores are de facto
not taxed (scenario #1 defined in Section 4). The green-cross line corresponds to a scenario where food
purchases are de jure exempt, but where formal and informal stores are taxed (scenario #2 in Section 4).
The green-square line corresponds to a tax scenario where both de facto informality exemption and de
jure food exemption are present (scenario #3 in Section 4).




                                                                         41
                                                                                                              Figure 6: Progressivity over Development

                                               (a) Formal Taxed                                                                       (b) Non-Food Taxed                                                               (c) Formal Non-Food Taxed
                     op 20-Bottom 20
                                       5




                                                                                                                              5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PG
                                       4




                                                                                                                              4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                SN
                                                    CD                                                                                                                                                                                         BF
                                                                  BF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RW
                                                                       RW
                                                             MZ
                                                                                KM                                                                                                                                                  CD                             KM
                                                                                     PG                                                                                                                                                                                                  RS
                                       3




                                                                                                                              3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NE
                                                                                                                                                          TZ                                                                                   TD TZ
 Budget Share Ratio T




                                                                                                                                                                      SN                                                                                                   MA
                                               BI                 TD TZ                 MA                                                                                                                                     BI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ST
                                                                                 CMBO               EC                                              TD                                            RS                                                                CMBO                EC
                                                     NE                                                                               BI                                                                                                                                             SZ PE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO   MX
                                       2




                                                                                                                              2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                         PE                                                                      PG
                                                                        BJ ST                            RS                                                           KM                                                                                 BJ                          TN DO MEZA BR
                                                                                                  SZ DO                                     NE MZ             BJ ST         BO             SZ
                                                                                             CG   TN
                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                        ME
                                                                                                              MX
                                                                                                                                                    BF                 CM        MA             EC CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                DO  PE ZA MX                                                                    CG             UY
                                                                                                             UY                                                                                     ME UY BR CL
                                                                                                          ZA CRBR                          CD            RW                                TN            CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CR  CL
                                                                                                                                                                                      CG
                                       1




                                                                                                                              1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                    CL
                                       0




                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                           5             6                  7                8            9              10       5             6               7                     8                9          10       5          6                       7                 8             9         10
                                               Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                   Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD

 These panels plot the ratio of effective tax rate paid by the richest quintile relative to the poorest quintile
in each country as a function of the country's level of economic development. The left panel corresponds
to a scenario where a uniform tax is levied on all goods, but purchases in informal stores are de facto not
taxed (scenario #1 in Section 4). The middle panel corresponds to a scenario where food goods are de jure
exempt, but purchases in both formal and informal stores are taxed (scenario #2 in Section 4). The right
panel combines de facto informality exemption and de jure food exemption (scenario #3 in Section 4). In
each panel, the ratio is plotted for all 31 countries of our sample against log GDP per capita.




                                                                                                                                                                    42
                                                                   Figure 7: Optimal Rate Differentiation over Development

                                          (a) All Varieties Taxed, No Efficiency Change                                                                                  (b) Only Formal Varieties Taxed, No Efficiency Change
                                    1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                     1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CD




                                                                                                                                                                                     1.2
                                    1.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BJ                        CG
  Ratio Food Rate / Non Food Rate




                                                                                                                                                   Ratio Food Rate / Non Food Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                               BI




                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BF RW                                    EC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TD                       PG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MA        TN




                                                                                                                                                                                     .8
                                    .8




                                                                                                  CG                                                                                                                   TZ
                                                     CD
                                                                                             PG                                                                                                              MZ                       BO              SZ DO ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CRBR
                                                                        RW                                                                                                                                                  ST SN                                         UY




                                                                                                                                                                                     .6
                                    .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PE
                                                                   TD                                                                                                                                                                                                      MX
                                                              MZ         BJ   ST                       TN                      BR                                                                                                                               CO ZA
                                                                                   KM        MA        SZ                 CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RS




                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                   BF
                                    .4




                                                BI                                                                        UY
                                                      NE                                BO
                                                                                                                                    CL                                                               NE
                                                                                                                 CO ZA     MX
                                                                                                                  ME
                                                                                                                  PE
                                                                                    CM                           RS




                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                            EC
                                    .2




                                                                         TZ
                                                                                   SN                       DO




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CL

                                          5               6                   7                   8                   9                  10                                                5             6                  7                    8                   9                   10
                                                              Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                          Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


                                          (c) All Varieties Taxed, With Efficiency Change                                                              (d) Only Formal Varieties Taxed, With Efficiency Change
                                    1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                     1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                     1.2
                                    1.2
  Ratio Food Rate / Non Food Rate




                                                                                                                                                   Ratio Food Rate / Non Food Rate




                                                                                                                               BR                                                                   CD

                                                                                                                          CR                                                                   BI
                                                                        RW
                                                                                                                                                                                     1
                                    1




                                                                                                       TN                                                                                                              BJ

                                                                                                  CG                                                                                                                                             CG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BR
                                                                                                                                                                                     .8
                                    .8




                                                                                                                      ZA UY         CL                                                                                                                                    CR
                                                                         BJ                                                                                                                                                                           TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BF RW          KM
                                                                   BF                                            CO                                                                                                              CM                                  ZA
                                                                                        PG                                                                                                                             TZ
                                                     CD                            KM BO MA                                                                                                                       TD                       PG
                                                                                                                                                                                     .6




                                                                                                       SZ                                                                                                                                                                 UY
                                    .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EC ME
                                                BI            MZ   TD         ST                                           MX
                                                                                    CM                                                                                                                                      ST                        SZ
                                                                                                                 ME                                                                                                              SN BO MA
                                                                                                                 PE                                                                                          MZ                                            DO              MX
                                                                                                                                                                                     .4




                                                      NE                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO
                                    .4




                                                                                                            EC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PE
                                                                                                                 RS                                                                                  NE                                                         RS
                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
                                    .2




                                                                         TZ                                 DO

                                                                                   SN
                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CL

                                          5               6                   7                   8                   9                  10                                                5             6                  7                    8                   9                   10
                                                              Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                          Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 All panels plot for each country the ratio of the calibrated optimal rate on food products relative to the
optimal rate on non-food products, as a function of that country's log GDP per capita. Optimal rates are
calibrated using expressions (8) (panels A and C) and (9) (panels B and D). A value equal to 1 indicates
that both optimal rates are set at the same level, a lower value indicates that it is optimal to subsidize
food products relative to non-food products. In panels A and C we assume that all varieties can be
taxed; in panels B and D, we assume that only formal varieties can be taxed. In panels A and B we hold
efficiency considerations constant by assuming that uncompensated price elasticities of demand are equal
across goods and countries, while in panels C and D we allow price elasticities to vary across goods and
countries by calibrating values using expression (4).




                                                                                                                                              43
         Figure 8: Inequality Reduction: Optimal Policy and Current Tax Policies




 Panel A shows the average percent-change in Gini for different scenarios applied to the countries of this
paper's core sample. The red dot represents the scenario where a uniform rate is implemented but only
the formal sector is taxed. The green dot represents the scenario where only non-food items, but both
sectors are taxed. The orange dot represents the scenario where only non-food items, and only the formal
sector are taxed. The reported effects reflect the change in Gini from the pre-tax income distribution to
the post-tax distribution. Panel B show the percent-change in Gini using data from the Commitment to
Equity Institute (CEQ). In the first row of Panel B, the pre-tax income measure is disposable income, and
actual general consumption and excise taxes are applied; in the second row of Panel B, the pre-tax income
measure is market income plus direct transfers, and actual personal income taxes and compulsory social
security contributions are applied. Adding transfers to the pre-tax income measure is commonly done in
analyses of the marginal distributional effects of tax policies. Effects calculated in Panel B are based on
country and income-decile data, publicly available, and released under Lustig (2018).




                                                    44
                 Table 1: Household Expenditure Surveys for Core Sample
 Country             Code    Survey        Year GDP per capita        Sample size     Nb items/HH
 Benin               BJ      EMICOV        2015      828                19871               32
 Bolivia             BO      ECH           2004     1658                 9149               49
 Brazil              BR      POF           2009    10595                56025               41
 Burkina Faso        BF      EICVM         2009      563                 8404              152
 Burundi             BI      ECVM          2014      245                 6681               90
 Cameroon            CM      ECAM          2014     1400                10303               81
 Chad                TD      ECOSIT        2003      572                 6697               94
 Chile               CL      EPF           2017    14749                15239              129
 Colombia            CO      ENIG          2007     5999                42373               60
 Comoros             KM      EDMC          2013     1373                 3131               82
 Congo DRC           CD      E123          2005      301                12098              107
 Congo Rep           CG      ECOM          2005     2569                 5002               85
 Costa Rica          CR      ENIGH         2014     8994                 5705               68
 Dominican Rep       DO      ENIGH         2007     5121                 8363               88
 Ecuador             EC      ENIGHUR       2012     5122                39617               89
 Eswatini            SZ      HIES          2010     4169                 3167               44
 Mexico              MX      ENIGH         2014     9839                19479               61
 Montenegro          ME      HBS           2009     6516                 1223              149
 Morocco             MA      ENCDM         2001     2095                14243               90
 Mozambique          MZ      IOF           2009      416                10832              221
 Niger               NE      ENCBM         2007      330                 4000              192
 Papua NG            PG      HIES          2010     1949                 3810              111
 Peru                PE      ENAHO         2017     6315                43545               78
 Rwanda              RW      EICV          2014      690                14416               54
 Sao Tome            ST      IOF           2010     1095                 3545              100
 Senegal             SN      EDMC          2008     1278                 2503              299
 Serbia              RS      HBS           2015     6155                 6531              105
 South Africa        ZA      IES           2011     7455                25328               44
 Tanzania            TZ      HBS           2012      788                10186              318
 Tunisia             TN      ENBCNV        2010     4142                11281              139
 Uruguay             UY      ENIGH         2005     9079                 7043               77

 This table lists alphabetically the 31 countries in the core sample, the survey names and years. GDP per
capita is in PPP USD in the year of the survey, obtained from the World Bank Development Indicators.
Code refers to the country acronym which we use in the figures. The sample size refers to the number of
households in the survey, and the number of items reported is the number of expenditure items reported
on average across all households in the survey.




                                                   45
                   Table 2: Average Slopes of the Informality Engel Curves
 Specification:                       Main               Geography                          Product Codes                         All
 Avg. of 31 Countries           (1)          (2)         (3)    (4)               (5)         (6)    (7)              (8)         (9)

 (Negative of) Slope            9.8          10.6        9.2          8.5         6.9         6.3         6.1         5.4         4.3
 Confidence Interval         [9.2,10.4]   [9.9,11.2]   [8.5,9.9]    [7.7,9.2]   [6.2,7.4]   [5.7,6.7]   [5.5,6.5]   [4.8,5.7]   [3.7,4.7]

 # of p-values < 0.05           31            31         31           30          30          29          30          29          28
 R2 adjusted                   0.19          0.21       0.25         0.41        0.43        0.51        0.51        0.50        0.54


 Household Characteristics                    X           X            X           X           X           X           X           X
 Urban/Rural                                              X
 Survey Blocks                                                         X                                                           X
 Food Products                                                                     X
 COICOP 2-dig                                                                                  X
 COICOP 3-dig                                                                                              X
 COICOP 4-dig                                                                                                          X           X

 This table shows the (negative) average slope of the Informality Engel Curves across countries for dif-
ferent specifications. In column 1, we report the slopes that are estimated from the following regression:
Share In f ormalip =  0 +  1 ln(expenditurei ) +  ip where Share In f ormalip is the share of household i's
informal expenditure on product p. We weigh each observation using household survey weights and
the expenditure share of the product. Average of lower and upper bound of 95% confidence intervals
in brackets, from robust standard errors. In column 2, we augment this regression with controls for
household characteristics (household size, age, gender, education of head). In column 3 (4), we instead
add fixed effects for urban/rural (survey enumeration blocks). In column 5, we instead add fixed effects
for food versus non-food products. In column 6/7/8, we instead add fixed effects for product codes at
2nd/3rd/4th level of the COICOP classification. In column 9, we add household characteristics, as well as
fixed effects for survey blocks and COICOP-4.




                                                               46
                     Table 3: Main Reason for Choosing Place of Purchase


                                            Outcome: Share of purchases (in %)
         Reason                     All Stores    Informal Stores      Formal Stores
         Access                        41.5             42.1                 31.3
         Price                         28.6             29.4                 17.7
         Quality                       13.4             11.8                 40.6
         Store Attributes               6.9              6.9                  5.0
         Other                          9.6              9.8                  5.5

 The table reports for each potential reason households report for using a particular place of purchase,
the share of purchases associated with this reason. Each number is an average across the six countries in
our core sample in which the household survey asks this questions. These countries are Benin, Burundi,
Comoros, Congo Rep., Morocco and RD Congo. In all surveys seven reasons are listed which we classify
into five categories as follows: access is defined as "The retailer is closer or more convenient" and "The
good or service cannot be found elsewhere", price as "The good or services are cheaper", quality as "The
goods or services are of better quality", store attributes as "The retailer offers credit" and "The retailer is
welcoming or is a friend" and other as "Others reasons". Note that Morocco has a few additional small
categories, which pertain to attributes of retailer. The table lists the frequency for all purchases of goods
and excludes services, which are less comparable along these dimensions, although their inclusion does
not impact the results.




                                                      47
                                 Table 4: Baseline Calibration Parameters

    Parameter                                     Value             Justification

    Budget shares sij and sij1                    Varying           Observed in our data

    Household income (scaled) i                   Varying           Observed in our data
                                                                                                    j 1
    Income elasticities of goods  j               Food: 0.65,       From our data, using  j = 1 +   sj
                                                  Non-food: 1.2
                                                                                                      j1 1
    Income elasticities of formal varieties  j1   Food: 1.14,       From our data, using  j1 = 1 +   s j1
                                                  Non-food: 1.31,
                                                  All goods: 1.25
    Informal share of consumption  j              Varying           From our data
    Cross-variety compensated elasticity ~ C      1.5               Faber and Fally (2017); Atkin et al. (2018b)2
    Own-price compensated elasticity     C        -0.7              Deaton et al. (1994)3
    Government preferences gi                     1-10              Uniform tax rates in the [0.10, 0.25] range4


1 The parameter  j (  j1 ) refers to the estimated slope of the Engel curve for good j (variety j1).
2 For the cross-variety price elasticity we use estimates of the elasticity of substitution  across store types
in consumption obtained by Faber and Fally (2017); Atkin et al. (2018b) which are in the [2, 4] range. With
a CES utility function ~ C = s0 where s0 is the aggregate budget share spent in the informal sector, equal
to 0.5 on average in our sample.
3 Our choice of value for C together with our estimated income elasticities and observed budget shares

yield uncompensated own-price elasticities for goods in the [-2, -0.5] range, in line with estimates obtained
by Deaton et al. (1994) in the developing country context.
4 We set gi = 10 for the first decile, gi = 9 for the second decile, gi = 8 for the third decile, ..., gi = 1 for

the tenth decile. This, together with our other calibration choices, yields optimal uniform rates when we
assume only formal varieties can be taxed in the 10-25% range, in line with observed consumption tax rates
in developing countries.




                                                          48
Online Appendix for 'Informality, Consumption Taxes and
                     Redistribution'


            Pierre Bachas, Lucie Gadenne & Anders Jensen



                             May 2020
A           Additional Figures and Tables

                                                      Figure A1: Informality Engel Curves
    100




                                                           100




                                                                                                                 100
    80




                                                           80




                                                                                                                 80
    60




                                                           60




                                                                                                                 60
    40




                                                           40




                                                                                                                 40
    20




                                                           20




                                                                                                                 20
    0




                                                           0




                                                                                                                 0
              5               6           7                                6               7            8                        7            8               9




                      (a) Benin                                                    (b) Bolivia                                       (c) Brazil
      100




                                                                 100




                                                                                                                       100
      80




                                                                 80




                                                                                                                       80
      60




                                                                 60




                                                                                                                       60
      40




                                                                 40




                                                                                                                       40
      20




                                                                 20




                                                                                                                       20
      0




                                                                 0




                                                                                                                       0
                  6               7           8                                        6                7                    6            7               8               9




              (d) Burkina Faso                                                      (e) Burundi                                      (f) Cameroon
      100




                                                                 100




                                                                                                                       100
      80




                                                                 80




                                                                                                                       80
      60




                                                                 60




                                                                                                                       60
      40




                                                                 40




                                                                                                                       40
      20




                                                                 20




                                                                                                                       20
      0




                                                                 0




                                                                                                                       0




                      6               7           8                            8                9           10                        7               8               9




                          (g) Chad                                                   (h) Chile                                       (i) Colombia
      100




                                                                 100




                                                                                                                       100
      80




                                                                 80




                                                                                                                       80
      60




                                                                 60




                                                                                                                       60
      40




                                                                 40




                                                                                                                       40
      20




                                                                 20




                                                                                                                       20
      0




                                                                 0




                                                                                                                       0




                          7           8           9                    7              8             9                            5                6               7




                      (j) Comoros                                                  (k) Costa Rica                            (l) Dem. Rep. of Congo




                                                                                               50
100




                                                        100




                                                                                                             100
80




                                                        80




                                                                                                             80
60




                                                        60




                                                                                                             60
40




                                                        40




                                                                                                             40
20




                                                        20




                                                                                                             20
0




                                                        0




                                                                                                             0
      7               8           9                               7                8               9                  6           7               8




          (m) Dominican Rep.                                           (n) Ecuador                                        (o) Eswatini
100




                                                        100




                                                                                                             100
80




                                                        80




                                                                                                             80
60




                                                        60




                                                                                                             60
40




                                                        40




                                                                                                             40
20




                                                        20




                                                                                                             20
0




                                                        0




                                                                                                             0
               7              8               9                   8                    9                                  7                   8




                   (p) Mexico                                         (q) Montenegro                                      (r) Morocco
100




                                                        100




                                                                                                             100
80




                                                        80




                                                                                                             80
60




                                                        60




                                                                                                             60
40




                                                        40




                                                                                                             40
20




                                                        20




                                                                                                             20
0




                                                        0




                                                                                                             0




           5              6               7                             6                  7                                  6           7               8




               (s) Mozambique                                               (t) Niger                              (u) Papua New Guinea
100




                                                  100




                                                                                                       100
80




                                                  80




                                                                                                       80
60




                                                  60




                                                                                                       60
40




                                                  40




                                                                                                       40
20




                                                  20




                                                                                                       20
0




                                                  0




                                                                                                       0




                      8               9                       6               7                8                      6               7               8




                    (v) Peru                                  (w) Rep. of Congo                                      (x) Rwanda




                                                                                  51
 100




                                       100




                                                                        100
 80




                                       80




                                                                        80
 60




                                       60




                                                                        60
 40




                                       40




                                                                        40
 20




                                       20




                                                                        20
 0




                                       0




                                                                        0
           6           7           8                  7          8                8           9




               (y) Sao Tome                       (z) Senegal                   (aa) Serbia
 100




                                       100




                                                                        100
 80




                                       80




                                                                        80
 60




                                       60




                                                                        60
 40




                                       40




                                                                        40
 20




                                       20




                                                                        20
 0




                                       0




                                                                        0
               7       8       9             6            7      8                    8           9




           (ab) South Africa                     (ac) Tanzania                 (ad) Tunisia
 100
 80
 60
 40
 20
 0




       7           8       9




               (ae) Uruguay

 Local polynomial fit of the Informality Engel Curves in all 31 core sample countries. Per person total
expenditure on the horizontal axis is measured in log. Informal budget share is on the vertical axis. The
shaded area around the polynomial fit corresponds to the 95% confidence interval. The solid grey line
corresponds to the median of each country's expenditure distribution, while the dotted lines correspond to
the 5th and 95th percentiles. The construction of informality Engel curves is presented in section 3.1.




                                                          52
                                         Figure A2: Alternative Assignment Scenarios for Informal Expenditure

                               (a) Budget Shares (Probability Scenario)                                                                                                           (b) Slopes (Probability Scenario)
                               100




                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                               CD
                                          BI
                                                                   TZ
                                                NE           TD                                                                                                                                                                                                      CL




                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                    BJ                     CG
  Informal Consumption Share
                               80




                                                                                                                                           Informal Consumption Slope
                                                             BF               SN                                                                                                     BI CD
                                                        MZ        RW     ST KM                                                                                                                                BJ                   CG
                                                                            CM                                                                                                                                     ST                                      CR
                                                                                                                                                                                           NE




                                                                                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                     PG                                                                                                                 TD                                                      BR
                               60




                                                                                   BO MA                                                                                                                      TZ        KM                        CO ZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MZ   BF              CMBOPG          TN
                                                                                                     EC RS




                                                                                                                                                                        -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                             RW                         SZ
                                                                                                TN                     BR
                                                                                                        PE                                                                                                                                                 UY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DO
                                                                                                                   MX                                                                                                                              ME
                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SN   MA
                                                                                                     CO
                                                                                                      ME




                                                                                                                                                                        -15
                                                                                                SZ DO                                                                                                                                        EC
                                                                                                                  CR                                                                                                                              RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PE
                                                                                                                            CL
                               20




                                                                                                                  UY




                                                                                                                                                                        -20
                                                                                                             ZA




                                                                                                                                                                        -25
                               0




                                     5              6                    7                 8                 9                   10                                           5                6                   7               8                   9                  10
                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                      Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


                               (c) Budget Shares (Robustness Scenario)                                                                                                        (d) Slopes (Robustness Scenario)
                               100




                                                                                                                                                                        5


                                               CD
                                          BI                       TZ

                                                NE           BF
                                                             TD    BJ         SN           CG                                                                                                                                                                        CL
                                                                                                                                                                        0
  Informal Consumption Share
                               80




                                                                                                                                           Informal Consumption Slope




                                                                                                                                                                                          CD
                                                        MZ                    KM                                                                                                     BI                                            CG
                                                                  RW     ST                                                                                                                                                                                CR
                                                                               CM                                                                                                                             BJ                        TN
                                                                                      MA                                                                                                   NE                                                                   BR
                                                                                                                       BR                                                                               TD    TZ   ST
                                                                                                                                                                        -5




                                                                                   BOPG         TN EC RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MZ   BF              KM
                               60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CM
                                                                                                                                                                                                             RW              PG         SZ        CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MEZA
                                                                                                                                                                        -10




                                                                                                        PE         MX                                                                                                         MA
                                                                                                        ME
                                                                                                       CO                                                                                                               SN                   DO
                               40




                                                                                                     DO           CR                                                                                                                         EC             MX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RS
                                                                                                                                                                        -15




                                                                                                SZ

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PE
                                                                                                                  UY        CL
                               20




                                                                                                                                                                        -20




                                                                                                             ZA
                                                                                                                                                                        -25
                               0




                                     5              6                    7                 8                 9                   10                                           5                6                   7               8                   9                  10
                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                      Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 This figure is the equivalent of figure 3 for the two alternative assignments of store types to formality. The
Probability scenario uses the observed probability of VAT payment by store type in the Mexican census as
the formality probability of each store type across countries (see Figure 1). The robustness scenario differs
from the central scenario by assigning specialized stores to the informal sector, in addition to maintaining
corner stores, non brick and mortar and self-production in the informal sector. Panel (a) and (c) show
informal budget shares, on log per capita GDP. Panel (b) and (d) show the the slope of informality Engel
curves on log per capita GDP. The bars correspond to the 95% confidence interval of the slope coefficient.
GDP per capita is in constant 2010 USD (Source: World Bank WDI).




                                                                                                                                      53
                                  Figure A3: Unspecified Places of Purchase by Good

        (a) Percentage of Total Expenditure                        (b) Percentage of Goods' Expenditure
  5




                                                              60
  4




                                                              40
  3
  2




                                                              20
  1
  0




                                                              0
        od

                  l
                       es

                                            els

                                              nt

                                               h

                                               rt

                                               n

                                             re

                                             on

                                              ts

                                             ds




                                                                     od

                                                                               l
                                                                                    es

                                                                                                         els

                                                                                                           nt

                                                                                                            h

                                                                                                            rt

                                                                                                            n

                                                                                                            e
                                                                                                          on

                                                                                                           ts

                                                                                                          ds
              ho




                                                                           ho
                                           alt



                                           tio




                                                                                                        alt



                                                                                                        tio

                                                                                                          r
                               mm spo




                                                                                            mm spo
                                          an




                                                                                                       an
                                        me




                                                                                                     me
                                         ltu




                                                                                                      ltu
                      oth




                                        oo




                                                                                   oth




                                                                                                     oo
      Fo




                                        ati




                                                                   Fo




                                                                                                     ati
                                        Fu




                                                                                                     Fu
             co




                                                                          co
                                      He



                                      ica




                                                                                                   He



                                                                                                   ica
                                       ur




                                                                                                    ur
                                      Cu




                                                                                                   Cu
                                     uc



                                     .G




                                                                                                  uc



                                                                                                  .G
                                    uip



                                     an




                                                                                                 uip



                                                                                                  an
         Al




                                                                      Al
                  Cl




                                                                               Cl
                                     &




                                                                                                  &
                                   sta




                                                                                                sta
                                   un




                                                                                                un
                                  Ed




                                                                                               Ed
                                  Tr




                                                                                               Tr
                                  sc




                                                                                               sc
                                Eq




                                                                                             Eq
                       ies




                                                                                    ies
                               Re




                                                                                            Re
                               Mi




                                                                                            Mi
                     ilit




                                                                                  ilit
                              &




                                                                                           &
                            Co




                                                                                         Co
                   Ut




                                                                                Ut
                            ing




                                                                                         ing
                        ish




                                                                                     ish
                      rn




                                                                                   rn
                   Fu




                                                                                Fu




 This figure shows the share of expenditures with an unspecified place of purchase by goods categories
(COICOP-2 digit level) on average, across the 31 countries of the core sample, discussed in section 2.2.
Panel (a) shows this share as a percentage of total expenditures and Panel (b) as a percentage of each
goods' total expenditure.




                                                         54
                                                   Figure A4: Average Expenditure of Each Decile by Place of Purchase
                                  (a) Non Market                                   (b) Non Brick&Mortar                                                                        (c) Corner Stores                                                             (d) Indiv. Providers
30




                                                                                   30




                                                                                                                                                         30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
25




                                                                                   25




                                                                                                                                                         25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        25
20




                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
15




                                                                                   15




                                                                                                                                                         15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
10




                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
5




                                                                                   5




                                                                                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
0




                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
     1                            2    3       4   5   6   7   8    9     10            1   2     3       4   5       6   7       8   9        10             1                                2        3       4    5       6   7     8   9   10            1   2      3   4    5         6    7       8    9        10



 (e) Specialized Stores                                                                     (f) Large Stores                                                      (g) Instit. Services                                                                           (h) Unspecified
30




                                                                                   30




                                                                                                                                                         30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
25




                                                                                   25




                                                                                                                                                         25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        25
20




                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
15




                                                                                   15




                                                                                                                                                         15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
10




                                                                                   10




                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
5




                                                                                   5




                                                                                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
0




                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
     1                            2    3       4   5   6   7   8    9     10            1   2     3       4   5       6   7       8   9        10             1                                2        3       4    5       6   7     8   9   10            1   2      3   4    5         6    7       8    9        10



 This figure shows the average expenditure of each decile across countries by type of retailer, following the
retailer taxonomy described in section 2.2. Panel (a), (b), (c), (d) show the places of purchase classified
as informal and Panel (e), (f), (g) and (h) show the places of purchase classified as formal in the central
scenario of the paper.

                                               Figure A5: Average Expenditure of Each Decile By Formality Assignment

                                               (a) Informal Places of Purchase                                                                                                                                      (b) Formal Places of Purchase
                                                                                                                                                                                                   70
                                  70




                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                  60
     Mean Share of Expenditures




                                                                                                                                                                  Mean Share of Expenditures




                                                                                                                      Informal Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                  50




                                                                                                Corner Stores
                                                                                                                                                                                                   40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Unspecified
                                  40




                                                                                                                                                                                                   30
                                  30




                                                                        No Store Front

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Formal Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                   20
                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Large Stores
                                                                                                                                                                                                   10
                                  10




                                                       Non-market
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Specialized Stores
                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                           1       2       3        4          5            6         7           8           9           10                                                                1            2       3         4        5            6          7          8            9            10
                                                            Decile of Expenditure Distribution                                                                                                                                       Decile of Expenditure Distribution


 This figure shows the average expenditure of each decile across countries by type of retailer, following the
retailer taxonomy described in section 2.2. Panel (a) shows the places of purchase classified as informal and
Panel (b) shows the places of purchase classified as formal in the central scenario of the paper.


                                                                                                                                                    55
                                         Figure A6: Informality Engel Curve Slopes Controlling for Geography

                                         (a) Control: Rural Location                                                                                                               (b) Control: Survey Block
                               5




                                                                                                                                                                         5
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CL
  Informal Consumption Slope




                                                                                                                                            Informal Consumption Slope
                                                                                                                             CL                                                    BI
                                          BI CD
                                                                                                                                                                                        CD            TD
                                              NE                  BJ
                                                                                            CG                                                                                           NE
                               -5




                                                                                                                                                                         -5


                                                           TD                                                                                                                                                BJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                            TZ
                                                                       ST                                                                                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CM                               CRBR
                                                                 TZ          CM    PG                                   BR                                                                            BF                BOPG CG                   ZA
                                                           BF                                                   ZA CR
                                                      MZ        RW                                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                  BO                                                                                                                                 KM            TN
                               -10




                                                                                                                                                                         -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                 MZ        RW                                           MX
                                                                                                 TN        CO                                                                                                                                          UY
                                                                             KM                  SZ                  MX                                                                                              SN
                                                                                                                    UY                                                                                                    MA            DO
                                                                            SN                                                                                                                                                     SZ        PE
                                                                                       MA
                               -15




                                                                                                                                                                         -15




                                                                                                      DO
                                                                                                           PE
                                                                                                           ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EC ME
                               -20




                                                                                                                                                                         -20




                                                                                                      EC


                                                                                                           RS                                                                                                                                RS
                               -25




                                                                                                                                                                         -25




                                     5            6                    7                    8                   9                 10                                           5             6                  7              8                  9                10
                                                  Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                      Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 This figure shows each countries Informality Engel curves' on their GDP per capita, when controlling for
geographical variables. Panel (a) controls for a rural/urban dummy variable and panel (b) controls for
survey enumeration blocks.




                                                                                                                                       56
                                                                     Figure A7: Rural vs Urban Informal Consumption

                                            (a) Rural: Budget Share                                                                                                           (b) Urban: Budget Share
                                  100




                                                                                                                                                                    100
                                            BI CD
                                                NE           BF    BJ
                                                        MZ   TD RW
                                                                                        CG                                                                                    BI CD
                                                                  TZ                                                                                                              NE                 BJ
                                                                            KM PG
                                  80




                                                                                                                                                                    80
                                                                         ST CM                                                                                                                      TZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ST                  CG
                                                                              BO MA
  Informal Budget Share




                                                                                                                                    Informal Budget Share
                                                                                                                                                                                                               KM
                                                                                                                                                                                              BF
                                                                                                                                                                                              TD RW
                                                                                                                                                                                         MZ                    CM
                                                                                                     PE
                                                                                                  EC RS
                                  60




                                                                                                                                                                    60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BO
                                                                                             TN                                                                                                                          MA
                                                                                                                 MX
                                                                                                  CO              BR                                                                                                                    EC PE
                                                                                             SZ DO ME                                                                                                                PG                    RS
                                  40




                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DO              MX
                                                                                                                CR                                                                                                                                       BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SZ        ME
                                                                                                            ZA UY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CR
                                  20




                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZA
                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                    0


                                        5           6                    7              8                   9             10                                              5          6                    7                   8                   9              10
                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                            Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


                                                (c) Rural: IEC slope                                                                                                               (d) Urban: IEC slope
                                  5




                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                    0
  Informality Engel Curve Slope




                                                                                                                                    Informality Engel Curve Slope




                                            BI CD
                                                                    BJ
                                                NE                       ST             CG
                                                             TD                                                                                                                                     BJ
                                                             BF                                                                                                                                                               CG
                                  -5




                                                                                                                                                                    -5




                                                                                                                                                                              BI    NE                         CM
                                                        MZ                                                                                                                                          TZ    ST
                                                                                                    CO                                                                             CD                                                                       BR
                                                                  RWTZ          BOPG         TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CR
                                                                              CM                                CR                                                                                                   PG
                                                                                                                                                                                              TD
                                  -10




                                                                                                                                                                    -10




                                                                                                                     BR                                                                                                            SZ
                                                                                                       PE ZA                                                                                       RW               BO
                                                                                                                UY                                                                                             KM                                       MX
                                                                              KM   MA                                                                                                                                                        CO        UY
                                                                                             SZ                                                                                               BF                                   TN
                                                                                                  DO             MX
                                                                                                  EC                                                                                     MZ
                                  -15




                                                                                                                                                                    -15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MA             DO ME

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PE
                                                                                                       ME
                                  -20




                                                                                                                                                                    -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RS
                                                                                                       RS
                                  -25




                                                                                                                                                                    -25




                                        5           6                    7              8                   9             10                                              5          6                    7                   8                   9              10
                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                            Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 This figure plots informality levels and the slopes of the informality Engel curves for households located
in rural regions (graphs a and c) and urban regions (graphs b and d). It only contains 29 countries instead
of 31, since the expenditure surveys in Chile and Senegal concern urban population only.




                                                                                                                               57
                                Figure A8: Informality Engel Curve Slopes Controlling for Goods Composition

                                         (a) Control: Food Products                                                                                                                (b) Control: COICOP2
                               5




                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                        CL                                                                                                                                     CL
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                    NE
  Informal Consumption Slope




                                                                                                                                       Informal Consumption Slope
                                          BI                       BJ                                                                                                                                  TZ
                                                                                                                                                                              BI                        BJ
                                               CD
                                                NE                                                                                                                                 CD            TD          ST
                                                             TD    TZ   ST
                                                                                       CG                                                                                                                          CM          CG
                               -5




                                                                                                                                                                    -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 BF RW               BO                  DO
                                                                              CMBO               DOCO
                                                                             SN                            ZA CR                                                                            MZ                     KM   PG                    CO ZA
                                                                              KM                                 BR                                                                                               SN                                      BR
                                                             BF                   PG                          UY                                                                                                                                       CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UY
                                                                  RW
                               -10




                                                                                                                                                                    -10
                                                        MZ                                            PE         MX                                                                                                                           PE        MX
                                                                                            SZ
                                                                                            TN                                                                                                                            MA        SZ        RS
                                                                                  MA                                                                                                                                                     EC
                                                                                                 EC                                                                                                                                 TN
                                                                                                      RS
                               -15




                                                                                                                                                                    -15
                                                                                                       ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ME
                               -20




                                                                                                                                                                    -20
                               -25




                                                                                                                                                                    -25

                                     5              6                   7              8                   9                 10                                           5             6                    7                 8                   9                10
                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                               Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


                                               (c) Control: COICOP3                                                                                                                (d) Control: COICOP4
                               5




                                                                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CL
                                                                                                                        CL
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                    0




                                                NE                                                                                                                                  NE
  Informal Consumption Slope




                                                                                                                                       Informal Consumption Slope




                                          BI                     TZ                                                                                                           BI                      RWBJ
                                                                  BJ
                                               CD            TD RW   ST                                                                                                            CD          TD       TZ ST            MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BO    CG
                                                                                       CG                                                                                                   MZ BF                                        DOCO
                                                                              CM MA              DOCO                                                                                                                   PG
                               -5




                                                                                                                                                                    -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SN
                                                        MZ BF                SN BO
                                                                              KM PG                                                                                                                                KM
                                                                                                           ZA      BR                                                                                                                         PE ZA       BR
                                                                                                                UY
                               -10




                                                                                                                                                                    -10




                                                                                                      PE
                                                                                                      RS         MX                                                                                                                           RS       UY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SZ                  MX
                                                                                            SZ                  CR                                                                                                                                     CR
                                                                                                 EC                                                                                                                                      EC
                               -15




                                                                                                                                                                    -15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TN         ME
                                                                                                      ME
                                                                                            TN
                               -20




                                                                                                                                                                    -20
                               -25




                                                                                                                                                                    -25




                                     5              6                   7              8                   9                 10                                           5             6                    7                 8                   9                10
                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                               Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 This figure shows the informality Engel curves' slopes across countries when controlling for increasingly
narrow products (and household controls). Panel (a) only controls for food products, panel (b) controls for
the 12 COICOP2 good categories, panel (c) controls for the 47 COICOP3 categories and panel (d) controls
for the 117 COICOP4 categories.




                                                                                                                                  58
                              Figure A9: Share of Purchases where Store is Chosen for its Quality by Income


                                                                                                                     .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .3
                              .3
  Purchased for Quality (%)




                                                                           Purchased for Quality (%)




                                                                                                                                                                    Purchased for Quality (%)
                                                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
                              .2




                                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                              .1
                              0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                           5        6          7                                                                        6            7                                                                                  7           8            9
                                   Log Expenditure PP, Constant 2010 USD                                                   Log Expenditure PP, Constant 2010 USD                                                             Log Expenditure PP, Constant 2010 USD



                                           (a) Benin                                                                           (b) Burundi                                                                                        (c) Comoros
                              .3




                                                                                                                      .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .3
  Purchased for Quality (%)




                                                                                         Purchased for Quality (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                Purchased for Quality (%)
                              .2




                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2
                              .1




                                                                                                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .1
                              0




                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                       5                6          7                                                             7              8              9                                                                 6             7             8
                                   Log Expenditure PP, Constant 2010 USD                                                    Log Expenditure PP, Constant 2010 USD                                                                Log Expenditure PP, Constant 2010 USD



               (d) Dem. Rep. of Congo                                                                                           (e) Morocco                                                                                      (f) Rep. of Congo

 Local polynomial fit of the share of households buying any product for its quality on household's total
expenditure per person (log). Each panel corresponds to one of the six countries, for which the expenditure
survey asks respondents why they chose this place of purchase for each expenditure. The solid vertical line
corresponds to the median household total expenditure, while the dotted lines correspond to the 5th and
95th percentile.




                                                                                                                                        59
                                                                                                        Figure A10: Budget Shares

                                                       (a) Informal Food                                                                                                                            (b) Formal Food
                                   100




                                                                                                                                                                            100
                                   80




                                                                                                                                                                            80
  Informal Food Budget Share




                                                                                                                                             Formal Food Budget Share
                                                  CD
                                   60




                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                 SN
                                                                TD
                                                   NE MZ                    ST                CG
                                                                      TZ
                                             BI                                        PG
                                                                                 KM
                                                                     BJ
                                   40




                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                         MA
                                                                BF RW
                                                                                    BO                       RS
                                                                                                             PE
                                                                                  CM                                                                                                                                                       SZ
                                                                                                        EC
                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                   SZ                                                                                                                                                 ME
                                                                                                   TN DO ME             MX                                                                                                                           RS CR
                                                                                                        CO                                                                                                                    PG                        ZA UY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TN
                                                                                                                              CL                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                                       UY                                                                           MZ             ST                             CO                  CL
                                                                                                                       CRBR
                                                                                                                  ZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         TD TZ           KM BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SN                      EC PE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DO
                                                                                                                                                                                          NE
                                                                                                                                                                                      BI CD              BF RWBJ         CM           CG
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                            0


                                         5             6                    7                 8                   9                10                                             5             6                  7                  8                   9                10
                                                       Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


                                              (c) Informal Non-Food                                                                                                                        (d) Formal Non-Food
                                   100




                                                                                                                                                                            100
  Informal Non-Food Budget Share




                                                                                                                                             Formal Non-Food Budget Share
                                   80




                                                                                                                                                                            80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UY     CL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DO             CR
                                   60




                                                                                                                                                                            60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EC PE           MX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ME
                                             BI                                                                                                                                                                                            TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SZ
                                                                       BJ         CM
                                   40




                                                                                                                                                                            40




                                                                BF                                                                                                                                                                                   RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BO
                                                                     RW                                                                                                                                                          MA
                                                   NE                 TZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CM
                                                  CD                             KM BO        CG
                                                                TD          ST                                                                                                                      MZ        RW         KM
                                                                                                   TN                                                                                                    BF
                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                 SN                               BR
                                                           MZ
                                                                                       PG             ECCO                                                                                                                    PG CG
                                                                                                                MX                                                                                       TD     BJ ST SN
                                                                                         MA               ME
                                                                                                         PE
                                                                                                      DO RS    CR                                                                                              TZ
                                                                                                                              CL                                                            NE
                                                                                                   SZ                                                                                 BI
                                                                                                            ZA UY                                                                          CD
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                         5             6                    7                 8                   9                10                                             5             6                  7                  8                   9                10
                                                       Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 Panel (a) shows country informal food consumption as a share of total consumption, plotted against log
per capita GDP. Panel (b), (c) and (d) are constructed similarly to Panel (a), respectively showing formal
food consumption, informal non-food consumption and formal non-food consumption.




                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                           Figure A11: Engel Curve Slopes

                                                                    (a) Informal Food                                                                                                                              (b) Formal Food
                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                        15




                                                                                                                                                                                     15
  Informal Food Engel Curve Slope




                                                                                                                                                 Formal Food Engel Curve Slope
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                        5




                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MA                    SZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TN
                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MZ TD RW      KM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SN       CG                    EC ME
                                                                                                                                  CL                                                                   BI CD     BF   BJ ST CMBO




                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           NE                                             DO RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PE CR UY
                                                               CD                                                                                                                                                                                                   MX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BR
                                        -5




                                                                                                      CG                                                                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                                                        ZA CRBR                                                                                                                                 ZA




                                                                                                                                                                                     -5
                                                                        MZ TD RW   ST
                                        -20 -15 -10




                                                                                BJ              PG                CO        UY
                                                                           BF                               SZ
                                                                                                            TN               MX                                                                                                                                                      CL




                                                                                                                                                                                     -20 -15 -10
                                                                NE                          KM
                                                                                            CMBO
                                                                                                 MA
                                                          BI                                                     DO PE
                                                                                                                 EC ME


                                                                                                                   RS
                                                                                   TZ       SN


                                                      5             6                   7             8                 9              10                                                          5           6                7                 8                   9                   10
                                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                      Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


                                                           (c) Informal Non-Food                                                                                                                         (d) Formal Non-Food
                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RS
                                                                                                                                                                                     20
  Informal Non-Food Engel Curve Slope




                                                                                                                                                 Formal Non-Food Engel Curve Slope




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PE
                                        15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ME
                                                                                   TZ
                                                                                                                                                                                     15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SN      MA             DO
                                                          BI                                                                                                                                                                                                                MX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CO
                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TN                  UY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZA
                                                                                                                                                                                     10




                                                                NE                          SN                                                                                                                        BF RW             BO                                      BR   CL
                                                                                   BJ                                                                                                                              MZ                                  SZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TZ         KM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CM                                    CR
                                        5




                                                                                           CM                                                                                                                                             PG
                                                                                                                                                                                     5




                                                                             TD         ST KM BO                                                                                                           NE         TD        ST
                                                               CD                                                                                                                                                          BJ                     CG
                                                                             BF                 PG CG                             CL
                                                                                                               DO                                                                                      BI CD
                                        0




                                                                                                            SZ CO RS CR
                                                                                                                     ZA MX
                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                        MZ        RW                        TN         UYBR
                                                                                                 MA                ME
                                                                                                               EC PE
                                        -5




                                                                                                                                                                                     -5
                                        -20 -15 -10




                                                                                                                                                                                     -20 -15 -10




                                                      5             6                   7             8                 9              10                                                          5           6                7                 8                   9                   10
                                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                      Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 Panel (a) shows the country-specific slope of informal food consumption with respect to log household
expenditure, plotted against log per capita GDP. The slope measures the drop in informal food consump-
tion for a doubling of households' income. Panel (b), (c) and (d) are constructed similarly to Panel (a),
respectively showing formal food consumption, informal non-food consumption and formal non-food con-
sumption.




                                                                                                                                            61
                                                   Figure A12: Share of Informal Consumption for Food and Non Food Goods

                                                            (a) Informal Food                                                                                                                                 (b) Informal Non-Food
                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                                   100
                                                                                                                                                    Share of Non Food Consumption in Inf. Sector
                                                       BI CD         BF      BJ
  Share of Food Consumption in Inf. Sector




                                                           NE             RW                         CG
                                                                     TD                SN
                                                                                        CM
                                                                                        KM                          PE
                                                                            TZ             BO
                                                                MZ                                                                                                                                           BI CD
                                                                                  ST                           EC
                                             80




                                                                                                MA             DO                                                                                  80
                                                                                            PG                                                                                                                   NE                  BJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BF
                                                                                                                    RS                                                                                                               TZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TD
                                             60




                                                                                                                                                                                                   60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RW     ST
                                                                                                                                     CL                                                                                                        SN
                                                                                                          TN                   MX
                                                                                                                    CO                                                                                                                         KM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CM PG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CG
                                                                                                                     ME
                                                                                                          SZ
                                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                                   40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MZ                         BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TN
                                                                                                                              UY
                                                                                                                              CRBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ECCO
                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ME MX BR
                                                                                                                         ZA                                                                                                                                              RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SZ DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZA UY
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                   5        6                     7                  8                   9                10                                                             5           6                    7                   8           9               10
                                                            Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 Panel (a) shows the share of food consumption which occurs in the informal sector. Panel (b) shows the
share of non food consumption which occurs in the informal sector. For each good, this is constructed by
taking total informal consumption of the good and dividing it by the total consumption of that good.




                                                                                                                                               62
                                                              Figure A13: Optimal Uniform Tax on Formal Varieties

                                       (a) No efficiency consideration                                                                                                   (b) Cross price elasticity = 1.5
                             .6




                                                                                                                                                               .3
                             .55




                                                        MZ




                                                                                                                                                               .25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZA
                                                             BF                     PG
                                          BI
                             .5
  Optimal Uniform Rate




                                                                                                                                        Optimal Uniform Rate
                                               CD
                                                                  RW                                          ZA
                             .45




                                                             TD




                                                                                                                                                               .2
                                                                   BJ        KM                                                                                                                                                                      BR
                                                                                BO MA                               BR                                                                             RW
                                                                             CM                          CO                                                                                                                           CO           CR
                                                                                                                                                                                         MZ                         PG                             UY
                             .4




                                                                                                    EC                                                                                                                           SZ DO
                                                NE                                                                                                                                            BF                                                    MX
                                                                                               SZ DO                MX
                                                                                                                   CR                                                                                                  MA           EC                     CL
                                                                                          CG                                                                                                                      BO




                                                                                                                                                               .15
                                                                                                                                                                           BI
                             .35




                                                                        ST                                         UY                                                                                        KM
                                                                             SN                TN        PE                                                                     CD            TD    BJ                           TN      PE
                                                                                                                         CL
                                                                   TZ                                                                                                                                        CM                          RS
                                                                                                         RS                                                                      NE                      ST SN              CG
                             .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                    TZ




                                                                                                                                                               .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ME
                             .25




                                                                                                         ME


                                                                                                                                                               .05
                             .2




                                   5                6                   7                 8                   9               10                                     5               6                   7                  8                 9                 10
                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                            Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


                                        (c) Cross price elasticity = 1                                                                                                   (d) Cross price elasticity = 2
                             .3




                                                                                                                                                               .3




                                                                                                              ZA
                             .25




                                                                                                                                                               .25




                                                                  RW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZA
                                                        MZ
      Optimal Uniform Rate




                                                                                                                                        Optimal Uniform Rate




                                                                                    PG
                                                             BF                                                     BR
                                                                                                     CO
                                          BI
                             .2




                                                                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                  BO MA                            CR
                                               CD                                                 EC
                                                                                               SZ DO               UY
                                                                                                                    MX
                                                                   BJ        KM
                                                             TD
                                                                                                                         CL                                                                                                                           BR
                                                                                               TN        PE                                                                                                                                        UY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CR
                                                NE                            CM
                                                                             SN           CG                                                                                                                                          CO
                             .15




                                                                                                                                                               .15




                                                                        ST                                                                                                                         RW                            SZ DO
                                                                   TZ                                    RS                                                                              MZ                         PG                              MX     CL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EC
                                                                                                                                                                                              BF                     MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                             KM                  TN      PE
                                                                                                         ME                                                                BI
                                                                                                                                                                                CD            TD    BJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RS
                             .1




                                                                                                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                             CM
                                                                                                                                                                                 NE                      ST SN              CG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                    TZ
                             .05




                                                                                                                                                               .05




                                   5                6                   7                 8                   9               10                                     5               6                   7                  8                 9                 10
                                                    Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                            Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 The panels plot the optimal uniform rate for each country calibrated using expression (6) as a function of
each country's log GDP per capita. In panel (a) we hold efficiency considerations constant by assuming
that uncompensated elasticities of demand are equal across all countries, in panels (b), (c) and (d) we allow
price elasticities to vary across goods and countries by calibrating values using expression (4) above. We
vary the value of the cross-variety compensated elasticity ~ C across the three panels: it is 1.5 (our baseline
value) in panel (b), 1 in panel (c) and 2 in panel (d).




                                                                                                                                   63
                                                                   Figure A14: Optimal Rate Differentiation: Robustness

 (a) Only Formal Varieties Taxed, Cross price elasticity = 1.5                                                                                      (b) Only Formal Varieties Taxed, Cross price elasticity = 1




                                                                                                                                                                                      1.6
                                    1.4




                                                                                                                                                                                      1.4
                                    1.2




                                                                                                                                                    Ratio Food Rate / Non Food Rate
  Ratio Food Rate / Non Food Rate




                                                   CD




                                                                                                                                                                                      1.2
                                              BI
                                    1




                                                                      BJ                                                                                                                             CD

                                                                                                                                                                                                BI




                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                  CG                                                                                                                    BJ
                                                                                                                                BR
                                    .8




                                                                                                                           CR
                                                                                                       TN                                                                                                                                    CG




                                                                                                                                                                                      .8
                                                                 BF RW               KM                                                                                                                                                                                  BR
                                                                                     CM                               ZA
                                                                      TZ                  PG                                                                                                                                                                        CR
                                                                 TD
                                    .6




                                                                                                                           UY                                                                                      BF RW          KM              TN
                                                                                                            EC ME                                                                                                       TZ        CM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PG




                                                                                                                                                                                      .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TD                                          ZA
                                                                            ST                         SZ
                                                                                 SN BO MA                                                                                                                                                                           UY
                                                            MZ                                              DO              MX                                                                                               ST                        EC ME
                                    .4




                                                                                                              CO                                                                                                                  SN BO MA        SZ




                                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                              MZ                                                     MX
                                                                                                                 PE                                                                                                                                    DOCO
                                                    NE                                                           RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      NE                                                  PE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RS
                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                      .2
                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                    0




                                                                                                                                     CL                                                                                                                                       CL

                                          5             6                   7                     8                   9                   10                                                5             6                  7               8                 9                   10
                                                            Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD                                                                                                     Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


  (c) Only Formal Varieties Taxed, Cross price elasticity = 2
                                    1.6
                                    1.4
  Ratio Food Rate / Non Food Rate
                                    1.2




                                                   CD
                                              BI
                                                                       BJ
                                    1




                                                                                                  CG
                                                                                                                           CRBR
                                    .8




                                                                                                       TN             ZA
                                                                 BF RW               KM
                                                                                     CM                                    UY
                                                                 TD   TZ                  PG                EC
                                                                                                                 ME
                                    .6




                                                                                             MA        SZ
                                                                                ST                          DO
                                                            MZ                       SN BO                    CO            MX
                                    .4




                                                                                                               PE
                                                                                                               RS
                                                    NE
                                    .2
                                    0




                                                                                                                                     CL

                                          5             6                   7                     8                   9                   10
                                                        Log GDP per capita, Constant 2010 USD


 The panels plot for each country the ratio of the calibrated optimal rate on food products relative to the
optimal rate on non-food products, as a function of that country's log GDP per capita. Optimal rates are
calibrated using expression (9). A value equal to 1 indicates that both optimal rates are set at the same
level, a lower value indicates that it is optimal to subsidize food products relative to non-food products. In
all panels we assume only formal varieties can be taxed and allow price elasticities to vary across goods
and countries by calibrating values using expression (4) above. We vary the value of the cross-variety
compensated elasticity ~ C across the three panels: it is 1.5 (our baseline value) in panel (a), 1 in panel (b)
and 2 in panel (c).



                                                                                                                                               64
                        Figure A15: Change in Gini by Income Groups




 This figure shows the average percent change in the Gini coefficient per different group of countries for
the three scenarios. Panel A shows the drop in Gini for lower income countries (i.e. the countries with
a GDP per capita inferior to 2100 $ in constant US 2010.) of this paper core sample. Panel B shows the
drop in Gini for middle income countries (i.e. the countries with a GDP per capita superior to 2100 $ in
constant US 2010.) of this paper core sample. For Panel A and B the red dot represents the scenario where
a uniform rate is implemented but only the formal sector is taxed. The green dot represents the scenario
where only non-food items, but both sectors are taxed. The orange dot represents the scenario where only
non-food items, and only the formal sector are taxed.Panel C show the drop in Gini using data from the
Commitment to Equity Institute (CEQ). This sample gathers both lower and middle income countries.




                                                   65
                                 Table A1: IEC Slopes by Country
  Country                              Main              Geography                     Product Codes                   All
                                   (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)        (9)
  Benin                           3.31       3.61      3.18      4.54       0.92       1.49      1.36       1.03       1.26
                                 (0.15)    (0.16)     (0.16)    (0.22)     (0.16)     (0.11)    (0.10)     (0.10)     (0.15)
  Bolivia                         9.77      11.43      8.99      7.22       5.71       4.87      5.13       2.93       2.74
                                 (0.29)    (0.33)     (0.38)    (0.44)     (0.29)     (0.19)    (0.18)     (0.16)     (0.25)
  Brazil                          7.60       7.98      7.07      6.41       7.50       7.15      7.79       8.11       6.64
                                 (0.15)    (0.17)     (0.17)    (0.18)     (0.16)     (0.16)    (0.15)     (0.13)     (0.14)
  Burkina Faso                    9.71      10.56      7.58      6.89       7.97       5.20      4.92       3.73       2.39
                                 (0.30)    (0.32)     (0.30)    (0.32)     (0.28)     (0.19)    (0.18)     (0.17)     (0.19)
  Burundi                         1.89       2.35      1.44      0.80       0.83       1.54      1.20       0.84       0.33
                                 (0.16)    (0.17)     (0.17)    (0.18)     (0.17)     (0.12)    (0.10)     (0.10)     (0.12)
  Cameroon                        8.21       9.35      7.13      5.81       5.72       4.30      4.61       4.55       2.88
                                 (0.13)    (0.14)     (0.16)    (0.22)     (0.13)     (0.12)    (0.10)     (0.09)     (0.13)
  Chad                            5.72       6.21      4.54      3.10       3.35       2.37      2.29       2.23       0.90
                                 (0.29)    (0.30)     (0.30)    (0.37)     (0.25)     (0.19)    (0.16)     (0.15)     (0.22)
  Chile                           0.97       0.91      0.91      0.03       0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00       0.00
                                 (0.21)    (0.23)     (0.23)    (0.25)     (0.21)     (0.18)    (0.17)     (0.16)     (0.18)
  Colombia                        9.76      10.52     10.56      8.32       5.31       6.51      4.28       3.22       3.37
                                 (0.23)    (0.25)     (0.26)    (0.28)     (0.22)     (0.21)    (0.20)     (0.17)     (0.19)
  Comoros                         9.54      11.65     11.08      8.84       7.28       6.95      6.16       5.93       4.42
                                 (0.58)    (0.71)     (0.74)    (0.82)     (0.58)     (0.47)    (0.42)     (0.37)     (0.56)
  CongoDRC                        2.04       2.76      1.62      2.66       2.34       2.36      2.17       1.99       1.51
                                 (0.15)    (0.17)     (0.14)    (0.20)     (0.15)     (0.14)    (0.13)     (0.10)     (0.16)
  Congo Rep                       4.21       5.62      4.13      7.06       4.22       4.01      3.96       2.97       2.78
                                 (0.32)    (0.33)     (0.33)    (0.43)     (0.27)     (0.22)    (0.18)     (0.16)     (0.25)
  Costa Rica                      7.22       8.60      7.72      5.95       7.25       8.44     10.60      10.69       8.84
                                 (0.35)    (0.37)     (0.38)    (0.45)     (0.35)     (0.33)    (0.30)     (0.25)     (0.30)
  Dominican Rep                  14.39      14.89     14.48     11.78       5.70       4.76      4.57       3.52       2.36
                                 (0.31)    (0.35)     (0.35)    (0.42)     (0.28)     (0.27)    (0.26)     (0.23)     (0.25)
  Ecuador                        19.11      20.90     19.11     16.57      13.02      12.22     11.92      12.34       9.46
                                 (0.18)    (0.19)     (0.21)    (0.21)     (0.16)     (0.15)    (0.14)     (0.12)     (0.13)
  Eswatini                       11.64      12.38     11.55     12.56      10.17      10.47     10.89      10.05       9.88
                                 (0.51)    (0.62)     (0.67)    (0.65)     (0.55)     (0.51)    (0.54)     (0.50)     (0.51)
  Mexico                         12.01      13.57     11.51      9.83       9.14       9.33      9.70      10.39       7.09
                                 (0.20)    (0.23)     (0.24)    (0.25)     (0.22)     (0.20)    (0.20)     (0.16)     (0.19)
  Montenegro                     18.16      18.88     16.04     16.60      14.61      15.83     15.91      14.23      12.52
                                 (0.84)    (0.94)     (0.97)    (1.11)     (0.79)     (0.68)    (0.67)     (0.53)     (0.59)
  Morocco                        16.85      18.11     14.05     12.09      12.35      10.57      4.34       2.14       0.00
                                 (0.21)    (0.22)     (0.23)    (0.27)     (0.19)     (0.18)    (0.21)     (0.25)     (0.28)
  Mozambique                      9.67      11.28      8.83      9.30       9.43       6.59      5.23       3.66       2.74
                                 (0.37)    (0.39)     (0.40)    (0.44)     (0.33)     (0.29)    (0.27)     (0.23)     (0.29)
  Niger                           3.90       4.66      3.68      4.29       2.62       0.25      0.34       0.20       0.61
                                 (0.34)    (0.37)     (0.41)    (0.40)     (0.31)     (0.25)    (0.24)     (0.23)     (0.26)
  Papua New Guinea                8.59       9.35      7.14      7.36       8.10       6.88      6.40       4.24       3.06
                                 (0.49)    (0.49)     (0.50)    (0.52)     (0.43)     (0.40)    (0.38)     (0.30)     (0.32)
  Peru                           18.04      18.92     16.04     12.59       9.31       9.26      9.41       7.89       4.15
                                 (0.20)    (0.22)     (0.23)    (0.27)     (0.16)     (0.16)    (0.16)     (0.12)     (0.16)
  Rwanda                          9.90      10.61      8.68      9.75       9.04       5.23      2.14       0.97       0.09
                                 (0.19)    (0.20)     (0.20)    (0.25)     (0.18)     (0.12)    (0.08)     (0.08)     (0.09)
  Sao Tome                        4.66       5.23      5.26      5.06       3.50       2.64      2.46       1.84       1.84
                                 (0.48)    (0.56)     (0.57)    (0.58)     (0.48)     (0.44)    (0.43)     (0.37)     (0.38)
  Senegal                        15.20      12.19     12.19     11.56       6.57       7.39      5.53       4.83       4.47
                                 (0.67)    (0.74)     (0.74)    (0.84)     (0.63)     (0.59)    (0.57)     (0.56)     (0.65)
  Serbia                         20.91      24.24     22.74     23.03      13.67      10.48      9.50       9.48       8.47
                                 (0.58)    (0.58)     (0.56)    (0.56)     (0.51)     (0.49)    (0.47)     (0.29)     (0.29)
  South Africa                    7.50       8.69      7.78      7.29       6.78       6.49      7.69       7.59       6.92
                                 (0.12)    (0.14)     (0.15)    (0.18)     (0.13)     (0.12)    (0.10)     (0.08)     (0.11)
  Tanzania                        8.47       7.52      7.26      4.88       3.18       1.03      1.11       2.11       0.80
                                 (0.20)    (0.20)     (0.20)    (0.27)     (0.19)     (0.15)    (0.14)     (0.11)     (0.15)
  Tunisia                        13.68      12.98     10.72      9.05      10.18      12.97     17.60      14.57      13.03
                                 (0.15)    (0.17)     (0.18)    (0.21)     (0.16)     (0.12)    (0.15)     (0.26)     (0.29)
  Uruguay                        11.57      11.73     11.65     10.87       8.18       8.48      8.96       9.31       8.36
                                 (0.25)    (0.27)     (0.28)    (0.32)     (0.24)     (0.22)    (0.22)     (0.19)     (0.21)

  All Countries (Mean)            9.8       10.6        9.2        8.5       6.9       6.3        6.1       5.4        4.3
  Household Characteristics                  X           X          X         X         X          X         X          X
  Urban/Rural                                            X
  Survey Blocks                                                    X                                                    X
  Food Products                                                              X                               X
  COICOP 2-dig                                                                          X
  COICOP 3-dig                                                                                    X
  COICOP 4-dig                                                                                               X          X

This table shows the average slope of the Informal Engel curve across countries for different specifications. The slopes are
estimated from: Share In f ormali = .ln(expenditure pc)i +  Xi +  i , where the dependent variable is the informal expenditure
share and the explanatory variable is the log expenditure pp. Controls include household characteristics (household size, age,
gender, and education of head), geographic indicators (urban/rural and survey enumeration blocks), and product codes for food
compared to the rest and at the 2nd, 3rd and 4th level of the United Nation's COICOP classification.

                                                              66
                  Table A2: IEC Slopes: Probabilistic Formality Assignment
Specification:                       Main            Geography                      Product Codes                       All
Avg. of 31 Countries           (1)          (2)      (3)    (4)             (5)       (6)    (7)             (8)        (9)

Slope                          7.8          8.3      7.1        6.4         5.0        4.5        4.4        3.8        3.0
Confidence Interval         [ 7.3,8.4 ] [ 7.7,8.9] [ 6.4,7.7] [ 5.7,7.1] [ 4.4,5.5] [ 4.0,4.9] [ 3.9,4.7] [ 3.4,4.1] [ 2.4,3.3]

# of p-values < 0.05           30         30         30          30         30         29         29         30         26
R2 adjusted                   0.15       0.17       0.22        0.39       0.42       0.54       0.54       0.54       0.58
Household Characteristics                   X         X          X          X           X          X          X          X
Urban/Rural                                           X
Survey Blocks                                                    X                                                       X
Food Products                                                               X
COICOP 2-dig                                                                            X
COICOP 3-dig                                                                                       X
COICOP 4-dig                                                                                                  X          X

  This table shows the average slope of the Informal Engel curve across countries for different speci-
fications under the probabilsitic assignment of places of purchase to formality. The Probabilistic sce-
nario uses the observed probability of VAT registration by store type in the Mexican census as the
formality probability of each store across countries (see Figure 1). The slopes are estimated from:
Share In f ormali = .ln(expenditure pc)i +  Xi +  i . The dependent variable is informal expenditure share
and the main explanatory variable is log expenditure per capita. Controls include household characteris-
tics (household size, age, gender, education of head), location indicators (urban/rural, survey enumeration
blocks), and product codes for food vs all other purchases, 2nd, 3rd and 4th level of the COICOP classifi-
cation.




                                                           67
                   Table A3: IEC Slopes: Robustness Formality Assignment
Specification:                    Main            Geography                    Product Codes                   All
Avg. of 31 Countries           (1)    (2)         (3)    (4)           (5)       (6)    (7)           (8)      (9)

Slope                          7.0       7.4       6.3        5.8      4.3       3.8       3.8        3.3       2.7
Confidence Interval          [6.4,7.6] [6.7,8.1] [5.6,7.0] [4.8,6.4] [3.5,4.7] [3.1,4.1] [3.1,4.1] [2.7,3.5] [2.0,3.0]

# of p-values < 0.05           30        30        29          28      28         28        27        25        25
R2 adjusted                   0.12      0.13      0.17        0.34    0.38       0.52      0.53      0.54      0.57


Household Characteristics                 X         X          X        X         X         X         X         X
Urban/Rural                                         X
Survey Blocks                                                  X                                                X
Food Products                                                           X
COICOP 2-dig                                                                      X
COICOP 3-dig                                                                                X
COICOP 4-dig                                                                                          X         X

 This table shows the average slope of the Informal Engel curve across countries for different specifi-
cations under the robustness scenario assignment of places of purchase to formality. The robustness
scenario differs from the central scenario by assigning specialized stores to the informal sector, in addi-
tion to maintaining corner stores, non brick and mortar and self-production in the informal sector. The
slopes are estimated from: Share In f ormali = .ln(expenditure pc)i +  Xi +  i . The dependent variable
is informal expenditure share and the main explanatory variable is log expenditure per capita. Controls
include household characteristics (household size, age, gender, education of head), location indicators (ur-
ban/rural, survey enumeration blocks), and product codes for food vs all other purchases, 2nd, 3rd and
4th level of the COICOP classification.




                                                         68
                    Table A4: Main Reason for Choosing Place of Purchase
                                         Outcome: Share of purchases (in %)
                            Benin                     Burundi                    Comoros
Reason           All Stores Informal Formal All Stores Informal Formal All Stores Informal Formal
Access              39.0      39.3    29.9     49.8      49.9    41.5       36.2    38.6    16.4
Price               26.4      26.8    11.6     27.6      27.8    14.8       31.1    31.7    26.1
Quality             24.3      23.5    51.4      6.4       5.7    41.0       12.4     9.0    39.8
Store Attributes     7.4       7.6     3.3      3.7       3.8     0.8       13.4    14.3     6.0
Other                2.9       2.9     3.9     12.6      12.8     1.9        7.0     6.4    11.7

                     Dem. Rep of Congo                Morocco                  Rep. of Congo
Reason           All Stores Informal Formal All Stores Informal Formal All Stores Informal Formal
Access              28.7      28.9    16.1     58.5      58.7    57.3     36.8       37.5    26.8
Price               34.3      34.4    27.2     20.1      22.5     6.4     32.4       33.3    20.0
Quality             16.6      16.3    46.5      6.3       3.9    19.7     14.3       12.2    45.0
Store Attributes     7.8       7.8     7.6      1.7       0.6     7.7      7.2        7.4    4.3
Other               12.6      12.7     2.7     13.5      14.3     8.9      9.3        9.7     3.8

 The table reports the frequencies across all purchases by reason of choosing a place of purchase, and shows
the average for the six countries in the core sample which ask this question. These countries are Benin,
Burundi, Comoros, Congo Rep., Morocco and RD Congo. In all surveys seven reasons are listed which we
classify into five categories as follows: access is defined as "The retailer is closer or more convenient" and
"The good or service cannot be found elsewhere", price as "The good or services are cheaper", quality
as "The goods or services are of better quality", store attributes as "The retailer offers credit" and "The
retailer is welcoming or is a friend" and other as "Others reasons". Note that Morocco has a few additional
small categories, which pertain to attributes of retailer. The table lists the frequency for all purchases of
goods and excludes services, which are less comparable along these dimensions, although their inclusion
does not impact the results.




                                                     69
                         Table A5: Unit Values Across Places of Purchase
                            Outcome: % dif. in formal sector unit values          # Purchases      # FE
  Country                       (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)
  Benin                        5.25        1.10          3.38           -0.39       262,280        5,065
                              (7.10)      (5.66)        (7.53)         (6.19)
  Bolivia                      4.08        3.53          4.69           3.86        120,971        1,549
                              (1.40)      (1.12)        (1.40)         (1.15)
  Brazil                       -0.11       -0.20         0.14           0.01        704,639        9,437
                              (0.37)      (0.35)        (0.38)         (0.35)
  Burundi                      2.53        4.39          4.81           5.23        250,139        2,454
                              (4.65)      (4.73)        (4.39)         (4.23)
  Chad                         -4.36       -3.21         -4.36          -3.21       380,462        1,968
                              (1.80)      (1.77)        (1.80)         (1.77)
  Colombia                     -0.33       -0.04         -0.30          -0.06       778,203        7,861
                              (0.55)      (0.30)        (0.55)         (0.30)
  Comoros                     22.56       14.93         21.81          14.49        113,228        1,142
                              (5.01)      (3.64)        (4.98)         (3.64)
  CongoDRC                     4.62        0.87          9.77           5.89        865,754        5,556
                             (16.79)     (12.88)       (17.47)        (14.15)
  Congo Rep                   27.84       23.70         27.12          23.01        208,557        1,182
                              (5.88)      (4.67)        (6.03)         (4.78)
  Costa Rica                   3.04        2.37          1.93           1.58        122,467        1,593
                              (2.40)      (2.11)        (2.17)         (1.93)
  Dominican Rep               18.86       13.64         18.94          13.73        340,303        4,416
                              (1.69)      (1.01)        (1.68)         (1.00)
  Ecuador                      2.29        1.86          2.23           1.82       1,030,387      12,104
                              (0.63)      (0.63)        (0.63)         (0.62)
  Eswatini                     3.09        2.38          1.31           1.06        89,209         852
                              (2.10)      (1.79)        (1.89)         (1.46)
  Mexico                       1.10        1.00          1.10           1.00        446,417        6,195
                              (1.16)      (1.02)        (1.16)         (1.02)
  Montenegro                  10.36        9.57          7.13           6.45        138,446        867
                              (3.70)      (3.25)        (3.08)         (2.85)
  Morocco                      7.10        5.43          6.88           5.22        743,979        3,598
                              (0.87)      (0.70)        (0.92)         (0.75)
  Peru                        14.70       13.29         14.69          13.29       1,300,408      10,721
                              (2.74)      (2.46)        (2.74)         (2.46)
  Sao Tome                     6.81        4.87          6.69           4.86        215,527        2,946
                              (1.39)      (1.37)        (1.39)         (1.34)
  Serbia                       2.39        2.03          2.86           2.49        503,344        9,332
                              (0.49)      (0.46)        (0.51)         (0.48)
  Tanzania                     2.11        1.59          2.80           2.21       1,169,193      13,771
                              (0.73)      (0.68)        (0.59)         (0.55)
  Avg. of 20 Countries         6.70        5.16          6.68           5.13
  Confidence Interval       [0.7,12.7]  [0.2,10.1]    [0.7,12.7]     [0.1,10.1]
  # of p-values < 0.05          12          12            11             11
  Winsorization [5,95]                       X                            X
  Self Consumption                                         X              X

 This table shows the percentage difference in unit values in the formal sector compared to the informal
sector. The sample is restricted to food purchases, for which units and unit values are detailed, in the 20
core sample countries with such data. Formally it runs the following specification: ln(unit value)ipmu =
 Formalipmu + µ pmu + ipmu , where ln(unit value)ipmu is the unit value reported by household i, for
product p, in location m, in units u, and Formalipmu equals one if the product is purchased in a formal
store. We add fixed effects at the product * location * unit of measurement. Standard errors are clustered
at the location level.

                                                     70
                       Table A6: Ratio Top over Bottom Quintile of Effective Tax Rates
                                                                Baseline          Baseline +             Baseline + Distri-         Probabilistic                 Robust
Tax policy                                                 Assignment            VAT on Input                butional Savings       Assignment                Assignment

Uniform rate, only formal taxed                                  2.06                    1.62                     1.89                  1.76                        1.95

Food exempt, formal and informal taxed                           1.67                    1.67                     1.54                  1.63                        1.67

Food exempt, only formal taxed                                   2.36                    2.18                     2.17                  2.11                        2.19


 This table shows the progressivity of consumption tax policies, measured as the effective tax rate of the
richest household quintile over that of the poorest quintile. The numbers are averages for the 31 countries
in the core sample. The rows correspond to the three tax policies considered: (1) a uniform rate on all
goods in a context where only formal goods can be taxed, (2) a tax exemption on food in a context where
both formal and informal goods can be taxed, and (3) an exemption on food, in a context where only
formal goods can be taxed. The columns correspond to the different assumptions on our data. Column (1)
corresponds to the central informality assignment of retailers. Column (2) models a 10% pass-through of
taxes onto prices in the informal sector, following the share of formal inputs in informal firms in Mexico's
census. Column (3) allows for savings rate, which increases linearly from 0 for the bottom decile to 15% for
the top decile, following evidence form consumer finance surveys. Columns (4) and (5) use the alternative
assignment of store types to formality, by using either the probability of formality by store type from
Mexico's census, or by assigning specialized stores to the informal sector instead of the formal sector.


                            Table A7: Percent Change in Gini from Optimal Tax Policy
                                                                     (1)          (2)                  (3)               (4)          (5)            (6)                    (7)
                                                                  Baseline     Baseline +       Baseline + Distri- Probabilistic     Robust              Cross-variety
                                                                 Assignment   VAT on Input butional Savings         Assignment     Assignment                 Elasticity
Tax policy                                                                                                                                          ~C   =1                ~C = 2
Uniform rate, only formal taxed                                     -2.30        -2.02                -1.24            -1.71         -1.54          -2.82                  -1.95
Food rate differentiation, formal & informal taxed                  -3.16        -3.16                -0.96            -3.16         -3.16          -3.16                  -3.16
Food rate differentiation, only formal taxed                        -3.26        -3.11                -1.88            -2.42         -2.03          -3.84                  -2.85
Full rate differentiation, formal & informal taxed (12 goods)       -4.81        -4.81                -2.40            -4.60         -4.81          -4.81                  -4.81
Full rate differentiation, only formal taxed (12 goods)             -4.19        -4.01                -3.11            -3.22         -2.83          -4.73                  -3.82


 This table shows the redistributive impact of different consumption tax policies under different hypothe-
sis, as presented in section 6. Our metric for redistribution is the percent change in Gini from the pre-tax
income distribution to the net-of-tax distribution. We take the average across the 31 countries in the core
sample. The rows correspond to the tax policy scenarios considered. (1) a uniform rate on all goods in a
context where only formal goods can be taxed, (2) optimal tax rates on food and non food goods in a con-
text where both formal and informal goods can be taxed, (3) optimal tax rates on food and non food goods,
in a context where only formal goods can be taxed, (4) optimal tax rates for each of the 12 COICOP-2 digit
level goods in a context where both formal and informal goods can be taxed, and (5) optimal tax rates
for each of the 12 COICOP-2 digit level goods in a context where only formal goods can be taxed. The
columns correspond to the different assumptions on our data. The baseline in column (1) corresponds to
the central assignment of retailers to informality status, and to a value of the cross-variety elasticity of 1.5.
Column (2) adds to the baseline scenario a 10% pass-through of taxes onto prices in the informal sector,
following the share of formal inputs in informal firms in Mexico's census. Column (3) adds the baseline
scenario a distributional savings rate which ranges from 0 for the bottom decile to 15% for the top decile,
following evidence form consumer finance surveys. Columns (4) and (5) use the alternative assignment of
store types to formality. Finally columns (6) and (7) keep the central store assignment to informality but
vary the value of the elasticity of substitution between the formal and informal variety of goods.



                                                                                  71
B     Data Appendix

All statistical codes to replicate the paper are available at https://github.com/
pierrebachas/Informality_Taxes_Redistribution. This includes the cleaning
files for the micro data of each country's survey, as well as all files generating the tables
and figures of the paper.

B.1   Core Sample

Inclusion Criteria

Our dataset consists of 31 nationally representative household expenditure surveys. We
use surveys which satisfy the following four criteria:

    1. The household expenditure survey is nationally representative and dates from the
       21st century.

    2. The expenditure module(s) in the survey is structured as an open consumption
       diary, rather than a pre-fill diaries for a limited set of products.

    3. The expenditure survey includes a variable for the place of purchase (data on where
       each item was purchased). The place of purchases are detailed enough for us to
       apply our taxonomy of store types, as further outlined in section B.2.

    4. The place of purchase variable rarely contains missing values, particularly for food,
       clothing and household goods product categories (see Figure A3).

Data Sources and Coverage

We obtained the data principally from two sources: (i) the World Bank Microdata Li-
brary and (ii) National Statistical Agencies. Our first step for accessing data was to
search the restricted-access World Bank Microdata Library for household Income and
Expenditure, Living Standards, and Budget Surveys to see in which countries criteria
(1)-(4) above appeared to be satisfied. The datasets which satisfied these criteria varied
in their ease of access: for some countries, the micro data were accessible for download
on the World Bank platform, others were licensed and required applications through the
World Bank, which would in turn sometimes contact the country's national statistical
agency for approval. If a survey was listed without its micro through the World Bank
platform, we reached directly the country's' statistical agency. Most countries for which
we requested the data sent us the micro data, but in a few cases we could not obtain data

                                             72
which included the place of purchase variables. The countries which ultimately satisfied
the criteria for inclusion span four regions of the world, concentrated in Sub-Saharan
Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean, as detailed in Table B1. Unfortunately we
were not able to include countries in Asia, since the question on the place of purchase
was almost always missing from their budget surveys.

                                    Table B1: Regional Survey Representation
 Region                     # Countries Pop. of Surveyed Countries Total Pop. Proportion of pop.
                                                 (Millions)        (Millions)
 Sub-Saharan Africa             16                  379               1078           35%
 Middle East & North Africa      2                   48                449           11%
 Europe & Central Asia           2                   9                 918            1%
 Latin America & Carribean      10                  489                641           76%
 East Asia & Pacific             1                   9                2328          0.4%


   While some surveys appeared from their questionnaire to satisfy our criteria, we ul-
timately could not include them, either because of issues with data access, or because
when we looked more closely at the data one of our criteria was violated. For complete-
ness, Table B2 further details countries that were considered, but could not be included/

                           Table B2: Discarded Household Expenditure Surveys
 Country                Survey                                                 Year Reason not Included

 Armenia                Integrated Living Conditions Survey                    2016   PoP often missing
 Bosnia & Herzegovina   Household Budget Survey                                2007   PoP asked as a purchasing habit
 El Salvador            Encuesta de Hogares de Propositos Multiples            2010   PoP often missing; limited product categories
 The Gambia             Integrated Household Survey                            2003   No Data access to PoP
 Gerogia                Integrated Household Survey                            2018   Limited product categories
 Ghana                  Living Standards Survey                                2006   No Data access to PoP
 Guatemala              Encuesta Nacional sobre Condiciones de Vida            2000   PoP often missing; limited product categories
 Mauritius              Household Budget Survey                                2012   PoP asked as a purchasing habit
 Namibia                Namibia Household Income and Expenditure Survey        2015   limited product categories
 Nicaragua              Encuesta Nacional de Hogares sobre Medicion de Nivel   2014   PoP asked as a purchasing habit; limited product categories
 Tajikistan             Household Budget Survey                                2016   limited product categories
 Turkey                 Household Income and Consumption Survey                2009   No Data access to PoP




    Table B3 lists the 31 countries which we could include, with summary statistics and
the structure of each survey. Any slight deviation from our inclusion criteria is outlined
in the last column.




                                                                     73
                                                           Table B3: Household Expenditure Surveys
      Country name    Survey    Year   Source            # HH    # items/HH   Exp/HH          Urban    HH Size   # PoP   # Modules   Product Code       Comments
                                                                              Cst. 2010 USD
      Benin           EMICOV    2015   World Bank        19872      31.9          261         48.2%      4.3      12        22       COICOP
      Bolivia         ECH       2004   Stat. Office      9149       49.4          585         60.7%      4.2      24         3       COICOP
      Brazil          POF       2009   Stat. Office      56049       48           3892        84.4%      3.3      33         8       Country-specific
      Burkina Faso    EICVM     2009   Stat. Office      8404      161.6          563         29.3%      6.7      45         1       COICOP
      Burundi         ECVM      2014   World Bank        6681       90.2          242         9.0%       4.8      13        23       COICOP
      Cameroon        ECAM      2014   World Bank        10303      95.8          1889        44.5%      4.6      17         1       COICOP
      Chad            ECOSIT    2003   World Bank        6747        92           356         10.9%      5.9      17        18       Country-specific
      Chile           EPF       2017   Stat. Office      15237     129.2          6872        100.0%     3.3      22         1       COICOP             No self-production, Only urban
      Colombia        ENIG      2007   Stat. Office      42733      79.6          1850        82.4%      3.8      24         5       COICOP
      Comoros         EDMC      2013   Stat. Office      3139       83.5          1809        49.1%      5        12        19       COICOP
      Congo DRC       E123      2005   World Bank        12098     106.9          198         16.0%      5.3      13         1       COICOP
      Congo Rep       ECOM      2005   World Bank        5002       84.8          641         63.8%      5.1      17         1       COICOP
      Costa Rica      ENIGH     2014   Stat. Office      5705       67.5          5256        73.2%      3.4      41         1       COICOP
      Dominican Rep   ENIGH     2007   Stat. Office      8363       89.1          2396        67.6%      3.7      88         3       COICOP
      Ecuador         ENIGHUR   2012   World Bank        39617      88.6          1923        68.0%      3.9      75         7       COICOP
74




      Eswatini        HIES      2010   World Bank        3167       43.9          1283        37.4%      4.5      13         2       COICOP
      Mexico          ENIGH     2014   Stat. Office      19459      57.4          2272        64.5%      3.8      19         1       COICOP
      Montenegro      HBS       2009   World Bank        1223      148.9          3731        62.7%      3         7         3       COICOP             Cant separate categories 3 & 4
      Morocco         ENCDM     2001   World Bank        14243      87.5          1679        61.6%      5.9      47        17       COICOP
      Mozambique      IOF       2009   World Bank        10809      48.7          363         28.9%      4.7       6         6       COICOP
      Niger           ENCBM     2007   World Bank        4000      221.2          325         17.2%      6.4      15         6       COICOP
      Papua NG        HIES      2010   World Bank        3811      111.2          1002        11.3%      5.1       6         1       COICOP
      Peru            ENAHO     2017   Stat. Office      43545      78.5          2609        76.8%      3.9      41         8       Country-specific
      Rwanda          EICV      2014   World Bank        14419      53.6          417         17.1%      4.6      11         8       COICOP             Pre-filled items
      SaoTome         IOF       2010   World Bank        3145      105.9          705         68.1%      3.8      21         3       COICOP
      Senegal         EDMC      2008   World Bank        1443      517.8          640         100.0%     7.7      41         1       COICOP             Only urban
      Serbia          HBS       2015   World Bank        6531       106           1888        61.9%      2.8       9         2       COICOP
      South Africa    IES       2011   U. of Cape Town   25325      44.2          3557        67.3%      3.8       6         1       COICOP             Cant separate categories 3 & 4
      Tanzania        HBS       2012   World Bank        10186     317.8          478         21.9%      5        13         2       COICOP             Cant separate categories 3 & 4
      Tunisia         ENBCNV    2010   Stat. Office      11281     139.1          1732        67.6%      4.3       9         1       COICOP             Cant separate categories 3 & 4
      Uruguay         ENIGH     2005   Stat. Office      7042       77.5          2855        84.9%      3        39         1       COICOP

     The column '# PoP' refers to the number of different places of purchase in the country classification.
Consumption Module Structure

Expenditure surveys do not have a fully homogeneous structure across countries. Table
B3 presents information on their structure and we provide a summary below:

   · Number and frequency of modules
     The number of consumption modules ranges from 1 to 17 across countries in the
     sample. All surveys have a module which is a diary of consumption over some
     short to medium period of time and some countries complement these with recall
     modules for more infrequent purchases. For example, Costa Rica has a single con-
     sumption module, while Morocco has 17, with modules specialized by frequency
     and products. Surveys with multiple modules typically asked for consumption
     linked to the frequency of expenditures (e.g. weekly diary, quarterly recall).

   · Durables
     Durable items, which are not purchased frequently are included whenever avail-
     able, but their inclusion is more probable in surveys which have recall modules.

   · Self-production
     Self production is included as a "place of purchase" for all countries but Chile
     where it was not available. In some countries, it was pre-coded as an option for
     the place of purchase, while in other cases we added it as a place of purchase
     based on other variables, such as "mode of acquisition," which had "purchased or
     "self/home production." Self-production values are typically asked as value if you
     had purchased(or sold) this item at a market place.

   · Product codes
     All surveys have product codes for each consumption item, which typically follow
     the United Nations Classification of Individual Consumption According to Pur-
     pose (COICOP) or which we could matheced to the COICOP with a cross-walk.
     For a few countries the COICOP classification was not available and we could not
     find a product crosswalk. We used the nationally-specific product classification
     scheme for these countries (Brazil, Chad, Peru and Tunisia).




                                          75
B.2    Categories of Places of Purchase

Our core sample of 31 surveys has by construction a place of purchase for each house-
hold purchase. Evidently, the names of places of purchases (PoP) available to respon-
dents differ across countries. However, the places of purchases can be classified into
broad categories which are approximately equivalent across countries. We detail below
the taxonomy used in this paper, which separates the consumption of goods into five
broad categories of places of purchase, and services into four broad categories.

      · Goods

(1) Non-market consumption (e.g. Self-production)
(2) Market consumption, no store front (e.g. markets, street stalls)
(3) Market consumption, corner and convenience shops
(4) Market consumption, specialized shops (e.g. brand stores, bakeries)
(5) Market consumption, large stores (e.g. supermarkets, malls)

      · Services

(6) Services provided by institutions (e.g. bank, hospital, university)
(7) Service provided by individuals (e.g. maid services, gardening)
(8) Entertainment (e.g. restaurants, hotels)
(9) Informal Entertainment (e.g. food truck)

      · Unspecified

(99) N.A/other (e.g. other, not applicable, unspecified)

    The majority of countries have places of purchase for each of the five good categories.
In some countries one of these categories is missing, all such cases are reported in the last
column of table B3. Four countries in particular do not distinguish between specialized
stores (category 4) and corner/convenience stores (category 3). For these countries we
imputed at the decile level the relative shares of categories 3 and 4, based on countries
with income up to 50% smaller or larger.
    For services, it is more frequent that some of categories are missing. In particular
some countries do not have a detailed list of institutions as potential places of purchases
for services. These are typically also countries in which the share of expenditures with

                                               76
                                                       Figure B1: Average Share of Unspecified Category by COICOP




                                                           60
                                                                           Utilities, Telecom, Gas
                                                                           Health & Education
           Share of Unspecified Place of Purchase (in %)                   Diverse G&S, Recreation

                                                           50
                                                                           Other
                                                           40
                                                           30
                                                           20
                                                           10
                                                           0




                                                                BI CD NE MZ BF TD RW TZ BJ ST SN KM CM BO PG MA CG TN SZ DO EC CO RS PE ME ZA CR UY MX BR CL




an 'unspecified' place of purchase is relatively large. Indeed when looking at what types
of products compose the unspecified category, over half are utilities, while the remaining
is principally education and health spending.
    Finally, we assign the remaining places of purchase that are harder to categorize
(as purchases over the internet or from abroad) to category (6) "services provided by
institutions". While this might not be accurate, we note that these PoP typically represent
a very small share of total expenditure.
    The countries-specific assignment of places of purchase to the broad categories pre-
sented above is detailed in Table B4, for each PoP representing more than 0.5% of total
purchases. The table also reports the share of expenditures purchased from each cate-
gory, including the unspecified category.
    Finally, we note that, to the best of our knowledge, the only other project which con-
structs a common taxonomy of places of purchases across countries is the International
Price Comparison (ICP) project, which builds purchasing power parity indexes. The
ICP provides a store type classifier for marketed consumption which is used by individ-
ual countries to obtain price quotes from a variety of retailer types. Our classification
mirrors that of the ICP.




                                                                                                      77
B.3   Global Consumption Database

A limitation of our core sample of 31 countries is that it tends to be geographically
clustered and in particular does not contain countries in Asia. To obtain an idea on
whether our results might be relevant for all low and middle income countries, we com-
pare food expenditure with that of the Global Consumption Database (GCD). The GCD
is the most comprehensive data source on consumer spending patterns in developing
countries to date, by assembling all available representative household expenditure sur-
veys across countries. In particular, it includes most countries in Asia. The dataset
is curated by the World Bank: aggregatef consumption statistics and further details
on sources and methodology are available at http://datatopics.worldbank.org/
consumption/.
    We obtained access to the Global Consumption Database microdata, in order to com-
pare food expenditure in our core sample of 31 countries to the 79 low and middle
income countries available in the GCD. From our sample of 31 countries, 21 countries
overlap with the GCD and usually have the exact same survey as an original source.
With this enhanced dataset, which represents 51% of the world population,56 we mea-
sure food consumption as a share of total consumption and the slope of the food Engel
curve. First we note that for the 21 overlapping countries we find Engel curve slopes
within 5% of the GDC estimate. Second we compare food expenditure patterns in our
core sample 31 countries to the 58 countries which only appears in the GCD. We find
remarkably similar food expenditure shares and food Engel curve slopes, as a function
of development, which supports that our core sample informality measures could be in-
formative to the entire population located in developing countries, with the caveat that
informality patterns might still differ geographically.




  56 We  exclude rich countries by design, but a few populous countries such as China, Egypt and Iran are
not part of the GCD. This explains the lion's share of the missing population in the GCD sample.

                                                   78
                                    Table B4: Country-Specific Places of Purchase
                                                   BENIN                                                                                       CAMEROON
Assigned %      Original name                                 Classification              Assigned %      Original name                                     Classification
Formal   1.9    autre lieu d'achat formel sur le territoir    5 large stores              Formal   1.0    Supermarche/Grand magasin                         5 large stores
                                                                                                   3.8    Magasin specialistes                              4 specialized shops
         0.7    achat dans un super march´    e               5 large stores
                                                                                                   2.9    Presetation de services publics                   6 institutions
         0.6    achat dans un magasin ou un atelier formel    4 specialized shops                  7.5    Secteur transport                                 6 institutions
         2.8    achat au secteur public ou parapublic         6 institutions                       2.1    Cliniques                                         6 institutions
Informal 28.3   achat au domicile du vendeur, dans une pet    3 corner shops                       7.0    Hotels/bars/restaurants                           8 entertainment
         22.8   achat sur un march´  e public                 2 no store front            Informal 10.7   Epiceries/Boutiques/Echoppes                      3 corner shops
         26.1   achat chez un ambulant, ou poste fixe sur     2 no store front                     0.8    Vendeurs specialises hors magasins                2 no store front
         7.0    autre lieu d'achat informel (ind´ ependant)   1 non-market                         3.4    Kiosque de jeux et Call Box                       2 no store front
         0.6    cadeau recu                                   1 non-market                         3.4    Vente ambulante                                   2 no store front
                                                                                                   26.4   Marches                                           2 no store front
         8.6    bien ou service autoproduit                   1 non-market                         14.8   Don, cadeau recu                                  1 non-market
Unspec. 0.0     other                                         99 n.a./other                        1.9    Domicile de vendeur                               1 non-market
                                              BOLIVIA                                              3.6    Auto production                                   1 non-market
Formal   0.9    supermercado                                  5 large stores                       0.9    Dans la nature/forit/brousse                      1 non-market
         11.5   tienda especializada                          4 specialized shops                  2.5    Prestation de services individuels                7 service from individual
         1.2              ´ de salud
                institucion                                   6 institutions              Unspec. 7.3     Other                                             99 n.a./other
         0.5    comunicacion  ´                               6 institutions                                                                   CHAD
                                                                                          Formal   0.7    Supermarche                                       5 large stores
         3.5    instituto educativo                           6 institutions
                                                                                                   5.7    Boutique                                          4 specialized shops
         1.5    hotel, bar, restaurante                       8 entertainment                      1.1    Magasins                                          4 specialized shops
Informal 14.2   tienda de conveniencia                        3 corner shops                       0.6    Prestataire service sant´  e public               6 institutions
         2.0    vendedor ambulante                            2 no store front                     4.1    Autre prestataire de service priv´     e          6 institutions
         3.5    puesto/kiosco                                 2 no store front                     0.7    Enseignement priv´    e                           6 institutions
         3.9    feria                                         2 no store front                     0.7    Transport priv´  e                                6 institutions
         19.2   mercado                                       2 no store front                     0.6    Enseignement public                               6 institutions
         1.5    auto consumo                                  1 non-market                         0.9    Autre prestataire de service public               6 institutions
                                                                                                   0.6    Prestataire service sant´  e priv´ e              6 institutions
         1.9    de un hogar / transferencia                   1 non-market
                                                                                                   1.6       ^
                                                                                                          Hotel,  Restaurant, ..                            8 entertainment
         5.4    cantina                                       9 informal entertainment    Informal 0.5    Echoppe                                           3 corner shops
Unspec. 28.0    other                                         99 n.a./other                        2.6    Marchand ambulant                                 2 no store front
                                                BRAZIL                                             25.8   March´ e de quartier ou sp´   ecialis´e           2 no store front
Formal   11.5   supermarket                                   5 large stores                       30.1   March´ e centraux                                 2 no store front
         0.7    department store                              5 large stores                       1.2    Tablier                                           2 no store front
         22.1   specialized shop                              4 specialized shops                  17.3   Self-Consumption                                  1 non-market
                                                                                          Unspec. 4.9     Other                                             99 n.a./other
         6.5    vehicle                                       4 specialized shops
                                                                                                                                               CHILE
         4.0    pharmacy                                      4 specialized shops         Formal   26.5   supermercados                                     5 large stores
         0.7    bank                                          6 institutions                       4.3    distribuidoras - mayoristas                       5 large stores
         0.6    internet                                      6 institutions                       1.6             ´ y multiferreterIas
                                                                                                          ferreterIas                   ´                   4 specialized shops
         1.5    health institution                            6 institutions                       0.5    tienda especializada                              4 specialized shops
         2.5    education institution                         6 institutions                       4.9    farmacias                                         4 specialized shops
         0.5    lottery                                       6 institutions                       2.0    internet                                          6 institutions
         2.7    restaurant                                    8 entertainment                      0.5    extranjero                                        6 institutions
                                                                                                   2.4                 ´
                                                                                                          hospital pUblico    y consultorios                6 institutions
Informal 3.4    grocery store                                 3 corner shops
                                                                                                   5.4      ´
                                                                                                          clInicas                                          6 institutions
         0.8    small shop                                    2 no store front
                                                                                                   1.0    restaurantes y bares                              8 entertainment
         1.2    fair                                          2 no store front                                   ´ tradicional
                                                                                          Informal 13.3   almacEn                                           3 corner shops
         1.4    small market                                  2 no store front                     3.3    ferias libres                                     2 no store front
         1.4    street seller                                 2 no store front                     2.9    comercio ambulante                                2 no store front
         8.3    person                                        1 non-market                         0.9    vegas - mercados                                  2 no store front
         4.8    private service                               7 service from individual   Unspec. 30.5    other                                             99 n.a./other
         2.1    bar-cafe                                      9 informal entertainment                                                     COLOMBIA
         0.5    recreation events                             9 informal entertainment    Formal   4.7    Supermercados de barrio                           5 large stores
                                                                                                   10.1   Almacenes o supermercados de cadena y tien        5 large stores
Unspec. 20.8    other                                         99 n.a./other
                                                                                                   2.1    Plazas de mercado y galer´      ias               5 large stores
                                          BURKINA FASO                                             0.6    Hipermercados                                     5 large stores
Formal   0.6    magasin de gros a petits prix                 5 large stores                       11.1   Establecimientos especializados en la vent        4 specialized shops
         0.7    grands magasin                                5 large stores                       1.7    Farmacias y droguer´     ias                      10 pharmacies
         0.5    quincallerie (petite taille)                  4 specialized shops                  1.0    Televentas y ventas por cat´     alogo            6 institutions
         1.3    atelier, service reparation                   4 specialized shops                  5.1    Restaurantes                                      8 entertainment
         1.7    station service (lubrifiants)                 4 specialized shops         Informal 0.9    Graneros                                          3 corner shops
         1.0    pharmacie                                     4 specialized shops                  13.5   Tiendas de barrio                                 3 corner shops
                                                                                                   1.7    Vendedores ambulantes o ventas callejeras         2 no store front
         1.0    clinique, laboratoire medical public          6 institutions
                                                                                                   1.1    Persona particular                                1 non-market
         0.7    ecole, lycee, universite publics              6 institutions                       0.9    Transfers, from household                         1 non-market
         1.2    ecole, lycees, universite privas              6 institutions                       10.3   Self production                                   1 non-market
         0.6    cabine telephone privee                       6 institutions                       1.0    Cafeter´ ias y establecimientos de comidas        9 informal entertainment
         2.0    telephone, eau, electricite                   6 institutions              Unspec. 32.9    Other                                             99 n.a./other
         1.8    bar, cafe, restaurant, hotel                  8 entertainment                                                              COMOROS
Informal 14.3   boutique de quartier                          3 corner shops              Formal   2.0    Achat dans un super march´        e               5 large stores
         0.9    kiosque ou echoppe quartier                   2 no store front                     16.9   Autre lieu d'achat formel                         5 large stores
                                                                                                   4.9    Achat dans un magasin ou un atelier formel        4 specialized shops
         40.5   marche                                        2 no store front                     8.3    Achat dans un magasin ou un atelier formel        4 specialized shops
         1.0    marchant ambulants                            2 no store front                     6.1    Achat hors lieu de r´  esidence ou a   ` l'´
                                                                                                                                                     etr    6 institutions
         10.1   bien ou service autoproduit                   1 non-market                         8.6    Achat au secteur public ou parapublic             6 institutions
         12.4   menage                                        1 non-market                Informal 19.1   Achat au domicile du vendeur, dans une pet        3 corner shops
         0.5    cadeau recu en nature ou en espace            1 non-market                                                               CONGO DRC
         2.1    autres service prives                         7 service from individual            12.6   Achat sur un march´     e public                  2 no store front
         1.4    service de transport prive                    7 service from individual            5.5    Achat chez un ambulant, ou poste fixe sur         2 no store front
                                                                                                   4.2    Bien ou service autoproduit                       1 non-market
Unspec. 0.3     other                                         99 n.a./other
                                                                                                   2.3    Cadeau rec   ¸u                                   1 non-market
                                              BURUNDI                                              8.3    Autre lieu d'achat informel (ind´     ependant)   1 non-market
Formal   3.6    Autre lieu d'achat formel                     5 large stores              Formal   0.5    Achat supermarche                                 5 large stores
         0.8    Magasin, atelier formel (societe) tenu        4 specialized shops                  3.2    Achat magasin indo-pakistanais                    4 specialized shops
         2.0    Secteur public ou parapublic                  6 institutions                       3.1    Achat secteur public                              6 institutions
Informal 26.8   Domicile du vendeur, petite boutique          3 corner shops              Informal 3.8    Achat magasin non indo-pakistanais                3 corner shops
         32.9   Marche public                                 2 no store front                     36.5   Achat marche public                               2 no store front
         3.9    Vendeur ambulant ou poste fixe sur voie       2 no store front                     10.1   Achat Ambulant                                    2 no store front
                                                                                                   17.5   Bien ou service autoproduit                       1 non-market
         0.9    Cadeau Recu                                   1 non-market
                                                                                                   5.8    Autre lieu informel                               1 non-market
         14.3   Bien ou service autoproduit                   1 non-market                         17.9   Achat domicile                                    1 non-market
         13.9   Autre lieu d'achat informel                   1 non-market                         1.4    Cadeau recu                                       1 non-market
Unspec. 0.0     Other                                         99 n.a./other               Unspec. 0.1     Other                                             99 n.a./other
                                                                               79
                                                  COSTA RICA                                                                         ESWATINI
Assigned %      Original name                                   Classification              Assigned %      Original name                               Classification
Formal   1.2    tienda por departamentos                        5 large stores              Formal   27.5   supermarket                                 5 large stores
         17.1   supermercado                                    5 large stores
                                                                                                     1.4    butchery                                    4 specialized shops
         11.3   local especializado                             4 specialized shops
         4.3    gasolinera y estacion  ´ de servicio            4 specialized shops                  1.7    hardware store                              4 specialized shops
         1.1    carnicer´ ia / pescader´ ia                     4 specialized shops                  5.6    clothes/footwear/linen                      4 specialized shops
         1.0    salones de est´  etica o belleza                4 specialized shops         Informal 5.8    grocery                                     3 corner shops
         3.4    almac´ en de electrodom´    esticos y de tecnol 4 specialized shops                  0.5    spaza                                       3 corner shops
         3.4    tienda de ropa / zapater´    ia / perfumer´ ia  4 specialized shops                  4.0    street vendor                               2 no store front
         1.9    laboratorio / cl´  inica / centro m´ edico      6 institutions                       1.9    market                                      2 no store front
         1.1    en el exterior                                  6 institutions                       11.2   gifts/transfers                             1 non-market
         3.9    restaurante / soda / cafeter´    ia / helader   8 entertainment
                comedor en lugar de trabajo                     8 entertainment
                                                                                                     6.9    self production                             1 non-market
         1.7
Informal 6.2    pulper´ ia o minisuper                          3 corner shops              Unspec. 33.4    other                                       99 n.a./other
         2.4    vendedor ambulante o a domicilio                2 no store front                                                        MEXICO
         0.5    feria del agricultor                            2 no store front            Formal   2.1    tiendas departamentales                     5 large stores
         0.8    local de art´ iculos usados                     2 no store front                     1.0    tiendas con membresia                       5 large stores
         9.1    recibido o comprado a otros hogares             1 non-market                         11.4   supermercados                               5 large stores
         0.8    retiro del negocio                              1 non-market                         21.1   tiendas especificas del ramo                4 specialized shops
Unspec. 25.1    other                                           99 n.a./other
                                                                                                     0.5    compras fuera del pais                      6 institutions
                                       DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Formal   3.8    tienda por departamentos                        5 large stores
                                                                                                     0.7    diconsa                                     6 institutions
         3.6    supermercados                                   5 large stores                       2.4    restaurantes                                8 entertainment
         0.7    tienda de respuestos de vehiculos               4 specialized shops         Informal 12.8   tiendas de abarrotes                        3 corner shops
         1.1    taller de mecanica en general, desabulladu 4 specialized shops                       0.6    tiendas de conveniencia                     3 corner shops
         0.6    puesto de rifa de aguante y loteria electr      4 specialized shops                  5.6    persona particular                          2 no store front
         1.2    tienda de ropa                                  4 specialized shops                  3.1    vendedores ambulantes                       2 no store front
         1.0    ferreterias                                     4 specialized shops                  2.0    tianguis o mercado sobre ruedas             2 no store front
         0.8    carniceria                                      4 specialized shops
                                                                                                     3.7    mercado                                     2 no store front
         1.2    tienda de electrodomesticos                     4 specialized shops
         0.5    peluqueria                                      4 specialized shops                  1.3    auto produccion´                            1 non-market
         1.4    salon de belleza                                4 specialized shops                  2.6    loncherias, fondas, torterias , cocina      9 informal entertainment
         2.3    farmacias                                       4 specialized shops         Unspec. 28.8    other                                       99 n.a./other
         1.2    compania~ de tel´   efonos                      6 institutions                                                      MONTENEGRO
         1.9    envasadora de gas                               6 institutions              Formal   17.2   supermarket                                 5 large stores
         1.8    comedor popular                                 6 institutions                       36.2   store                                       4 specialized shops
         2.4    clinica                                         6 institutions              Informal 5.3    stall                                       2 no store front
         1.3    hospitales                                      6 institutions
         1.7    corporacion ´ de electricidad                   6 institutions
                                                                                                     5.3    own production                              1 non-market
         3.5           ´ de gasolina
                estacion                                        6 institutions              Unspec. 35.8    other                                       99 n.a./other
         1.5    colegio                                         6 institutions                                                            MOROCCO
         0.5    restaurante                                     8 entertainment             Formal   0.7    Gas stations (benzine)                      4 specialized shops
Informal 20.3   colmado                                         3 corner shops                       0.5    Small Bookshop, kiosk                       4 specialized shops
         0.7    almacen de provisiones                          3 corner shops                       0.8    Modern clothing shop                        4 specialized shops
         0.6    picapollo                                       2 no store front                     3.1    Butcher or retail chicken seller            4 specialized shops
         0.5    puesto de pollo                                 2 no store front
                                                                                                     1.2    Craftsman's shop (hairdresser, tailor)      4 specialized shops
         3.2    vendedora ambulante                             2 no store front
         1.2    mercados                                        2 no store front                     1.8    Pharmacy                                    10 pharmacies
         0.9    puestos de venta                                2 no store front                     35.5   Public and semi-public agencies             6 institutions
         1.9    autoproduction                                  1 non-market                         1.5    Regular transportation means (bus, train,   6 institutions
         1.6    cafeteria                                       9 informal entertainment             1.7    Public administration                       6 institutions
Unspec. 29.5    other                                           99 n.a./other                        0.7    Public baths, shower, swimming pool         6 institutions
                                                   ECUADOR                                           4.1    Private education institution               6 institutions
Formal   4.0    supermercados de cadena                         5 large stores                       1.3    Medical care in private institution         6 institutions
         1.2    hipermercados                                   5 large stores
                                                                                            Informal 1.9    Grocer's                                    3 corner shops
         0.5    repuestos de automotores                        4 specialized shops
         0.5    tercena/carnicera                               4 specialized shops                  9.7    Neighborhood or village grocer              3 corner shops
         1.3    librerias y papelerias                          4 specialized shops                  2.6    Neighborhood market                         2 no store front
         1.4    otros sitios de compra especializados           4 specialized shops                  1.3    Itinerant merchant selling on sidewalks     2 no store front
         1.0    salas de belleza                                4 specialized shops                  10.7   Weekly market                               2 no store front
         0.5    computadoras y accesorios                       4 specialized shops                  0.5    City market or central market               2 no store front
         1.1    gasolineras                                     4 specialized shops                  3.6    Self production/consumption                 1 non-market
         2.1    electrodomesticos y accesorios                  4 specialized shops
                                                                                                     0.7    Cafe, non-standing restaurant               9 informal entertainment
         4.1    ropa de todo tipo                               4 specialized shops
         1.9    calzado de todo tipo                            4 specialized shops
                                                                                            Unspec. 11.2    Other                                       99 n.a./other
         1.2    panaderas                                       4 specialized shops                                                 MOZAMBIQUE
         1.2    mecanicas automotrices                          4 specialized shops         Formal   8.8    loja                                        4 specialized shops
         0.8    muebles y enceres                               4 specialized shops         Informal 18.6   mercado informal                            2 no store front
         5.1    boticas y farmacias                             4 specialized shops                  12.2   mercado                                     2 no store front
         2.2    establecimientos privados de salud              6 institutions                       31.5   auto produc  ~o
                                                                                                                        ¸a                              1 non-market
         4.7    establecimientos educativos                     6 institutions              Unspec. 28.5    Other                                       99 n.a./other
         0.5    instituciones publicas                          6 institutions
                                                                                                                                         NIGER
         2.2    transporte de pasajeros                         6 institutions
         1.2    venta por cat·logo o television                 6 institutions              Formal   2.6    Clinique, laboratoire, ecole                6 institutions
         0.6    aseguradoras                                    6 institutions                       6.7    Prestation services publiques               6 institutions
         1.4    servicios profesionales (abogados, arqu)        6 institutions                       6.4    Secteur transport                           6 institutions
         2.3    restaurantes, salones                           8 entertainment                      1.5    Hotel, bar restaurant                       8 entertainment
Informal 12.8   tiendas de barrio                               3 corner shops              Informal 27.1   Epicerie, boutique                          3 corner shops
         1.5    bodegas, distribuidores                         3 corner shops                       13.0   Marche                                      2 no store front
         10.4   mercados                                        2 no store front                     2.9    Vente ambulante                             2 no store front
         1.1    ferias libres                                   2 no store front
                                                                                                     1.6    Cadeau recu                                 1 non-market
         2.0    vendedores ambulantes                           2 no store front
         11.1   productos autoconsumo, autosuministro           1 non-market                         15.2   Auto production                             1 non-market
         0.9    personas particulares                           7 service from individual            4.7    Prestation service individuels              7 service from individual
Unspec. 12.9    other                                           99 n.a./other               Unspec. 18.1    Other                                       99 n.a./other




                                                                                      80
                                     PAPUA NEW GUINEA                                                                                 SENEGAL
Assigned %      Original name                              Classification              Assigned %      Original name                                Classification
Formal   34.5   Supermarket                                5 large stores              Formal   2.0    Station service (carburants, lubrifiants,e   4 specialized shops
Informal 9.4    Small shop, canteen, tuck shop             3 corner shops                       1.8    Boulangerie, p^   atisserie                  4 specialized shops
         10.5   Local market                               2 no store front                     1.2    Service de transport public                  6 institutions
         3.8    Street vendor                              2 no store front                     11.6   Bar, caf´                  ^
                                                                                                               e, restaurant, hotel                 8 entertainment
         14.2   Home production                            1 non-market
                                                                                       Informal 40.3   Boutique de quartier                         3 corner shops
         10.2   Gift                                       1 non-market
                                                                                                0.6    Marchand Ambulant                            2 no store front
Unspec. 17.6    Other                                      99 n.a./other
                                               PERU                                             10.8   Kiosque ou e   ´ choppe au quartier          2 no store front
Formal   3.4    Supermercado                               5 large stores                       16.3   March´ es                                    2 no store front
         1.1    Bodega (por mayor)                         5 large stores                       3.5    Cadeau rec  ¸ u en nature                    1 non-market
         0.8    Panader´  ia                               4 specialized shops                  1.6    Bien ou service autoproduit                  1 non-market
         0.6    Peluquer´  ia                              4 specialized shops                  1.2    Autres services priv´   es                   7 service from individual
         0.9    Librer´ia                                  4 specialized shops                  5.1    Service de transport priv´   e               7 service from individual
         0.5    Tienda especializada al por mayor          4 specialized shops         Unspec. 1.4     Other                                        99 n.a./other
         5.8    Tienda especializada al por menor          4 specialized shops                                                          SERBIE
         3.6    Farmacia                                   10 pharmacies               Formal   8.9    Hypermarket                                  5 large stores
         3.4    Empresas de Transporte formales            6 institutions                       23.8   Specialized shop                             4 specialized shops
         1.6    Centro de estudios                         6 institutions                       2.9    Discounted shop                              4 specialized shops
         1.3    Grifos de empresas                         6 institutions              Informal 29.6   Minimarket                                   3 corner shops
         0.5    Talleres formales                          6 institutions
                                                                                                4.8    Market/open                                  2 no store front
         0.6    Cl´
                  inica particular                         6 institutions
                                                                                                1.8    Gray economy                                 2 no store front
         1.0    Restaurantes y/o ´ bares                   8 entertainment
Informal 14.6   Bodega (por menor)                         3 corner shops
                                                                                                5.3    Own production/Own business                  1 non-market
         24.0   Mercado (por menor)                        2 no store front                     2.2    Gifts/received transfers                     1 non-market
         2.7    Feria                                      2 no store front            Unspec. 20.7    Other                                        99 n.a./other
         3.3    Mercado (por mayor)                        2 no store front                                                        SOUTH AFRICA
         5.0    Ambulante                                  2 no store front            Formal   38.6   Chain store                                  5 large stores
         0.5    Empresas de Transporte informales          7 service from individual            11.2   Other retailer                               4 specialized shops
Unspec. 22.3    Other                                      99 n.a./other               Informal 0.9    Street trading                               2 no store front
                                      CONGO REPUBLIC                                            2.7    Other                                        2 no store front
Formal   1.0    Grands magasins                            5 large stores                       0.6    From a household                             1 non-market
         7.0    Autres commerces modernes                  4 specialized shops         Unspec. 45.7    Other                                        99 n.a./other
         3.9    Secteur transports                         6 institutions                                                            TANZANIA
         2.5    Cliniques, laboratoires m´           ´ col
                                          edicaux et e     6 institutions              Formal   0.5    Duka kubwa(Department stores)                5 large stores
         5.8    Prestataires de services publics           6 institutions                       37.3   Shop                                         4 specialized shops
         3.9    Hotels, restaurants, bars, cafes           8 entertainment
                                                                                       Informal 2.4    Street vendor                                2 no store front
Informal 3.4    Epiceries modernes                         3 corner shops
                                                                                                22.8   Market                                       2 no store front
         8.4    Echoppes sur marches et sur bord de route 2 no store front
         6.2    Marchands ambulants                        2 no store front                     4.7    Other household                              1 non-market
         42.8   Marches                                    2 no store front                     0.5    Gift from other household                    1 non-market
         3.9    M´enages                                   1 non-market                         16.0   Produced by household                        1 non-market
         4.5    Produit autoconsommes                      1 non-market                         1.8    Gift or free                                 1 non-market
         0.5    Cadeau recu                                1 non-market                Unspec. 13.7    Other                                        99 n.a./other
         5.5    Prestataires de services individuels       7 service from individual                                                   TUNISIA
Unspec. 0.0     Other                                      99 n.a./other               Formal   1.3    Hyper, supermarche                           5 large stores
                                                RWANDA                                          67.8   Boutique privee                              4 specialized shops
Formal   0.6    Supermarket/big shop                       5 large stores              Informal 1.2    Point de vente marche                        2 no store front
         4.6    Specialized shop                           4 specialized shops                  4.5    Ambulant                                     2 no store front
         2.4    Bar/restaurant                             8 entertainment                      1.6    Cadeau                                       1 non-market
Informal 13.5   Small shop/boutique                        3 corner shops                       1.3    Auto production                              1 non-market
         1.7    Individual                                 2 no store front
                                                                                       Unspec. 22.2    Other                                        99 n.a./other
         0.8    Mobile seller                              2 no store front
                                                                                                                                      URUGUAY
         12.5   Market                                     2 no store front
         11.5   Self production                            1 non-market
                                                                                       Formal   11.7   autoservicio, cadena de supermercados        5 large stores
         26.5   From a household                           1 non-market                         1.0    shopping o galeria                           5 large stores
         13.1   Service provider                           7 service from individual            0.5    barraca, ferreteria, vidrieria               4 specialized shops
Unspec. 12.7    Other                                      99 n.a./other                        1.3    casa de electrodomesticos, telefonos         4 specialized shops
                                           SAO TOME                                             0.7    verduleria, puesto, fruteria                 4 specialized shops
Formal   5.2    Lojas modernas                             5 large stores                       0.9    zapateria, marroquineria, talabarteria       4 specialized shops
         5.4    Grandes Lojas                              5 large stores                       2.3    merceria, tienda                             4 specialized shops
         1.3    Outros comercios modernos                  4 specialized shops                  1.5    panaderia, confiteria                        4 specialized shops
         0.5    Clinicas laboratorios medicos Hospitais    6 institutions                       2.6    carniceria, polleria, pescaderia             4 specialized shops
         0.8    Sector de transportes                      6 institutions                       0.7    farmacia, perfumeria, panalera               4 specialized shops
         4.3    Prestates de servicios publicos            6 institutions                       0.8    fuera del pais                               6 institutions
         0.9    Hotels, restaurantes, bares, cafes         8 entertainment                      0.5    cantina, trabajo, colegio                    8 entertainment
Informal 33.9   Quiosque / Quitanda                        3 corner shops                       0.9    restaurante, parrillada                      8 entertainment
         24.0   Mercado                                    2 no store front
                                                                                       Informal 7.8    almacen                                      3 corner shops
         7.8    Vendedor Ambulante                         2 no store front
                                                                                                0.1    almacen de ramos generales                   3 corner shops
         0.5    Prendas Recebidas                          1 non-market
         0.9    Campo, mato                                1 non-market                         1.0    vendedor ambulante, puesto callejero, carr   2 no store front
         1.9    Auto Consumo                               1 non-market                         0.7    quiosco, salon                               2 no store front
         0.6    Autoabastecimento                          1 non-market                         1.5    feria vecinal                                2 no store front
         3.7    Prestates de servicios individuais         7 service from individual            0.5    distribuidor o repartidor a domicilio        1 non-market
         1.6    Candongueiro                               7 service from individual            0.8    bar, pizzeria                                9 informal entertainment
Unspec. 6.4     Other                                      99 n.a./other               Unspec. 59.6    other                                        99 n.a./other




                                                                           81
C     Theory Appendix

C.1   Proof of expression (4)

Under our assumption that p j1  p j0 ,  j we can write the uncompensated elasticity of
product j as a function of the uncompensated elasticities of varieties j1 and j0 and the
cross-variety price elasticities in the following way:


                        j   =   j1 (1 -  j ) + j0  j           +   j1,0 (1 -  j ) + j0,1  j                      (10)
                 p x
                   0 0
   where  j = px       is the share of informal consumption in total consumption of the
product and j0,1 it the elasticity of demand for the informal variety with respect to the
price of the formal variety.
   Writing C  j the compensated price elasticity of product j the Slutsky equation is j =
 C -  s . Using this and the equalities  =  (1 -  ) +   and s = s + s we
 j     j j                                     j     j1       j      j0 j    j j1    j0
obtain:
                         C    C             C       C                 C
                         j = j1 (1 -  j ) + j0  j + j1,0 (1 -  j ) + j0,1  j            (11)

   Slutsky symmetry implies C                      C
                                 j1,0 (1 -  j ) = j0,1  j . Using our assumptions of equal
compensated cross-variety elasticity across products ( C            C
                                                            j0,1 = ~ ,  j) , equal compensated
own-price elasticity across varieties within products ( C            C
                                                              j1 = j0 ,  j) and equal compen-
sated own-price elasticities across products ( C j =
                                                       C ,  j), and re-arranging, we obtain:


                                               C           C
                                               j1   =          - 2 ~C j                                          (12)

    To obtain an expression for the compensated price elasticity                              j1 ,   the parameter of
interest, we use the Slutsky equation again and obtain:

                                                    C
                                      j1   =            - 2 ~ C  j -  j1 s j1                                    (13)

C.2   Proof of Proposition 1

In what follows we assume that all product and variety Engel curves are linear with
respect to log household income. Taking a first-order Taylor approximations around
yi = y                   ¯ ) = s j we can write sij = s j +  j (i - 1) where  j is the slope of
     ¯ and assuming sij (y
the EC for product j. We can then write the tax rate on a product j when all varieties are
taxed as:




                                                           82
                                                                              i -1
                                                 i (g -
                                                    ¯     g i )  i (1 +  j     sj )
                                       j =                                               (14)
                                                             -g    j

   The change in the optimal rate over the development path, holding efficiency consid-
erations constant ( j = 0), can therefore be written as:

                                                         ¯ - g i )  i (  i - 1)
                                            j  j s j i ( g
                                     j =     (   -    )                                  (15)
                                           sj  j   sj        -g j
             ¯ - g i )  i (  i -1)
            (g
   where i    -g j     > 0.
   Similarly we can write the tax rate on a product j when only formal varieties are
taxed as:

                                                                               i -1
                                                 i (g -
                                                    ¯     g i )  i (1 +  j1   s j1 )
                                       j =                                               (16)
                                                             -g    j1

   and

                                            j1  j1 s j1 i ( g¯ - g i )  i (  i - 1)
                               j =             (    -      )                             (17)
                                           s j1  j1   s j1       - g j1
    The first part of proposition 1 states that the redistribution gain from taxing all formal
varieties uniformly is decreasing over the development path, ie that equity considera-
tions push the optimal uniform rate 1       downwards with development. Applying the

above to the case of 1    , we find that that, holding efficiency considerations constant,

1   < 0 if the following condition holds:


                                                         1  s
                                                           < 1                           (18)
                                                        1    s1
The negative slope of the Informality Engel Curves implies  1 > 0. Equity considerations
therefore push the optimal uniform rate down over the development path as long as the
formal aggregate budget share s1 increases faster than the slope of the Engel curve for
all varieties  1 , which is minus the slope of the Informality Engel Curve depicted in the
paper. This proves the first part of the proposition.
    To prove the second part of the proposition, which relates to how the efficiency cost
of taxing all formal varieties changes over the development path, start from expression
(4) in the paper for a `product' consisting of all formal varieties. Writing 1 this product's
income effect, s1 it's budget share,  the share of all formal varieties in total consumption,
we obtain:

                                                           83
                              C
                      1   =       - 2 ~ C  - 1 s 1 =   C
                                                           - 2 ~ C  - 1 ( 1 -  )          (19)

   where the last expression is obtained by using s1 = (1 - ). The change in          1   over
the development path, under our assumptions, can therefore be written as:

                                          1   = (-2 ~ C + 1 )                             (20)

    As shown in the paper the size of the informal sector falls with development, so
 < 0. The term is therefore positive as long as ~ C > 21 . When this condition is met
                                                          

the price elasticity of demand for formal varieties increases over the development path,
so the efficiency cost of taxing these varieties falls.

C.3   Proof of proposition 2

We start by proving the first part of the proposition, which states under which conditions
the redistribution gain from taxing food less than non-food products increases over the
development path when all varieties can be taxed. This implies that, absent efficiency
considerations, the optimal rate on food F    falls over development relative to the optimal

rate on non-food N  . Using expression (15) above we obtain the following condition for

N   >   :
          F
                             N  N        s                   s
                               (       - N) > F( F - F)                                  (21)
                            sN  N         sN      sF  F       sF
   Re-arranging and using the fact that  N = -  F and s F = 1 - s N when all varieties
can be taxed, we obtain
                                N      s      1 - 2s N
                                    > N                                           (22)
                                N       s N s N (1 - s N )
    Where, as shown in the paper, we have s N > 0 and  N > 0. There are two cases
of interest, depending on which of s N or s F is highest. When households spend on
aggregate more on non-food than on food products (s N > 0.5), as is the case in most
countries in our sample, the right-hand-side of the expression is negative, so that the
condition holds as long as  N (minus the slope of the food Engel curve) does not fall
too much over the development path. This is the case described in the first part of
proposition 2 in the text. Note however that if s N < 0.5 the condition can still hold as
long as  N is positive and s N does not increase too much relative to  N . This case is less
empirically relevant, but note that it can be explained using the intuition developed in
the paper. All else equal (in particular, holding the slope of Engel curves constant), the
redistribution potential of taxing food and non-food at different rates is minimized when


                                                  84
food and non-food are consumed in same proportions in the aggregate. An increase in
the slope of the non-food Engel curve (or, equivalently, a steepening of the food Engel
curve), all else equal, increases this redistribution potential. The redistribution potential
will thus fall in a context in which s N starts below 0.5 and increases, unless the slope of
the Engel curve increases enough to compensate for the increase in s N .
   The change in the efficiency cost of taxing food less than non-food products over
the development path, discussed in the second part of proposition 2, is governed by
the relative values of  N and  F . The uncompensated price elasticity of demand for
product j is given by:
                                               C
                                          j =    - j sj                                  (23)

   Under our assumptions the change in this elasticity can be written as:

                                          j   = - j s j                                  (24)

    As shown in the paper over the development path s N = -s F > 0, which implies
 N <  F . The efficiency cost of taxing non-food products therefore increases relative
to that of taxing food products: efficiency considerations push the optimal rate on food
up relative to that non non-food products over the development path.

C.4   Proof of Proposition 3

To prove the first part of proposition 3, we use expression (17) above to write the change
in optimal rates on food and non food when only formal varieties can be taxed, N      and

F   . The condition for   >   can be written as:
                            N       F

                          1 N  1 N  s                 s
                             (     - 1N ) > 1F ( 1F - 1F )                               (25)
                         s1 N  1 N  s1 N    s1 F  1 F s1 F

   Re-arranging, we obtain:

                          1 N       s         s 
                              - 1F + 1F 1F - 1N 1N > 0                                   (26)
                         s1 N  s1 F s1 F s1 F s1 N s1 N
    This expression will hold as long as the non-food formal Engel curve slope increases
                                                                      N
more (or decreases less) than the food formal Engel curve slope ( s11   N
                                                                          >     1F
                                                                              s1F ) and the
non-food formal budget share doesn't increase too fast relative to the food formal budget
share.
    The second part of the proposition states under what conditions the efficiency cost
of taxing non-food products increases relative to that of taxing food products in a world


                                               85
in which only formal varieties can be taxed, ie  F1 >  N 1 . Under our assumptions the
change in the price elasticity of the formal variety of product j over the development
path is given by:

                                        j1   = -2 ~ C  j - s j1                           (27)

   The condition     F1   >   N1   is satisfied when:

                               2 ~ C ( F -  N ) < s N 1 - s F1                            (28)

This condition holds as long as, over the development path, the informal share of food
consumption falls faster than that of non-food consumption ( F <  N ) and the aggre-
gate budget share of formal food varieties does not increase too fast relative to that of
non-food varieties.

C.5   Supply-side assumptions

This subsection shows that our assumptions regarding the pass-through of taxes to prices
in the formal and informal sector can be modelled as a equilibrium responses of firms
with a simple supply-side model.
    Each variety j1 is produced by a firm that pays taxes (a formal firm), and each variety
j0 by a firm that does not pay taxes (an informal firm). All firms produce using only
labor L with the following production function x jl = jl L jl , l = 0, 1, labor is paid a fixed
wage w. Firms maximize their profit  jl = q jl x jl - wx jl /jl where q jl are the endogenous
producer prices, which then determine consumer prices p j1 = q j1 (1 + t j ) if the firm is
formal, p j0 = q j0 if the firm is informal.
    We assume firms compete under monopolistic competition, which implies that firms
maximize profit  jl whilst taking into account the demand function x jl ( p jl ) they face.
Writing jl the price elasticity of demand for variety jl and taking the first-order-condition
with respect to q jl we obtain:

                                                        jlw
                                          q jl =                                          (29)
                                                   jl - 1  jl

   This implies the following expression for consumer prices:

                                                               j1   w
                                     p j1 = (1 + t j )                                    (30)
                                                             j1 - 1  j1

   and


                                                   86
                                                         j0w
                                         p j1 =                                           (31)
                                                    j0 - 1  j0

    This in turn implies a pass-through of one to prices in the formal sector, zero to prices
in the informal sector.

C.6   Supply-chain considerations

To consider how our pass-through assumptions are affected by allowing informal retail-
ers to buy from formal suppliers, consider an extension to the above model in which
downstream firms produce varieties jl using inputs produced by upstream firms k. Up-
stream firms produce using only labor xk = Lk . Downstream firms' production function
is given by:

                                                                -1         

                                                  jlk x jlk
                                                                           -1
                                   x jl =                                                 (32)
                                                k

      where x jlk is the quantity of inputs k used by the downstream firm producing variety
jl , and  the constant elasticity of substitution in production.
      The consumer price of variety jl can now be written as:

                                                              Pjl          jl
                                  p jl = (1 + t j f jl )                                  (33)
                                                              jl     jl   -1

   where f jl = 1 if the firm producing jl is formal, zero otherwise, and Pjl is its input
cost index. Pjl is obtained by cost minimization and equal to:

                                                         1- 1/(1-)
                                              jlk p jlk
                                                    
                                 Pjl =                                                    (34)
                                            k

   Here p jlk is equal to the net of tax price paid for the product k by the firm producing
variety jl . We assume the consumption tax is a Value-Added-Tax, so that if both firms k
and jl are informal no tax is paid, if firm k is informal no tax is paid, and only if firm k is
formal and firm jl informal the tax is paid on the transaction between them. Formally:

                                                                                
                              p jlk = (1 + tk f k (1 - f jl ))w                           (35)
                                                                                -1

   Combining expressions (33), (34) and (35), we can write the pass-through of taxes to
the price of formal and informal downstream firms. The pass-through of taxes to the



                                                    87
price of formal downstream firms ( f jl = 1) is still equal to 1:

                                         p j1 1 + t j
                                                      =1                                 (36)
                                         t j p j1

   The pass-through of taxes to the price of informal downstream firms ( f jl = 0) can be
written as:
                                    p j0 1 + t j
                                                 = s j0 F                            (37)
                                     t j p j0
    where s j0F is the share of formal inputs in firm j0's total production costs:

                                                         -1 1- 
                                              f k  j0k Pj0
                                                    
                                  s j0 F =                 p j0k                         (38)
                                             k


D    Calibration Appendix

This sub-section explains how we calibrate tax rates under the three optimal policy sce-
narios defined in expressions (6), (8) and (9). Table 4 summarizes our choice of calibra-
tion parameters.
    First, we calibrate several parameters directly from our data: we use the observed
budget shares described in Section 3, total household expenditure to proxy for house-
hold income and the the observed informal shares of consumption for each good and
country. We relax our theoretical assumptions that Engel curves are log-linear and that
economic development does not affect within-country inequality, using instead the ob-
served budget shares and income distributions in each country. Note that our model
calls for using budget shares observed under a counterfactual 'no tax or transfers' sce-
nario. We do not attempt to adjust observed budget shares to take into account the fact
that they are affected by current tax systems as this would require an in-depth under-
standing of the tax and transfer system in each country in our sample which is beyond
the scope of this paper.
    We similarly use our data to obtain estimates of income elasticities for all goods and
varieties.To obtain an estimate of the income elasticity of demand for the formal variety,
 j1 we use our estimates of the slope of the formal Engel curve for good j,  j1 , and the
                                                                                      
expression  j1 = 1 + s j1 . We similarly obtain income elasticities  j using  j = 1 + s j .
                        j1                                                             j
    Second, we use existing literature to calibrate the remaining parameters.There are
no estimates of the cross-price compensated elasticity of demand between formal and
informal varieties ~ C  j so we use estimates of the elasticity of substitution in consump-
tion across stores of different types available in the literature. The cross-price elasticity

                                                  88
is related to this elasticity of substitution  in a CES utility function by the expression
  C
  0,1 =  s0 where s0 is the share of informal consumption of total consumption of the
good. Faber and Fally (2017) estimate an elasticity of substitution between large and
small stores in the US of 2.2, Atkin et al. (2018b) estimate the elasticity of substitution
between foreign and domestic supermarkets and find estimates in the 2-4 range. We
therefore use 3 as our baseline of . For an average value of s0 of 0.5 this yields a base-
line value of ~ C  j of 1.5, we consider the range 1-2 as a robustness check. We set a value
of -0.7 for the own-price compensated elasticity of goods. Together, these parameters
yield values for the own-price uncompensated elasticity of goods (calibrated using ex-
pression (33) that are in the [-2, -0.5] range, in line with estimates from the literature
(see for example Deaton et al., 1994).
     Finally, we specify government preferences by setting the same social welfare weight
for households in a given decile of the household expenditure distribution in each coun-
try. Our specification implies that governments place ten times more weight on income
received by households in the poorest decile than in the richest decile. In all countries
the richest decile is assigned a weight gi equal to 1, the second richest decile a weight
equal to 2, the third a weight equal to 3, and so on, until the poorest decile, which is
assigned a weight equal to 10.




                                            89
