                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO INTERACTIONS WITH CANDIDATES INCREASE VOTER SUPPORT AND
            PARTICIPATION? EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM ITALY

                                           Enrico Cantoni
                                            Vincent Pons

                                        Working Paper 27433
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27433


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




We are very thankful to the George and Obie Shultz Fund for its generous funding and to Gemma
Dipoppa for excellent research assistance. We also thank the implementing organization for
participating in this project. Benjamin Olken, Joshua Angrist, Daron Acemoglu, Kasper Hansen,
and participants in the 2016 APSA Meeting gave invaluable feedback about the study ­ we are
grateful to them. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27433.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Enrico Cantoni and Vincent Pons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do Interactions with Candidates Increase Voter Support and Participation? Experimental Evidence
from Italy
Enrico Cantoni and Vincent Pons
NBER Working Paper No. 27433
June 2020
JEL No. C93,D72

                                            ABSTRACT

We test whether politicians can use direct contact to reconnect with citizens, increase turnout, and
win votes. During the 2014 Italian municipal elections, we randomly assigned 26,000 voters to
receive visits from city council candidates, canvassers supporting the candidates' list, or to a
control group. While canvassers' visits increased turnout by 1.8 percentage points, candidates' had
no impact on participation. Candidates increased their own vote share in the precincts they
canvassed, but only at the expense of other candidates on the list. This suggests that their failure to
mobilize nonvoters resulted from focusing on securing the preferences of active voters.


Enrico Cantoni
University of Bologna
Department of Economics
Piazza Scaravilli 2, Bologna
Italy
enrico.cantoni@unibo.it

Vincent Pons
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 289
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vpons@hbs.edu
1     Introduction

     Strong electoral participation is commonly considered an essential component of a healthy
democracy, both inherently and to ensure equality of representation (e.g., Franklin et al., 2004;
Lijphart, 1997). Yet, voter turnout in most of the established democracies has been decreasing
over the last decades (Teixeira, 1992; Blais, 2010; Solijonov, 2016). Today, elections in these
countries regularly attract less than half of the voting-age population (Lijphart, 1997; Taylor et al.,
2014), raising concerns for the representativeness of elected officials and public policies, and for
the overall legitimacy and stability of the democratic regimes.
     Education and income, which in industrialized countries are positively associated with individ-
ual participation (Verba and Nie, 1972; Wolfinger and Rosenstone, 1980; Brady et al., 1995), have
risen at the same time overall turnout has declined, making this trend hard to explain. Possible
causes include economic adversity (Radcliff, 1992), lowering the voting age (hence increasing the
number of eligible voters and, with it, the abstaining percentage) (Franklin et al., 2004), decreased
electoral competitiveness (Johnston, Matthews, and Bittner, 2006), deterioration of voter mobi-
lization (Gray and Caul, 2000), and changes in values, attitudes, or family structure (Putnam and
Pharr, 2000; Wattenberg, 2002; Dalton, 2007; Blais and Rubenson, 2013; Bhatti et al., 2018). Of
particular relevance to this study is one change in values that has been concomitant to the decline
in turnout: citizens' increased skepticism about politicians' responsiveness to their concerns. In
Italy, where our study takes place, the proportion of voters who think parties do not care about
people's opinions grew from 68% in 1968 to 90% in 2013.1 This fraction is high today in most
advanced democracies. In the United States, the fraction of citizens agreeing with the statement
that "public officials don't care much what people like [you] think" increased from 35% in 1952 to
61% in 2012. Similarly, in France, in 2013, 87% of the population shared the belief that politicians
    1 See ITANES (1968), question 148 (http://www.itanes.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/
ITA1968_questionarioenvers2005.pdf, retrieved June 7, 2020) and ITANES (2013), question d38_4
(http://www.itanes.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/ITA2013_QuestionarioCAPI.pdf,
retrieved June 7, 2020).




                                                  2
care little about what they think, up from 42% in 1977.2 Strikingly, citizens expressing such dis-
content systematically report a significantly lower propensity to vote (Blais and Rubenson, 2013),
and distrust of public officials and low turnout further correlate with lack of campaign contact with
candidates and their teams.3
    If these correlations reflect actual causality, then politicians could help reverse the trend of
declining turnout by "bridging the gap" with voters, particularly by reducing physical distance and
engaging more often in personal interactions with them.4
    We test this hypothesis with a field experiment conducted in a middle-sized city in Northern
Italy during the 2014 municipal elections. These are characterized by mayoral candidates and
by party lists ­ rosters of candidates affiliated with either national political parties or local civic
organizations ­ competing for at-large seats on city councils. The experiment was implemented
in partnership with one of the civic (not party-affiliated) lists, and included 38 precincts and 2,612
addresses housing 26,352 registered citizens.5 We randomly assigned the addresses in this sample
to receive the visits of pairs of candidates on the party list (henceforth the candidates group),
the visits of pairs of paid volunteers (henceforth the volunteers group), or to the control group,
which did not receive any visit. Assignment probabilities to either type of canvassing or to the
control group were respectively one fourth and one half. We also randomized which candidates
and volunteers covered which precincts. Since voters chose not only a party list, but also could
express preferences for specific candidates within that list, we are able to separate the impact of
candidates' visits on their own vote tally and on the votes received by their list mates.
    Our study builds on a large experimental literature pioneered by Gosnell (1930) and Gerber
   2 See  ANES Time Series Studies, question VCF0609 (http://electionstudies.org/studypages/
download/datacenter_all_NoData.php, retrieved June 7, 2020) and TNS Sofres and Cevipof,
Baromètre de la confiance politique (http://www.tns-sofres.com/sites/default/files/
2010.01.15-confiance-politique.pdf                       and       https://www.sciencespo.fr/cevipof/
sites/sciencespo.fr.cevipof/files/BJ9724%20-%20CEVIPOF%20-%20Barome%CC%80tre%
20confiance%20en%20politique%20vag5%20VF.pdf, retrieved June 7, 2020), respectively.
   3 See ITANES (2013), questions d38_4 (distrust of public officials), d86 (turnout), and d68 (having been contacted);

and ANES Time Series Studies, questions VCF0609, VCF0702, and VCF9030a.
   4 Arceneaux (2007) finds that voters visited by a candidate become more likely to think that she is a strong leader.

This shows that personal contacts with candidates can change the beliefs that voters hold about them.
   5 Henceforth, we talk interchangeably of addresses and buildings.




                                                          3
and Green (2000). Door-to-door canvassing by regular citizens has been found to sizeably impact
electoral participation and vote shares, whether the canvassers are paid or not, and whether their
message is civic or partisan (e.g., Arceneaux and Nickerson, 2010; Gerber et al., 2003; Green et al.,
2003; Green and Gerber, 2015; Michelson, 2005; Nickerson et al., 2006). Direct contact with
politicians may trigger yet larger effects, in particular for low-propensity voters who are otherwise
more difficult to mobilize (Arceneaux and Nickerson, 2009; Enos et al., 2014; Enos and Hersh,
2015). Politicians may be better able than regular canvassers to convey information on their policy
position. In addition, their visits may reveal personal attributes, improve voter recall, reduce social
distance (Hoffman et al., 1996), and signal care for voters' preferences. (For theories of costly
signaling applied to electoral campaigns, see for instance Potters et al., 1997 and Ashworth, 2006.)
    Empirical evidence on the impact of politicians' direct interactions with voters is still rela-
tively scarce, though such interactions are not unusual even in large municipalities.       6   For obvious
strategic reasons, candidates and elected representatives are typically unwilling to delegate to re-
searchers (and chance) the decision of which citizens to address and how. A notable exception is
a study by Wantchekon (2003), which exposes randomly selected villages in Benin to presidential
candidates' meetings emphasizing clientelistic vs. public policy platforms and finds the former to
generate larger electoral support. More similar to the present study are two experiments involving
one-on-one interactions between a single candidate and voters. Arceneaux (2007) does not find
any significant effect of door-to-door canvassing by a candidate on voter turnout and Barton et al.
(2014) find a negative effect on this outcome. Both studies report substantial impacts on voter
support. This outcome is however measured using self-reports from phone surveys. As a result,
answer rates are low (respectively 25 and 15%) and answers may suffer from misreporting, includ-
ing overreporting for the winner (e.g., Wright, 1993; Atkeson, 1999; Campbell, 2010). The main
concern is that respondents' selection and misreporting might differ between treatment and control
individuals (Bailey et al., 2014; Cardy, 2005; Gelman et al., 2016).
   6 According to a 2009 Boston Globe poll, for example, a surprising 57% of Boston residents had personally

met mayor Thomas Menino during his then 16 years in office (http://www.scribd.com/doc/15123803/
Mayor-election-poll, retrieved February 23, 2015).



                                                     4
   The first main contribution of our paper is to estimate the impact of door-to-door visits by mul-
tiple candidates on voter turnout, in an election with proportional representation, and to compare
that effect to the impact of volunteers' visits to an identical group of voters. Much of the preexisting
get-out-the-vote literature has found large effects of door-to-door canvassing across a large variety
of settings (Green and Gerber, 2015). However, a small set of experiments conducted in Western
Europe find substantially smaller effects than in the U.S, due perhaps to higher baseline turnout
leading to a ceiling effect (Bhatti et al., 2018; Foos and John, 2018; John and Brannan, 2008; Ny-
man, 2017; Pons, 2018; Pons and Liegey, 2019). In addition, most of the existing evaluations of
mobilization campaigns examine nonpartisan interventions. But partisan field campaigns, such as
in the present study, have been found to generate weaker effects, including in the U.S. (Gerber and
Green, 2017; Green et al., 2013a). In light of this evidence, we included the volunteers' treatment
group to provide a benchmark. The impact of volunteers' visits would capture the influence of
our specific study context, and subtracting this effect from the effect of candidates' visits would
isolate the contribution of the candidates' presence. We were expecting this contribution to be
positive, but found the opposite. Strikingly, while volunteers' visits increased participation by a
significant 1.8 percentage points, amounting to a complier average causal effect and a mobilization
rate of 5.01% and 19.8%, respectively, candidates' visits affected neither the average voter, nor any
subgroup of the population, whether defined by age, gender, place of birth, or turnout history.
   Our second main contribution is to shed light on the plausible reasons of the differential im-
pact of volunteers and candidates. We exploit the fact that multiple candidates and volunteers
were involved in the experiment. Prior studies have found that activists' characteristics (Landry
et al., 2006; Price, 2008; Sinclair et al., 2007) and the way in which they interact with citizens
(Nickerson, 2007) can substantially affect the impact of the campaign. Does candidates' failure
to increase voter turnout reflect lower competence than volunteers? Responses to a survey admin-
istered to both candidates and volunteers reveal instead that the candidates were more politically
informed, engaged, and experienced. In addition, more politically competent candidates were not
more successful at mobilizing voters. Systematic treatment heterogeneity along canvassers' char-


                                                   5
acteristics is only observed among volunteers, and it goes in the opposite direction: less politicized
volunteers had larger effects on turnout.
      If candidates' intrinsic quality does not explain their failure to mobilize nonvoters, then perhaps
the way they allocated their effort does. Official results at the precinct level reveal that candidates
successfully increased their own vote count in the precincts they canvassed. Strikingly, this persua-
sion effect was obtained at the expense of other candidates on their party list, whose vote counts
decreased by an almost equal amount. This result is consistent with voters having clear prefer-
ences over parties but weak preferences over candidates within parties (Blom-Hansen et al., 2016).
It suggests that candidates may have free-ridden on voter mobilization and put more effort in se-
curing the direct preferences of active voters supporting the list, a strategy that was perhaps less
costly but beneficial to them only, not to the rest of their list. We discuss possible interpretations
of our results and the broader lessons that can be learned from them in the last section of the paper.


2     Research Setting

2.1     The 2014 Italian Municipal Elections

      We conducted our experiment during the 2014 campaign for the European and municipal elec-
tions in Italy. On May 25, every EU citizen 18 or older living permanently in Italy was called to
elect the Italian members of the European Parliament. Voters of approximately half of all Italian
municipalities, including the one where the experiment was administered, were also called to vote
for municipal elections. In municipalities holding both European and municipal elections, there is
a unique voter turnout record for the two races: although theoretically possible, it is extremely rare
for voters to vote for one, but not for the other race (there are fewer than 20 recorded instances of
this phenomenon in our data).
      Through municipal elections, Italian voters elect both the mayor and members of the city coun-
cil, which are respectively the head of the executive and the legislative branches of the municipal
government. Voters cast a ballot for a mayoral candidate, and the candidate that receives the largest


                                                    6
number of votes gets elected.7 In all Italian cities with 15,000 residents or more, voters can also
choose one of the lists competing for at-large seats in the city council. Typically political parties
have one mayoral candidate, and the lists affiliated with those parties back their candidates, while
"civic lists" (liste civiche) affiliated with civic organizations throw their weight behind the candi-
date who best represents their interests. Which lists support which candidates does not constrain
voters' choice: voters can choose a list that supports a different mayoral candidate than the one
they vote for. Each list receives a number of seats proportional to its vote share, with a minimum
of 60% of the seats allocated to the party lists that supported the winning mayoral candidate.8
    Then, similarly to municipal and legislative elections in several other countries including Aus-
tria, Belgium, and Greece (ECPRD, 2000), the allocation of seats to individual candidates is de-
termined by an open party list method.9 That is, when choosing a party list, voters also have the
option to express up to two preferences for members of the list, one male and one female. If a voter
expresses two preferences for candidates of the same gender, the second preference is considered
void. Seats won by the list are allocated to the city council candidates who received the highest
number of individual votes. If two candidates are tied for a seat, it goes to the candidate with a
higher ranking as determined by the party or organization that put forth the list.
   7 In  cities with 15,000 residents or more, if no mayoral candidate receives more than 50% of the valid votes in the
first round, the two candidates who get the highest vote share compete in a runoff, which takes place two weeks later.
There was no runoff in the municipality studied in the experiment, as the winning mayoral candidate received more
than 50% of the first-round votes.
    8 The party lists that support the winning mayoral candidate receive a number of seats equal to the maximum

between 60% and the sum of their respective vote shares and divide them proportionally. The remaining seats are
allocated to lists that supported other mayoral candidates.
    9 Beyond elections using an open party list method, our results likely hold lessons for other types of elections

using proportional rule, particularly when voters can express direct preferences for individual candidates, like in
German parliamentary elections (in which voters can choose both a list and a specific candidate) and in U.S. municipal
elections with single transferable vote. This latter system, also called multi-winner ranked-choice, was used during
the 20th century in several U.S. cities including Cincinnati, Cleveland, and New York, and it is currently used in
Cambridge and Minneapolis, among others. It is similar to the voting rule used in Italian municipal elections in that
it combines proportional representation with direct preferences for candidates (voters have to rank the candidates in
order of preference).




                                                          7
2.2     Candidates' Campaign Incentives under Proportional Representation

      Candidates' campaign incentives in elections with proportional representation differ in at least
three ways from their incentives under plurality rule. First, because plurality rule elections are
winner-take-all, individual candidates have strong incentives to put effort into the campaign in
close races, and weak incentives in lopsided elections. Instead, under proportional representa-
tion, competing lists generally care about electing as many list members as possible, not just
about obtaining a plurality of them. Winning an additional seat increases the list's influence in
the newly elected assembly and it allows the list to reward one additional running mate. Because
the number of seats increases proportionally to the vote share, campaign incentives exist even in
non-competitive elections and for small lists.
      Second, the number of competing candidates tends to be lower under plurality rule. Indeed,
weaker candidates will often prefer to stay out of the race since they know that they will leave
the election empty-handed unless they obtain a plurality of the votes; moreover, they can expect
a large fraction of voters to strategically vote for the front-runners (Duverger, 1954; Cox, 1997).
U.S. plurality rule elections which regularly oppose only two candidates, respectively from the
Republican and the Democratic party, are a case in point. Instead, small lists may be encouraged
to run when seats are allocated proportionally to vote shares, as long as they can reasonably hope
to win at least one seat. Unlike well-established parties, new entrants need to establish name
recognition, if they want to win any votes, further increasing their incentives to campaign. In our
study context, this is especially true for civic lists, which may support a well-known candidate for
mayor and include running mates enjoying some individual notoriety, yet are often formed just
before the election and do not campaign under a well-identified party label.
      Third, candidates running on a list face a collective action problem which is absent from single-
member districts. Indeed, some of the benefits of individual candidates' campaigning efforts likely
accrue to their running mates. In contrast to the two previous points, the failure to internalize this
return may reduce their willingness to contribute to the campaign. In Italian municipal elections,
the fact that voters can express preferences for individual members of the list alleviates this problem

                                                   8
and it may actually create incentives for candidates to direct their efforts at obtaining voters' direct
preferences instead of increasing their list's overall vote share.
      While the overall intensity of the campaign may vary due to differential incentives associated
with plurality and proportional elections, the desirability of different types of campaigns should
be expected to depend on factors independent from the voting rule, such as the baseline level of
participation. Voter turnout in Italy is higher than in the United States and most European countries,
but it has been experiencing a steady decline since the late 1970s (Figure 1). Participation at the
local and European elections is usually lower than at the higher-salience national parliamentary
ones, and the May 2014 European and municipal elections were no exception. Turnout was 57.2%
countrywide, down from 75.2% in the February 2013 national elections, and from 65.1% in the
2009 European and municipal elections.
      Despite the declining turnout, Italian political parties are not adjusting their campaign meth-
ods. While they once used intensive personal contacts, for several decades they have been relying
primarily on impersonal methods, such as hanging posters in public spaces, handing out fliers at
markets and bus stops, or dropping leaflets in mailboxes (Ballini and Ridolfi, 2002; Novelli, 2018).
Similarly as in other European countries (Liegey, Muller, and Pons, 2013), door-to-door canvassing
and other field mobilization techniques relying on direct, personal contacts with voters are largely
underused today in Italy, and little is known about their effects in that country.10


2.3    The Implementing Organization

      The experiment took place in a municipality in Northern Italy that had almost 30,000 registered
voters. The 2014 municipal election in this city featured four mayoral candidates. Of the 11 party
lists competing for 24 city-council seats, six supported the main left-wing mayoral candidate. Four
of these left-wing lists were endorsed by national political parties, and two were affiliated with local
organizations created for the purpose of participating in the municipal elections. The experiment
was organized in partnership with one of these two civic lists. Although the cooperating party list
  10 To   the best of our knowledge, Galasso and Nannicini (2018) is the only other canvassing experiment run in Italy.



                                                            9
was part of a broader coalition, the experiment involved neither the other lists nor the mayoral
candidate: the focus of the experiment and of the conversations with the voters was the race for
the city council. While the mayoral candidate supported by the list won the election with 62.4%
of the votes, the cooperating list received 3.6% of all cast votes, making it the second most voted
list across the six lists supporting this candidate (after the Partito Democratico, which swept an
absolute majority of all cast votes). This resulted in an average of 18.3 votes and 16.5 preferences
expressed in favor of the list's candidates in each precinct, and in one one of its candidates obtaining
a seat at the city council.
    The cooperating list had comprised 20 candidates to the city council, including the former
deputy mayor, a former member of the municipal executive branch, and two incumbent city coun-
cilors. Eleven candidates on the list took part in canvassing activities, along with eleven volun-
teers. These volunteers were either students or recent graduates of the nearby university, and they
received a compensation of 8.5 euros per hour. Towards the end of the experiment, we adminis-
tered a survey to all volunteers and candidates. We used the survey to collect socio-demographic
information about the canvassers, their feedback on the field campaign, and to assess their level
of political competence. Panel A of Table 1 presents the main socio-demographic characteristics.
Volunteers are on average younger and more educated than candidates, which is not surprising as
they were all selected among masters students or recent graduates.
    However, volunteers display a lower level of political engagement and competence than candi-
dates (Table 1, Panel B). Only about half of them had voted in the most recent national or municipal
elections, and none of them had ever held any public office. Conversely, all candidates had voted
in both elections, and one third had previous experience in elective public offices. Similarly, volun-
teers reported spending less time gathering political information from different media outlets, with
the exception of the internet, and they were less likely to know the name and party of the Minister
of Foreign Affairs.11 Following Kling et al. (2007), we summarize the information from Panel
B with a single index of political engagement, defined to be the equally weighted average of the
  11 Quite surprisingly, however, while all volunteers and candidates got the name of House President right, most
candidates failed to identify her party.


                                                       10
z-scores of its components. Let k (k = 1, . . . , 12) denote the responses to the 12 questions reported
in Panel B (which are coded so that higher values correspond to higher engagement/awareness),
and µk and k be the unweighted mean and standard deviation of k across all volunteers and
                                                                         12
candidates. Our summary index is then defined as (1/12)  (k - µk )/k . By construction, the
                                                                        k=1
overall mean of the index is 0. However, the mean for the volunteers is negative while the mean for
the candidates is positive, confirming their larger degree of political engagement and competence.


2.4    The Treatments

      We conducted the experiment in 38 of the 39 electoral precincts of the municipality.12 All
26,352 voters living in the 38 sample precincts and their 2,612 addresses, indicated in the voter
register, were included in the experiment. A large fraction of addresses contained multiple apart-
ments. The treatment was assigned at the address level after stratifying for precinct and street
name, so that all apartments of a given address were allocated to the same treatment condition
by construction. Each address had a one fourth probability of being assigned to either of the two
treatment groups, and one half probability of being assigned to the control group. Door-to-door
visits by candidates and volunteers took place during the five weeks before Election Day. We asked
canvassers to knock on doors in pairs of two to increase their safety and motivation. In our view,
this also increased the chance that voters who received the visit of canvassers would have an affin-
ity with at least one of them and, as a result, that they would be willing to engage in a discussion
with them. Canvassers visiting apartment buildings were instructed to buzz private intercoms and
request permission to access the building. When they managed to enter, canvassers knocked on the
door of every apartment. Treatment delivery was attempted only once for each address and, within
the address, for each apartment: if nobody opened the door, canvassers would move on to the next
one and not come back. Our field research assistant monitored both groups of canvassers to ensure
adherence to the experimental protocol on a daily basis throughout the entire campaign.
      All volunteers devoted approximately the same time to the door-to-door campaign. We were
  12 One   precinct was excluded from the sample due to lack of individual turnout data for the 2013 national elections.



                                                           11
thus able to pair them in teams of two that were mostly stable throughout the campaign. Differently
from the volunteers, the intensity of the involvement of candidates varied greatly. Before the
experiment, six candidates committed to dedicate considerable time to canvassing, while the five
other committed less time to it. Each evening in which a dedicated candidate was active, she was
paired with one of the less-involved candidates also available that evening. Pairs of candidates
were formed in an effort to compose complementary teams. In particular, to the extent possible,
each team comprised a man and a woman. In addition to making the team complementary, this
responded to a request of the candidates, who wanted to ensure that the citizens would be able vote
for both candidates in the team, if they so chose.13
    In addition to randomizing the allocation of addresses to the control, candidates, and volunteers
groups, we also randomized which dedicated candidates and pairs of volunteers covered which
precincts. The choice of the first four precincts covered by the campaign was based on their
location (as close as possible to the meeting point to facilitate the supervision of the canvassers by
the research team on the first day of the campaign). In each treatment group, these four precincts
were randomly allocated to the canvassers. The remaining 34 precincts were assigned to canvassers
based on a random order. That is, whenever a couple of volunteers or a dedicated candidate finished
covering a precinct, they were assigned the next untouched precinct in the (randomly ordered) list,
resulting in random allocation.
    Due to lack of time, the candidates only canvassed 70% of their assigned addresses, while the
volunteers canvassed all the addresses assigned to them. Because we instrument canvassing by
candidates with our exogenous instrument (i.e., being assigned to receive a visit by candidates),
partial treatment delivery in the candidates' group poses no threat to causal identification of turnout
effects. Moreover, candidates did not "choose" the 70% of assigned addresses they eventually can-
vassed: the randomization of the order with which precincts would be canvassed left no discretion
to canvassers over which areas (and thus voters) to canvass earlier or later.14
  13 When   the number of involved candidates exceeded the number of less involved candidates available on a given
day, volunteers or our research assistant were paired with them. In these heterogeneous teams, the candidate was
responsible for leading the conversation with the voters.
   14 With power 80%, ex-post Minimum Detectable Effects (MDEs) of candidates' and volunteers' visits at the 5%




                                                       12
    Volunteers and candidates received the same training prior to the campaign. They all received
the same toolkit with detailed instructions on how to conduct the discussions with voters (see
Appendix A.4 and A.5). As in most GOTV interventions, the instructions we provided were in-
tended as a general canvass, which would be adapted according to each voter's questions and
interests. As Green and Gerber (2015) note in their seminal book on GOTV campaigns, scripts
are helpful to guide canvassers, but they are not a substitute for informal and personalized dis-
cussions, which contribute to the effectiveness of door-to-door canvassing. The canvassers were
instructed to actively engage voters in discussions about politics and the civic list, and to provide
them with information about the upcoming elections. Canvassers gave general information on
how to vote and more specific instructions on how to cast their votes for city council candidates.
They emphasized that the election would be the first nationwide election in 13 years to be held
on a single day (Sunday), as opposed to both on a Sunday and the following Monday, and pro-
vided information about polling station location and opening hours. These conversations had the
twofold objective of identifying and mobilizing potential nonvoters, as well as persuading unde-
cided center-left-leaning voters to casting their ballot for the party list. Lists campaigning under
the label of a well-established party are easily recognizable by voters, which may facilitate both
the mobilization of party supporters and the persuasion of undecided voters. In contrast, the civic
list we partnered with could only hope to win votes through persuasion or mobilization if it first
acquired a minimal level of name recognition. At the beginning of each conversation, candidates
and volunteers introduced themselves as city council candidates of the civic list and volunteers
working for that list, respectively. At the end, they distributed a leaflet customized with the logo
of the campaign and the key points of the list's platform (see Appendix A.6 and A.7). Candidates
had prepared personalized cards, which contained their name and instructions on how to cast votes
for candidates in the city council race, and they attached these to the leaflets.
level are 2.1 and 2.2 percentage points, respectively. The higher MDE for the candidate treatment reflects the incom-
plete treatment delivery in this arm. The MDE for the average effect across the candidate and volunteer treatments is
approximately 1.8 percentage point. Finally, the MDE for the difference between impact estimates of the candidate
and volunteer treatments is 2.6 percentage points. All these ex-post MDEs account for randomization strata (street
name by precinct) and for treatment assignment at the residential address level.



                                                         13
      Even though we gave the same training to both groups of canvassers, and even though our
research assistant frequently reminded them that mobilization of nonvoters and persuasion of active
voters were simultaneous objectives of the campaign, there is suggestive evidence that volunteers
spent slightly more time and effort mobilizing nonvoters, while candidates focused a bit more on
persuasion instead. Overall, the time spent in front of each opened door (including the time to move
from one address to the other) was 7.2 minutes for volunteers and 7.8 for candidates. However,
whereas volunteers' visits were relatively shorter in areas characterized by high past turnout (6.9
minutes across all opened doors vs. 7.6 in areas with lower-than-average turnout in 2013), the
opposite was true for the candidates (8.0 across all vs. 7.5 in low-turnout).15 Moreover, in the open-
ended part of the survey most candidates reported trying to secure the voters' personal preferences
and dissuading them from voting for other left-wing parties. Overall, candidates reported a good
level of satisfaction with how they were greeted by voters. By contrast, volunteers were generally
unsatisfied with how they were treated by voters, but they reported being greeted more favorably
when they were perceived as "combating abstentionism" (even if in the context of a list's electoral
campaign) than as trying to "win new votes" for the party list.


3     Results

3.1     Verifying Randomization

      Randomization ensures that all observable and unobservable characteristics are balanced across
assignment groups. Table 2 verifies covariate balance across the candidates group, volunteers
group, and control group for a series of characteristics available from the voter rolls and for turnout
in the 2013 national elections. We present summary statistics for registered voters in the control
group (column 1) and show estimates of the difference between the control group and, respectively,
    15 Areas  with high (resp. low) past turnout are defined as (i) collections of buildings visited by a team of canvassers
on a single day, and (ii) where average turnout at the 2013 national elections was higher (resp. lower) than the median
(81.3%). Because we do not know the exact amount of time spent in front of each door, average visits' durations are
computed using the total number of open doors in the two treatments and the estimated time canvassers spent on the
field (i.e., an average of 2 and 3.5 hours per canvassing session on weekdays and weekends, respectively).



                                                            14
the volunteers group, the candidates group, and any of the two treatment groups in columns 2, 3,
and 4. Overall, registered voters across groups are extremely similar. Out of 33 differences reported
in Table 2, only three are significant at the 5% level, and four are significant at the 10% level, which
is in line with what should be expected.
    The average voter in the control group is 55 years old and lives in a building of 20 registered
voters. 52% of the control group voters are females, 63% are married or widows/widowers, 64%
were born in the province, and only 3% were born abroad.16 The vast majority of voters partic-
ipated in the 2013 national parliamentary elections, while 6% were not on the 2013 voter rolls,
either because they were too young at the time or because they were registered elsewhere.
    In Table 3, we verify the random allocation of canvassers to precincts and show that canvassed
voters' characteristics exhibit little correlation with the level of political competence of the can-
vassers who visited their addresses. We do so separately for voters whose addresses were visited by
volunteers (column 1), by candidates (column 2), or by canvassers of either type (column 3). Each
cell reports estimates and standard errors from a bivariate regression of the row variable, which
represents a characteristic of canvassed voters, on the average political engagement z-score of the
visiting canvassers. Since volunteers covered more precincts than candidates (therefore potentially
visiting, on average, different sets of voters), regressions in column 3 control for treatment assign-
ment dummies. In these and all other regressions that exploit the random allocation of canvassers
to voters, standard errors are clustered at the precinct level. The random allocation of precincts
to canvassers produced a fairly balanced distribution of canvassers' political competence across
different types of voters. In line with expectations, only three of the 33 regression coefficients in
Table 3 are significant at the 10% level, and none is significant at the 5% level.17
   16 Voter records for women indicate whether the voter is currently married or widowed. By contrast, voter records

for men only indicate the spouse's name, regardless of whether she is alive or deceased.
   17 Appendix Table A.3 reports the precinct-clustered asymptotic p-values of these balancing exercises, along with

wild bootstrap p-values robust to clustering by precinct and by each of the two canvassers who canvassed a given
address. Wild bootstrap p-values are substantively in line, albeit slightly larger, than their asymptotic precinct-clustered
counterparts.




                                                            15
3.2    Voter Mobilization

Main Effects. We first examine the impact of the visits on voter turnout. We measure individual
participation using official attendance sheets which were signed by election officers in charge of
identifying voters at the polling station. We took pictures of these sheets and digitized them.18
Table 4 reports results of regressions of the following form:


                          Votei =  +  v Tbv(i) +  c Tbc(i) + Xi,b(i)  +  b
                                                                         s
                                                                           (i) + i ,                               (1)
                                                                              s


where Votei equals 1 if voter i living in building b(i) turned out to vote on Election Day, and
0 otherwise; Tbv(i) and Tbc(i) are dummies for whether building b received the visit of volunteers
                                                                                            s
or candidates, respectively; Xi,b(i) is a vector of voter and building characteristics; and b (i) are

strata fixed effects. As discussed above, only 70% of the buildings assigned to the candidates were
eventually visited. We therefore instrument Tbc with a dummy for assignment to the candidate
treatment. The coefficients of interest are the  t 's, which represent the average difference in turnout
between residents of buildings that received treatment t and voters in the control group. The  t 's
are not adjusted to take into account the fraction of opened doors, respectively 45.5% and 35.9%
in the candidates' and volunteers' groups. In this and all other voter-level regressions that do not
exploit the random assignment of precincts to canvassers, standard errors are adjusted for clustering
at the building level since the randomization was conducted at this level.
      As shown in column 1 of Table 4, voters living in buildings canvassed by volunteers had a
turnout rate 1.8 percentage points higher than voters in the control group. This difference is sta-
tistically significant at the 5% level and robust to controlling for baseline covariates (column 2).
By contrast, visits by candidates did not have any significant impact on turnout. Voters living in
buildings canvassed by candidates were (an insignificant) 0.2 percentage point less likely to vote
on Election Day than their counterparts in the control group. Both with and without baseline co-
   18 Voter turnout sheets were available for all 38 precincts except for female voters of one precinct (turnout sheets

are maintained separately for male and female voters). As a result, voter-level regressions exclude female voters from
this precinct. All balance tests are unaffected by including these female voters. Similarly, precinct-level regressions
are unaffected by the exclusion of the corresponding precinct. Results available upon request.


                                                         16
variates, we reject the hypothesis of joint insignificance of the two treatment effects at the 5% level
(p-values of 0.041 and 0.028), and the hypothesis of equality of effects at the 10% level (p-values
of 0.084 and 0.055). Estimates for the baseline covariates reported in column 2 are in line with
the existing literature: older, married, local and politically active voters are more likely to vote,
and the contrary holds true for widows, foreign-borns and voters who didn't participate in the
higher-salience 2013 national elections.
   Our estimates can be compared to the existing literature using the method proposed by Green
et al. (2013b) and the one suggested by DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010). For the first method, we
estimate the Complier Average Causal Effects (CACE) by dividing our estimated treatment effects
by the fraction of opened doors. We obtain CACEs of, respectively, 0.018/0.359 = 5.01% and
-0.002/0.455 = -0.4% for the volunteer and candidate treatments. For the second method, we
further divide CACEs by the proportion of voters that could potentially be mobilized to vote by
the treatment (i.e., 1 minus the fraction of nonvoters in the control group). We obtain mobilization
rates of, respectively, 0.018/(0.359 × (1 - 0.747)) = 19.8% and -0.002/(0.455 × (1 - 0.747)) =
-1.7% for the volunteer and candidate treatments. According to both methods, the effect of vol-
unteers' visits is of the same order of magnitude as the largest mobilization rates documented
by existing studies on the impact of door-to-door canvassing on voter turnout (DellaVigna and
Gentzkow, 2010; Green et al., 2013b). Though insignificant, the negative effect of candidates is
comparable to the estimates obtained by Barton et al. (2014).
   In Appendix A.1, we compute the mobilization rate with an alternative method. We use a 2SLS
framework, where the fraction of opened doors is instrumented by treatment assignment; that is,
we estimate the local average treatment effect (LATE) of canvassers' visits on voter turnout. The
sign, significance, and relative magnitude of the estimates are very similar to those presented in
Tables 4 and 5. We prefer the method described in the main text and commonly used in GOTV ex-
periments: the fact that the fraction of doors opened is measured at the building, not the apartment
or individual level, makes the interpretation of heterogeneous effects measured along individual
socio-demographic characteristics difficult in the 2SLS framework.


                                                  17
Interactions with Voter Characteristics. Although candidates had no impact overall, it is pos-
sible that they successfully mobilized certain types of voters, e.g., the low-propensity ones, while
demobilizing others. To explore this possibility, we now examine if treatment effects vary across
voters who voted in the 2013 national elections and those who didn't. In the appendix, we also
explore interactions with gender, place of birth, and age. Formally, for each variable Z , we estimate
the following model:


               Votei =  +   v,k Zik × Tbv(i) +   c,k Zik × Tbc(i) + Xi,b(i)  +  b
                                                                                s
                                                                                  (i) + i ,                         (2)
                                k                      k                                  s


where the Zik 's are mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive dummies indicating values taken
by the variable (e.g., male and female for gender).19 Again, to address the incomplete delivery of
the candidate treatment, interactions with Tbc are instrumented by the corresponding interactions
with a dummy for assignment to the candidate treatment.
    Table 5 reports the results of the regression interacting the treatment dummies with past turnout,
along with the average effects from Table 4, column 2. For a given value Zik , column 1 provides the
average turnout rate of voters in the control group that have Zik = 1, whereas columns 2 and 3 report
estimates of  v,k and  t ,k , respectively. Appendix Table A.4 reports estimates of the regressions
interacting the treatment dummies with voter gender, place of birth, and age.
    Interestingly, the volunteer treatment produced the largest turnout gains among voters with a
higher-than-average propensity to vote: those who voted in the higher-salience 2013 national elec-
tions and people born in the province. These results are in line with preexisting findings showing
that, in the context of elections of intermediate salience, door-to-door canvassing mostly mobilizes
medium- and high-propensity voters (Arceneaux and Nickerson, 2009; Enos et al., 2014). This
evidence, however, is mostly suggestive: due to limited statistical power, we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that the treatment effect is the same across different values of any socio-demographic
  19 Differently   from the other socio-demographic characteristics, age is not included as a set of dummies but as a
continuous variable, after subtracting 18 years. Also note that we do not add separate notation for the direct effect of
the Zik 's since they are already included in the set of covariates Xi,b(i) .




                                                           18
variable. Turning to the candidates' treatment, we do not find evidence that it significantly af-
fected voter turnout for any of the subgroups examined in Table 5 (column 2). Like for the average
treatment effects, we report the 2SLS counterpart of Table 5 in the Appendix, Table A.1.


Interactions with Canvassers' Political Competence. If not voters' characteristics, then per-
haps candidates' characteristics may have influenced the impact of their visits on voter turnout
and could explain why only the volunteers' visits were impactful. We thus examine whether can-
didates or volunteers with different levels of political competence and engagement were more or
less effective at mobilizing voters. As described in Section 2, our canvassers' survey included
several questions measuring political interest, information, and experience, which we summarize
in a single index. We then define the level of political competence of any pair of canvassers as the
(demeaned) average of the two canvassers' indices20 and run the following regression:


          Votei =  +  v Tbv(i) +  c Tbc(i) +  v Ib
                                                 v         v     c c        c                 s
                                                   (i) × Tb(i) +  Ib(i) × Tb(i) + Xi,b(i)  +  b(i) + i ,            (3)
                                                                                                  s


       v (resp. I c ) is the political index of the volunteers' team (resp. candidates' team) which
where Ib (i)     b(i)

canvassed building b.  v and  c estimate the influence of canvassers' political index on the impact
of the visits. Table 6 reports the results, without (column 1) and with (column 2) the same set
of voter-level covariates included in Table 4, column 2. More politically competent candidates
were not significantly more successful at mobilizing voters.21 Systematic treatment heterogeneity
along canvassers' political index is only observed for the volunteers, and it goes in the opposite
  20 We   use only the candidate's z-score for mixed candidate-volunteer couples, as exclusively the candidate was
responsible for leading the conversation. Moreover, we demean z-scores by treatment group so that the main effects
are interpretable as the effects of the average canvassing couple in each treatment.
   21 For each estimate, we report both the precinct-clustered asymptotic p-value (in brackets) and the wild bootstrap

p-value robust to clustering by precinct and by each of the two canvassers, if any, who canvassed a given address (in
braces). To compute wild bootstrap p-values, we replace missing values of the two variables indicating canvassers
with a number uniquely identifying control-group observations in a given precinct. Moreover, within each pair of
canvassers, we define canvassers 1 and 2 to be, respectively, the female and the male canvasser in the couple. For the
relatively few voters (747 out of 11,089 voters visited by candidates or volunteers) visited by pairs of canvassers of
the same gender, we define canvassers 1 and 2 based on their names' alphabetical order. That is, canvasser 1 (resp.
canvasser 2) is the first (resp. second) canvasser within each pair according to the two canvassers' names' alphabetical
order.



                                                          19
direction: less politicized volunteers had larger effects on turnout. As shown in Table A.2, these
results are robust to using alternative constructions of the political competence index, and the
impact of candidates did not systematically vary along their level of education either.


3.3    Voter Persuasion

      The campaign sought to win votes by mobilizing inactive supporters as well as persuading ac-
tive but undecided voters. Even though the visits of candidates did not increase participation, they
may have persuaded some active voters, thus increasing the number of votes the candidates and/or
their list received. As a preliminary check on the existence of persuasion effects, we compare the
25 precincts that were canvassed by candidates to the 13 that were not. Since volunteers canvassed
all precincts, and vote counts are not available at any geographical level finer than the precinct, we
cannot estimate the impact of their visits on vote shares. Column 1 of Table 7 reports the results of
a bivariate regression of precinct-level vote share on a dummy for candidate canvassing. Columns
2 and 4 weight observations by the number of voters living in the precinct. Columns 3 and 4 con-
trol for precinct means of voter characteristics. Although the limited sample size rules out clear-cut
conclusions,22 we find no evidence of persuasion induced by canvassing candidates. If anything,
the list vote share decreased by an insignificant 0.3 percentage point in precincts canvassed by can-
didates. These results are robust to excluding the four precincts which were non-randomly selected
to be covered on the first day of the visits, based on their proximity to the meeting point (results
available upon request).
      When choosing a list, voters can also express up to two preferences for members of the list. We
now exploit the fact that different candidates were randomly assigned to different precincts, and use
official electoral results on individual candidates' vote counts at the precinct level to disentangle
the effect of a candidate's visit on her/his vote tally from the effect on the votes received by the
  22 With  25 precincts canvassed by candidates and 13 non-canvassed precincts, the mean list vote share in non-
canvassed precincts of 0.0363, and outcome standard deviations in non-canvassed and canvassed precincts of, re-
spectively, 0.0154 and 0.0160, the ex-post minimum detectable difference in vote share between canvassed and non-
canvassed precincts with 80% power is 0.0155.




                                                       20
other candidates on the list. To estimate these two impacts, we run the following regressions:


                 NVi, j =  +  1(precinct j canvassed by candidate i) + i + X j  + i, j ,                              (4)


and
                 NVi, j =  +  1(precinct j canvassed by candidate i) + i + X j  + i, j ,                              (5)

where NVi, j represents the votes received by candidate i in precinct j and NVi, j the votes received
in precinct j by all candidates of the list but i. The variable of interest is 1(precinct j canvassed by
candidate i), a treatment dummy equal to 1 if precinct j was randomly assigned to be canvassed
by candidate i. We control for candidate fixed effects i 's, to control for candidate characteristics,
such as her/his overall level of renown in the municipality, that might affect her/his vote counts
even in absence of canvassing. We run OLS and Poisson regressions, with or without precinct-
level covariates X j or fixed effects, and using one observation per candidate×precinct, for a total
of 760.23 The results from regressions 4 and 5 are presented in Table 8.
      Columns 1 through 3 report the effect on the canvassing candidates' own vote tallies. Can-
didates received .85 additional votes (Panel A, column 2) in the precincts they covered, thereby
doubling the average of 0.80 votes. OLS estimates that control for precinct-level covariates or
fixed effects are significant at the 10% level. This impact corresponds to 0.44% of all 180 voters
assigned to the candidates treatment in the average precinct. Taking into account the door-opening
rate of 45.5%, we obtain that the candidates persuaded .98% of voters to give them their prefer-
ence in households that opened their door. Proportional effects estimated by Poisson and Negative
Binomial regressions corroborate a similar, statistically more precise conclusion. For example, the
estimate of .689 from Panel B, column 2, implies that a canvassing candidate increased her/his
vote tally in the precinct by e.689 - 1 = 99% , which is comparable to the ratio between the corre-
sponding OLS impact estimate and the mean dependent variable (i.e., .853/.804).24
  23 Since  NVi, j + NVi, j = TotVotes j (i.e., the sum of the two outcomes is invariant at the precinct level), including
precinct fixed effects makes the OLS estimate       ^ mechanically equal to -^.
   24 Negative Binomial impact estimates are slightly larger and more statistically significant than their Poisson coun-

terparts. For example, the estimate of 1.049 from Panel C, column 2, implies that a canvassing candidate increased


                                                           21
    Columns 4 through 6 show the effect of canvassing candidates' visits on the votes received by
all other candidates. Consistently with the null effect on list vote share, candidates' canvassing
was essentially a zero-sum game: each new preference obtained by a candidate came from "steal-
ing the votes" of other candidates of the same list. Though at the limit of statistical significance,
this finding is robust to a number of different specifications, such as the inclusion or omission of
precinct-level covariates, as well as the restriction of the sample to the six more dedicated candi-
dates (see Appendix Table A.6).25 While limited statistical power forbids any strong conclusion,26
the available evidence suggests that candidates did receive more votes in the precincts they can-
vassed, but that a sizable share of this effect came from votes "stolen" from fellow list candidates.


4    Discussion and Conclusion

    Decreasing participation in the United States and in many European countries is paralleled by
another trend: a growing number of citizens express skepticism about politicians' responsiveness
to their concerns. Partnering with a civic organization that ran a list of candidates for city council
seats during the 2014 Italian municipal elections, we test whether discussions between candidates
and voters can help bridge this gap and increase voter turnout. The answer is a surprising no: door-
to-door visits made by the candidates during the five weeks before the election did not have any
significant effect on electoral participation. In addition, we do not find any effect of the candidates'
visits on any subgroup of the population, whether defined by age, gender, place of birth, or turnout
history. Our results enable us to discuss possible interpretations of the failure of voter mobilization
by candidates in this study.
her/his vote tally in the precinct by e1.049 - 1 = 185%. However, unlike OLS and Poisson regressions, Negative Bino-
mial regressions suffer from potential incidental parameters bias (Cameron and Trivedi, 2013). That is, inconsistent
estimation of the candidate and/or precinct fixed effects leads to inconsistent estimates of the other model parameters.
This suggests caution is needed in interpreting estimated persuasion effects from Negative Binomial specifications.
   25 Remember that, whenever each of the six more dedicated candidates finished covering a precinct, she was assigned

the next untouched precinct in the (randomly ordered) list. By contrast, "non-committed" candidates were paired with
a dedicated candidate in an attempt to compose complementary teams. Consequently, the treatment for persuasion
regressions (i.e., a dummy for being randomly assigned to canvass a certain precinct) has non-zero values only for
the six main candidates. All persuasion results are substantively identical when we restrict the sample to all eleven
candidates who took part in canvassing activities (results available upon request).
   26 See Table A.7 reporting persuasion MDEs.




                                                          22
   The first possible interpretation is that the particular context of the experiment was not suited
to door-to-door canvassing: perhaps voters in Northern Italy simply are not culturally receptive to
direct campaign contacts as they are in the United States and in other countries. This interpretation,
however, is ruled out by the large and significant impact of similar visits made by volunteers to
a comparable group of addresses over the same period. The 1.8 percentage point effect of volun-
teers' visits implies that 19.8% of the voters who were successfully contacted by the volunteers
and would have abstained otherwise were mobilized to vote, a mobilization rate that compares
favorably with the impact of door-to-door canvassing measured in other settings.
   A second possible interpretation is that the candidates were not of the type that makes door-
to-door canvassing impactful. Prior studies have found that activists' characteristics and the way
in which they interact with citizens can substantially affect the impact of the campaign. Candi-
dates of the civic list we worked with were not professional politicians, even though several of
them had prior office experience. Were they too incompetent to successfully mobilize nonvoters,
thereby limiting also the external validity of the findings? We do not find much empirical support
for this explanation. Responses to our survey of all those who conducted visits reveal instead that
candidates were more informed and politically engaged than the volunteers. In addition, more po-
litically competent candidates were not more successful at mobilizing voters. Systematic treatment
heterogeneity along canvassers' characteristics is only observed for the volunteers, and it goes in
the opposite direction: less politicized volunteers had larger effects on turnout.
   A last interpretation is that candidates and volunteers acted differently during the visits. Even
though the candidates' visits did not impact voter turnout, they increased, modestly but signifi-
cantly, the number of votes they received as individuals from voters on the day of the election.
This suggests that at least some candidates devoted time and efforts to persuade active voters to
give them their direct vote, beyond simply voting for their list. Several motives could explain this
behavior: the desire to increase their chance to get elected or to gain esteem from other candidates.
Evidence about the rolling-out of the door-to-door campaign further supports this claim: candi-
dates spent more time discussing with voters with high- than low-turnout history, they chose to


                                                 23
systematically pin personalized cards to the campaign leaflets, and men asked to be paired with
women, so that voters could give their two preferences to both candidates in the team. Conversely,
volunteers were openly supporting the list, but no candidate in particular. We infer that the differ-
ential impact of volunteers and candidates on voter turnout may have been partly due to the latter
devoting less time and effort to mobilizing nonvoters, and more to obtaining active voters' direct
preferences.
   Two circumstances make this result particularly striking: nonvoters had been explicitly pointed
out, in the training, as a primary target of the campaign. In addition, we find that the persuasion
effect benefited the candidates canvassing a particular precinct only at the expense of their list
mates. This suggests that candidates' individual incentives can keep them away from mobilizing
nonvoters, even when their list or party would benefit from it. This insight may extend beyond the
particular setting created by the preferences system in Italian municipal elections: while politicians
often lament the growing gap with disgruntled voters, they may simply not have clear individual
incentives to take any costly action to close it. Politicians compete against rivals within their own
party or camp in many contexts ­ jockeying for position within the party, competing in primaries
for forthcoming elections, and in some elections themselves. In these instances, it may be ­ or at
least seem ­ more cost-effective to focus on securing the vote and support of affiliated members
or active supporters of their party instead of reaching out to disenchanted citizens. Incentives to
focus on obtaining active voters' direct preferences instead of mobilizing nonvoters were perhaps
particularly strong for the candidates of the civic list we partnered with for this experiment, given
its limited electoral prospects. How different electoral rules and party regulations affect politicians'
incentives to undertake actions in the interest of their party and to target one type of citizens or
another, and how these incentives vary depending on parties' strength is an important topic for
future research.




                                                  24
            Figure 1: Turnout in Italy at Parliamentary, European and Municipal Elections

          90%




          80%
Turnout




          70%




          60%



                1980      1985        1990       1995      2000       2005       2010       2015
                                                 Election Year

                                 Parliamentary elections             European elections
                                 Municipal elections




                                                 25
                    Table 1: Volunteers' and Candidates' Summary Statistics

                                                   Volunteers       Candidates All Canvassers
                                                      (1)              (2)          (3)
                                    A. Socio-Demographics
Age                                                  25.36             47.64          36.50
                                                     (1.75)           (15.40)        (15.63)
Female                                                0.55              0.36           0.45
                                                     (0.52)            (0.50)         (0.51)
Education (1 = middle school, 4 = master's degree)    3.91              2.73           3.32
                                                     (0.30)            (1.10)         (0.99)
                               B. Political Engagement/Awareness
Knows the name of Minister of Foreign Affairs            0.55           0.73           0.64
                                                        (0.52)         (0.47)         (0.49)
Knows the party of Minister of Foreign Affairs           0.64           0.73           0.68
                                                        (0.50)         (0.47)         (0.48)
Knows the name of House President                        1.00           1.00           1.00

Knows the party of House President                      1.00            0.18           0.59
                                                                       (0.40)         (0.50)
Voted in 2013 national elections                         0.45           1.00           0.73
                                                        (0.52)                        (0.46)
Voted in last municipal election                         0.55           1.00           0.77
                                                        (0.52)                        (0.43)
Was ever elected to public office                        0.00           0.36           0.18
                                                                       (0.50)         (0.39)
Overall interest in politics (1 = min, 4 = max)          3.82           3.82           3.82
                                                        (0.40)         (0.40)         (0.39)
Follows politics on TV (1 = min, 3 = max)                1.82           2.91           2.36
                                                        (0.60)         (0.30)         (0.73)
Follows politics on radio (1 = min, 3 = max)             1.45           1.82           1.64
                                                        (0.52)         (0.75)         (0.66)
Follows politics on newspapers (1 = min, 3 = max)        2.36           2.73           2.55
                                                        (0.67)         (0.47)         (0.60)
Follows politics on the internet (1 = min, 3 = max)      2.64           2.36           2.50
                                                        (0.67)         (0.50)         (0.60)
Summary index of political engagement/awareness        -0.196           0.196         -0.000
                                                       (0.328)         (0.243)        (0.346)
Sample size                                               11             11             22
Notes: The table reports means and standard deviations in parentheses of survey variables.


                                                  26
                  Table 2: Covariate Balance: Voters' Characteristics

                                                   Treatment - Control Difference
                                 Control      Assigned to Assigned to           Any
                                              Volunteers     Candidates      Treatment
                                    (1)           (2)             (3)           (4)
Age                                55.23          0.04            0.53          0.28
                                  (18.75)        (0.37)          (0.35)        (0.30)
Female                             0.524         0.004           0.009 ~       0.006
                                  (0.499)       (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.004)
Married female                     0.262         0.010   *       0.009   *     0.009 *
                                  (0.440)       (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.004)
Widow                              0.088        -0.003           0.004         0.000
                                  (0.284)       (0.005)         (0.004)       (0.004)
Married male or widower            0.276         0.003           0.003         0.003
                                  (0.447)       (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.004)
Born in the province               0.639         0.009           0.001         0.005
                                  (0.480)       (0.009)         (0.009)       (0.007)
Born abroad                        0.032         0.001           0.004         0.002
                                  (0.175)       (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.002)
Number of voters in building       19.72         -0.18            0.39          0.09
                                  (13.34)        (0.85)          (0.82)        (0.68)
Did not vote in 2013               0.133        -0.003          0.0003        -0.001
                                  (0.339)       (0.006)        (0.0061)       (0.005)
Voted in 2013                      0.807         0.003           0.006         0.004
                                  (0.395)       (0.008)         (0.007)       (0.006)
Not in the 2013 voter rolls        0.060       -0.0002          -0.007        -0.003
                                  (0.238)      (0.0046)         (0.004)       (0.004)
F-test                                            0.86           1.23            1.12
p-value                                          0.567          0.264           0.342
Sample size                       13,181        19,855          19,678           26,352
Notes: Each of the 26,352 voters in the sample resides in one of 2,612
addresses/buildings: 1,323 assigned to the control group, and 642 (647) assigned to be
canvassed by volunteers (candidates). The sample size of column 2 (3) includes 13,181
control group voters and 6,674 (6,497) voters assigned to be canvassed by volunteers
(candidates). The sample size of column 3 refers to all voters subject to randomization.
Treatment-control differences are from regressions that control for strata (street name by
precinct) dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the residential address level.
** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10



                                            27
Table 3: Covariate Balance: Canvassers' Political Engagement and Canvassed Voters' Character-
istics

                                         Canvassed by Canvassed byAll Canvassed
                                          Volunteers Candidates       Voters
                                              (1)          (2)          (3)
            Age                               2.44         1.75         2.02
                                             (3.96)       (1.73)       (1.88)
            Female                           0.001        0.047        0.029
                                            (0.038)      (0.034)      (0.017)
            Married female                  -0.018        0.013        0.001
                                            (0.024)      (0.023)      (0.015)
            Widow                            0.013        0.040 ~      0.029 ~
                                            (0.033)      (0.021)      (0.017)
            Married male or widower          0.015       -0.020       -0.007
                                            (0.034)      (0.023)      (0.017)
            Born in the province             0.057       -0.048       -0.007
                                            (0.041)      (0.031)      (0.026)
            Born abroad                      0.007        0.011        0.009
                                            (0.016)      (0.012)      (0.009)
            Number of voters in building    -10.75         1.31        -3.41
                                             (7.64)       (4.63)       (3.54)
            Did not vote in 2013             0.026       -0.031       -0.009
                                            (0.030)      (0.022)      (0.018)
            Voted in 2013                   -0.017        0.045        0.021
                                            (0.032)      (0.031)      (0.024)
            Not in the 2013 voter rolls     -0.008       -0.014       -0.012
                                            (0.022)      (0.018)      (0.014)

            Sample size                          6,674       4,415           11,089
            Notes: Each cell reports estimates from a regression of the row
            variable, which represents a voter characteristic, on the political
            engagement index of the visiting canvassers. The samples in columns
            1 and 2 are voters whose addresses were visited by party volunteers
            and candidates, respectively. Regressions in column 3 are run on all
            voters living in canvassed addresses, and include dummies for whether
            the address was visited by volunteers or candidates. Standard errors
            are clustered at the precinct level.
            ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10



                                               28
Table 4: Treatment Effects on Voter Turnout: Main Results

                                           Turnout
                                    (1)             (2)
 Canvassed by volunteers           0.018     *     0.014     *

                                  (0.008)         (0.006)
 Canvassed by candidates          -0.002          -0.005
                                  (0.012)         (0.010)
 Age                                              0.0006     **

                                                 (0.0002)
 Female                                            0.013
                                                  (0.008)
 Married female                                    0.072     **

                                                  (0.008)
 Widow                                            -0.022     ~

                                                  (0.012)
 Married male or widower                           0.085     **

                                                  (0.008)
 Born in the province                              0.049     **

                                                  (0.006)
 Born abroad                                      -0.062     **

                                                  (0.017)
 Number of voters in building                    -0.0001
                                                 (0.0003)
 Did not vote in 2013                             -0.382     **

                                                  (0.017)
 Voted in 2013                                     0.177     **

                                                  (0.015)
       v     c
 H0: T = T = 0
  F-test                            3.20              3.59
  p-value                          0.041             0.028
       v     c
 H0: T = T
  F-test                            2.98              3.68
  p-value                          0.084             0.055
 Mean dep. var.                      0.747          0.747
 Sample size                        26,352         26,352
 Notes: All regressions control for strata dummies. Due
 to the incomplete delivery of the candidate treatment, the
 "Canvassed by candidates" regressor is instrumented by a
 dummy equal to 1 if the address was assigned to be
 canvassed by candidates. The omitted category for voter
 turnout in 2013 is "Not in the 2013 voter rolls". Standard
 errors are clustered at the residential address level.
 ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10
                               29
Table 5: Treatment Effects on Voter Turnout by Voter Characteristics

                                Control        Treatment Effects
                                 Mean       Volunteers Candidates
                                  (1)          (2)          (3)
Average effect                   0.747        0.014   *   -0.005
                                             (0.006)      (0.010)
                                  Interactions with 2013 Turnout
Did not vote in 2013             0.249          0.003       0.024
                                               (0.020)     (0.028)
Voted in 2013                    0.840          0.016  *   -0.012
                                               (0.006)     (0.011)
Not in the 2013 voter rolls      0.604          0.013       0.030
                                               (0.034)     (0.052)
Sample size                     13,181       26,352        26,352
Notes: The table reports results from a pooled regression that
distinguishes the effects of the volunteer (column 2) and candidate
visits (column 3) on the set of voters defined by the row variable,
along with the estimates from column 2 of Table 4. All regressions
control for strata dummies and the same set of baseline covariates
reported in Table 4, column 2. Interactions between voters'
characteristics and the candidate treatment are instrumented by
interactions between the same voter characteristics and a dummy for
whether the voters' address was assigned to be canvassed by
candidates. Standard errors are clustered at the residential address
level.
** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10




                                 30
Table 6: Treatment Effects on Voter Turnout by Canvassers' Political Competence

                                                     Turnout
                                                 (1)           (2)
         Canvassed by volunteers                0.018    ~    0.014      ~

                                               (0.009)       (0.008)
                                               [0.057]       [0.059]
                                               {0.080}       {0.099}
         Canvassed by candidates               -0.003        -0.005
                                               (0.011)       (0.010)
                                               [0.779]       [0.605]
                                               {0.763}       {0.590}
         Canvassed by volunteers*z-score       -0.073        -0.076      *

                                               (0.046)       (0.037)
                                               [0.113]       [0.041]
                                               {0.155}       {0.081}
         Canvassed by candidates*z-score        0.034         0.021
                                               (0.036)       (0.029)
                                               [0.336]       [0.478]
                                               {0.308}       {0.470}
         Voter covariates                                       yes
         Sample size                            26,352         26,352
         Notes: The table reports estimates and precinct-clustered
         standard errors in parentheses from regressions of voter
         turnout on the two treatment dummies, their interactions with
         the canvassers' index of political competence, and strata
         dummies. Column 2's regression also controls for the
         covariates reported in Table 4, column 2. "Canvassed by
         candidates" is instrumented with a dummy for assignment to
         the candidate treatment. Z-scores are demeaned by treatment.
         Precinct-clustered p-values are reported in parentheses and
         brackets. Bootstrap p-values clustered by precinct and by
         each of the two canvassers (if any) are reported in braces.
         Bootstrap p-values are based on Webb weights and 999
         repetitions, a number chosen following Davidson and
         MacKinnon (2000) to ensure that the significance level times
         the sum of the number of bootstraps and one is an integer.
         Bootstrap p-values are computed using Stata boottest routine
         (Roodman et al., 2018).
         ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10


                                      31
                       Table 7: Treatment Effect on the List Vote Share

                                                            List Vote Share
                                          (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)
Precinct canvassed by candidates        -0.0034         -0.0029        -0.0034        -0.0027
                                        (0.0055)        (0.0057)       (0.0068)       (0.0071)
Weighted by # of voters in precinct                       yes                            yes
Precinct covariates                                                      yes             yes
Mean dep. var.                             0.0341       0.0348         0.0341          0.0348
Sample size                                   38          38              38             38
Notes: Each column reports coefficients and standard errors from a regression of the civic
list's vote share at the precinct level on a dummy for whether the precinct received the visits of
candidates. 25 of the 38 precincts in the sample received the visits of candidates.
Regressions in columns 2 and 4 are weighted by the number of eligible voters in the precinct.
Regressions in columns 3 and 4 also control for precinct averages of the covariates reported in
column 2 of Table 4. Robust standard errors are obtained using the HC3 small-sample
adjustment.
** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10




                                               32
                                 Table 8: Treatment Effects on Candidates' Votes Received

                                                Candidate i 's Votes                       Other Candidates' Votes
                                                   in Precinct j                                in Precinct j
                                            (1)         (2)          (3)               (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                                               A. OLS
     Candidate i canvassed precinct j       0.758          0.853    ~     0.840 ~    -1.722        -0.464        -0.840    ~

                                           (0.485)        (0.497)        (0.499)     (1.671)       (0.718)       (0.499)
                                                                              B. Poisson
     Candidate i canvassed precinct j       0.421    ~     0.689    *     0.719 *      -0.123      -0.057        -0.074    ~

                                           (0.233)        (0.276)        (0.320)      (0.122)      (0.052)       (0.040)
                                                                         C. Negative Binomial
33




     Candidate i canvassed precinct j       0.845    **    1.049    **    1.209 ** -0.128          -0.063        -0.074    ~

                                           (0.323)        (0.342)        (0.363)      (0.123)      (0.054)       (0.040)
     Candidate FEs                            yes          yes            yes           yes          yes          yes
     Precinct covariates                                   yes                                       yes
     Precinct FEs                                                         yes                                     yes
     Mean dep. var.                          0.804        0.804          0.804         15.275      15.275        15.275
     Sample size                             760           760           760            760          760          760
     Notes: The sample consists of the 20 civic list's candidates times the 38 precincts included in the experiment. The
     treatment is a dummy for whether the candidate was randomly assigned to canvass a certain precinct. The
     dependent variable in columns 1-3 (4-6) is the number of preferences the candidate herself/himself (all candidates
     but oneself) received in the precinct. Standard errors are clustered at the precinct level.
     ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10
References

Arceneaux, K. (2007). I'm Asking for Your Support: The Effects of Personally Delivered Cam-
  paign Messages on Voting Decisions and Opinion Formation. Quarterly Journal of Political
  Science 2(1), 43­65.

Arceneaux, K. and D. W. Nickerson (2009). Who is Mobilized to Vote? A Re-Analysis of Eleven
  Randomized Field Experiments. American Journal of Political Science 53(1), 1­16.

Arceneaux, K. and D. W. Nickerson (2010). Comparing Negative and Positive Campaign Mes-
  sages: Evidence From Two Field Experiments. American Politics Research 38(1), 54­83.

Ashworth, S. (2006). Campaign finance and voter welfare with entrenched incumbents. American
  Political Science Review 100(01), 55­68.

Atkeson, L. R. (1999). Sure, I Voted for the Winner! Overreport of the Primary Vote for the Party
  Nominee in the National Election Studies. Political Behavior 21(3), 197­215.

Bailey, M., D. J. Hopkins, and T. Rogers (2014, may). Unresponsive and Unpersuaded: The
  Unintended Consequences of Voter Persuasion Efforts. Available at SSRN 2307631.

Ballini, P. L. and M. Ridolfi (2002). Storia delle campagne elettorali in Italia. 1, 302.

Barton, J., M. Castillo, and R. Petrie (2014). What Persuades Voters? A Field Experiment on
  Political Campaigning. The Economic Journal 124(574), 293­326.

Bhatti, Y., J. O. Dahlgaard, J. Hedegaard Hansen, and K. M. Hansen (2018). Is Door-to-Door
  Canvassing Effective in Europe? Evidence from a Meta-study across Six European Countries.
  British Journal of Political Science Forthcoming.

Bhatti, Y., E. Fieldhouse, and K. M. Hansen (2018, Jul). It's a group thing: How voters go to the
  polls together. Political Behavior.

Blais, A. (2010). Political participation. Comparing democracies 3, 165­183.

                                                 34
Blais, A. and D. Rubenson (2013). The source of Turnout Decline: New Values or New contexts?
  Comparative Political Studies 46(1), 95­117.

Blom-Hansen, J., J. Elklit, S. Serritzlew, and L. R. Villadsen (2016). Ballot position and election
  results: Evidence from a natural experiment. Electoral Studies 44, 172 ­ 183.

Brady, H., S. Verba, and K. L. Schlozman (1995). Voice and equality: Civic voluntarism in Amer-
  ican politics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Cameron, C. A. and P. K. Trivedi (2013). Regression Analysis of Count Data (2nd ed.). Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.

Campbell, J. E. (2010, oct). The Seats in Trouble Forecast of the 2010 Elections to the U.S. House.
  PS: Political Science & Politics 43(04), 627­630.

Cardy, E. A. (2005, sep). An Experimental Field Study of the GOTV and Persuasion Effects of
  Partisan Direct Mail and Phone Calls. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and
  Social Science 601(1), 28­40.

Cox, G. W. (1997). Making Votes Count: Strategic Coordination in the World's Electoral Systems.
  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Dalton, R. J. (2007). The Good Citizen: How a Younger Generation is Reshaping American
  Politics. Washington: Congressional Quarterly Press.

DellaVigna, S. and M. Gentzkow (2010). Persuasion: Empirical Evidence. Annual Review of
  Economics 2, 643­649.

Duverger, M. (1954). Political Parties: Their Organization and Activity in the Modern State. New
  York: Wiley.

ECPRD (2000). The ECPRD: Electoral Systems in Europe: an Overview. European Centre for
  Parliamentary Research and Documentation.


                                                35
Enos, R. D., A. Fowler, and L. Vavreck (2014). Increasing Inequality: The Effect of GOTV
  Mobilization on the Composition of the Electorate. The Journal of Politics 76(1), 273­288.

Enos, R. D. and E. D. Hersh (2015). Party Activists as Campaign Advertisers: The Ground Cam-
  paign as a Principal-Agent Problem. The American Political Science Review 109(2), 252­278.

Foos, F. and P. John (2018). Parties are No Civic Charities: Voter Contact and the Changing
  Partisan Composition of the Electorate. Political Science Research and Methods 6(2), 283­298.

Franklin, M. N., P. Lyons, and M. Marsh (2004). Generational Basis of Turnout Decline in Estab-
  lished Democracies. Acta Politica 39(2), 115­151.

Galasso, V. and T. Nannicini (2018). Persuasion and Gender: Experimental Evidence from Two
  Political Campaigns.

Gelman, A., S. Goel, D. Rivers, and D. Rothschild (2016). The Mythical Swing Voter. Quarterly
  Journal of Political Science 11(1), 103­130.

Gerber, A. S. and D. P. Green (2000). The Effects of Canvassing on Voter Turnout. American
  Political Science Review 94(3), 653­663.

Gerber, A. S. and D. P. Green (2017). Field experiments on voter mobilization: An overview of
  a burgeoning literature. In A. V. Banerjee and E. Duflo (Eds.), Handbook of Economic Field
  Experiments, Volume 1, Chapter 9, pp. 395­438. Elsevier.

Gerber, A. S., D. P. Green, and M. Green (2003, dec). Partisan mail and voter turnout: results from
  randomized field experiments. Electoral Studies 22(4), 563­579.

Gosnell, H. F. (1930). Why Europe Votes. The University of Chicago Press.

Gray, M. and M. Caul (2000). Declining Voter Turnout in Advanced Industrial Democracies,
  1950 to 1997: The effects of declining group mobilization. Comparative Political Studies 33(9),
  1091­1122.


                                                 36
Green, D. P. and A. S. Gerber (2015). Get Out the Vote: How to Increase Voter Turnout. Brookings
  Institution Press.

Green, D. P., A. S. Gerber, and D. W. Nickerson (2003). Getting Out the Vote in Local Elections:
  Results from Six Door-to-Door Canvassing Experiments. Journal of Politics 65(4), 1083­1096.

Green, D. P., M. C. McGrath, and P. M. Aronow (2013a). Field Experiments and the Study of
  Voter Turnout. Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties 23(1), 27­48.

Green, D. P., M. C. McGrath, and P. M. Aronow (2013b). Field experiments and the study of voter
  turnout. Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties 23(1), 27­48.

Hoffman, E., K. McCabe, and V. Smith (1996). Social distance and other-regarding behavior in
  dictator games. The American Economic Review 86(3), 653­660.

John, P. and T. Brannan (2008). How Different Are Telephoning and Canvassing? Results from
  a 'Get Out the Vote' Field Experiment in the British 2005 General Election. British Journal of
  Political Science 38(03), 565­574.

Johnston, R., S. J. Matthews, and A. Bittner (2006). Alienation, indifference, competitiveness, and
  turnout: Evidence from Canada. Electoral Studies 26(4), 735­745.

Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.
  Econometrica 75(1), 83­119.

Landry, C. E., A. Lange, J. A. List, M. K. Price, and N. G. Rupp (2006). Toward an Understand-
  ing of the Economics of Charity: Evidence From a Field Experiment. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 121(2), 747­782.

Liegey, G., A. Muller, and V. Pons (2013). Porte-à-Porte: Reconquérir la démocratie sur le terrain.
  Calmann-Lévy.

Lijphart, A. (1997). Unequal Participation: Democracy's Unresolved Dilemma. The American
  Political Science Review 91(1), 1­14.

                                                37
Michelson, M. R. (2005). Meeting the Challenge of Latino Voter Mobilization. The Annals of the
  American Academy of Political and Social Science of the American Academy of Political and
  Social Science 601(1), 85­101.

Nickerson, D. W. (2007). Quality is job one: Professional and volunteer voter mobilization calls.
  American Journal of Political Science 51(2), 269­282.

Nickerson, D. W., R. D. Friedrichs, and D. C. King (2006). Partisan Mobilization Campaigns
  in the Field: Results from a Statewide Turnout Experiment in Michigan. Political Research
  Quarterly 59(1), 85­97.

Novelli, E. (2018). Le campagne elettorali in Italia.

Nyman, P. (2017). Door-to-door canvassing in the European elections: Evidence from a Swedish
  field experiment. Electoral Studies 45(1), 110­118.

Pons, V. (2018). Will a Five-Minute Discussion Change your Mind? A Countrywide Experiment
  on Voter Choice in France. American Economic Review 108(6), 1322­1363.

Pons, V. and G. Liegey (2019). Increasing the Electoral Participation of Immigrants: Experiment
  Evidence from France. The Economic Journal 129(617), 481­508.

Potters, J., R. Sloof, and F. van Winden (1997, feb). Campaign expenditures, contributions and
  direct endorsements: The strategic use of information and money to influence voter behavior.
  European Journal of Political Economy 13(1), 1­31.

Price, M. K. (2008). Fund-raising success and a solicitor's beauty capital: Do blondes raise more
  funds? Economics Letters 100, 351­354.

Putnam, R. D. and S. J. Pharr (2000). Disaffected democracies: What's troubling the trilateral
  countries? Princeton University Press.

Radcliff, B. (1992). The Welfare State, Turnout, and the Economy: A Comparative Analysis.
  American Political Science Review 86(02), 444­454.

                                                 38
Sinclair, B., M. Mcconnell, and M. R. Michelson (2007). Strangers vs. Neighbors: The Efficacy of
  Grassroots Voter Mobilization. Annual meeting of the American Political Science Association.

Solijonov, A. (2016). Voter Turnout Trends around the World. Technical report, International
  Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance (International IDEA), Stockholm.

Taylor, S. L., M. S. Shugart, A. Lijphart, and B. Grofman (2014). A Different Democracy: Ameri-
  can Government in a 31-Country Perspective. New Haven & London: Yale University Press.

Teixeira, R. A. (1992). The Disappearing Voter. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

Verba, S. and N. H. Nie (1972). Participation in America: Political democracy and social equality.
  New York: Harper and Row.

Wantchekon, L. (2003). Clientelism and voting behavior: Evidence from a field experiment in
  Benin. World politics 55(03), 399­422.

Wattenberg, M. P. (2002). Where have all the voters gone? Harvard University Press.

Wolfinger, R. E. and S. J. Rosenstone (1980). Who votes? New Haven: Yale University Press.

Wright, G. C. (1993). Errors in Measuring Vote Choice in the National Election Studies, 1952­88.
  American Journal of Political Science 37, 291­316.




                                               39
A     APPENDIX (FOR ONLINE-ONLY PUBLICATION)




A.1   2SLS Regressions With Endogenous Door-Opening-Rates

    Regressions in the paper do not correct for whether a voter was actually contacted by can-
vassers. Following the literature (e.g., Gerber and Green, 2000), it is only in a second step that we
relate regression estimates to the fraction of opened doors to estimate what fraction of contacted
voters were successfully persuaded. Here, we present the results obtained with an alternative ap-
proach. We use a just-identified 2SLS framework, and instrument the fraction of opened doors
in building b assigned to treatment t , %doorstb(i) , with a dummy for assignment to treatment t .
Formally, in lieu of equation 2, we estimate the following regression:


      Votei =  +   v,k Zik × %doorsv       c,k k       c                  s
                                   b(i) +   Zi × %doorsb(i) + Xi,b(i)  +  b(i) + i ,             (6)
                    k                         k                                    s


where Zik × %doorstb(i) is instrumented by Zik × 1(b(i) assigned to treatment t ). Consistently with
the results of Table 5, 2SLS estimates in Table A.1 suggest that the impact of volunteers' visits
is significant and larger for voters with a higher-than-average propensity to vote. Conversely,
candidates' visits did not have any significant impact on turnout for any type of voter.




                                                  40
Table A.1: Treatment Effects on Voter Turnout by Voter Characteristics: Instrumenting for Door-
Opening Rates

                                              Control         Treatment Effects
                                               Mean       Volunteers   Candidates
                                                (1)          (2)           (3)
             Average effect                    0.747        0.041    *   -0.011
                                                           (0.018)       (0.023)
                                                A. Interactions with 2013 Turnout
             Did not vote in 2013              0.249          0.008         0.056
                                                             (0.057)       (0.065)
             Voted in 2013                     0.840          0.046   *    -0.027
                                                             (0.018)       (0.024)
             Not in the 2013 voter rolls       0.604          0.040         0.070
                                                             (0.103)       (0.120)
                                                   B. Interactions with Gender
             Male                              0.757          0.043 *      -0.013
                                                             (0.022)       (0.029)
             Female                            0.738          0.040  ~     -0.008
                                                             (0.022)       (0.027)
                                                C. Interactions with Place of Birth
             Born in the province              0.776          0.062 **       0.002
                                                             (0.021)        (0.026)
             Born elsewhere in the region      0.738          0.060          0.036
                                                             (0.055)        (0.061)
             Born out of the region            0.684         -0.013         -0.056
                                                             (0.038)        (0.045)
                                                    D. Interactions with Age
             Main treatment effect                           0.095 *       -0.002
                                                            (0.045)        (0.054)
             Age*treatment                                  -0.001        -0.0002
                                                            (0.001)       (0.0012)
             Sample size                        13,181       26,352         26,352
             Notes: Panels A-C report results from pooled 2SLS regressions that
             distinguish the effects of the volunteer (column 2) and candidate visits
             (column 3) on the set of voters defined by the row variable. For each
             treatment, the endogenous variables are the interactions between the
             fraction of open doors in the building and the voter characteristics in
             rows. The corresponding instruments are the interactions between the
             treatment assignment dummy and the same set of voter characteristics.
             All regressions control for strata dummies and the same set of baseline
             covariates reported in Table 4, column 2. Standard errors are clustered
             at the residential address level.
             ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10 41
A.2    Interactions with Canvassers' Political Competence: Robustness Checks

    Table A.2 reports estimates from regression 3 under alternative measures of canvassers' po-
litical competence. Columns 1 and 2 correspond to the estimates of Table 6, where indices of
canvassers' political competence are constructed using all survey information reported in Panel B
of Table 1. The z-score used for regressions in columns 3 and 4 (5 and 6) is constructed using
(excluding) only the following responses: "Voted in 2013 national elections", "Voted in last mu-
nicipal election", and "Was ever elected to public office". The z-score in columns 7 and 8 includes
all survey responses from Table 1, Panel B, but "Was ever elected to public office".
    With the exception of columns 3 and 4, interaction coefficients are substantively unaffected by
the choice of the canvassers' political competence index. One explanation of this exception is that
past turnout might be a surprisingly misleading proxy for the volunteers' political engagement. For
reasons of college enrollment, in fact, most volunteers resided in regions different than the one of
voter registration, making it perhaps prohibitively costly for them to vote27 independently of their
actual level of interest in politics.




  27 There   is no absentee voting in Italy.


                                                42
Table A.2: Treatment Effects on Voter Turnout by Canvassers' Political Competence: Robustness
Checks

                      Original        Past Turnout        Interest in Politics    All But       Education
                      Z-Score        and Ever Held        Know Politicians,      Previous
                                      Public Office        Follow on media        Office
                      (1)                  (2)                    (3)               (4)            (5)
Canvassed by         0.014       ~        0.014       ~          0.014       ~     0.014    ~     0.014     ~

 volunteers         (0.008)              (0.008)                (0.008)           (0.008)        (0.008)
                    [0.059]              [0.069]                [0.059]           [0.059]         [0.07]
                    {0.099}             {0.178}                 {0.061}           {0.099}        {0.160}
Canvassed by        -0.005               -0.005                 -0.005            -0.005         -0.005
 candidates         (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.010)           (0.010)        (0.010)
                    [0.605]              [0.629]                [0.599]           [0.607]        [0.638]
                    {0.590}             {0.601}                 {0.573}           {0.595}        {0.615}
Canvassed by        -0.076       *       -0.004                 -0.061       *    -0.069    *     0.014
 volunteers*z-score (0.037)              (0.027)                (0.026)           (0.034)        (0.034)
                    [0.041]              [0.867]                [0.019]           [0.041]        [0.685]
                    {0.081}             {0.865}                 {0.030}           {0.078}        {0.732}
Canvassed by         0.021                0.007                  0.013             0.016         -0.000
 candidates*z-score (0.029)              (0.021)                (0.019)           (0.023)        (0.007)
                    [0.478]              [0.757]                [0.484]           [0.492]        [0.973]
                    {0.470}             {0.759}                 {0.478}           {0.482}        {0.956}
Voter covariates           yes              yes                 yes              yes             yes
Sample size              26,352           26,352              26,352            26,352         26,352
Notes: Columns 1 reports the same estimates of Table 6, column 2. Columns 2-5 verify the
robustness of the interactions with canvassers' z-scores to alternative definitions of the political
competence index. The z-score for column 2 (resp. 3) is the sum of (resp. all but) the z-scores of the
following variables from Table 1, Panel B: "Voted in 2013 national elections", "Voted in last
municipal election", and "Was ever elected to public office". The z-score for column 4 is the sum of
the z-scores of all variables except "Was ever elected to public office". The z-score for column 5 is
the z-score of the "Education" variable reported in Panel A of Table 1. Standard errors and p-values
clustered at the precinct level are reported in parentheses and brackets, respectively. Wild bootstrap
p-values, robust to three-way clustering by precinct and by each of the two canvassers (if any) who
canvassed a given address, are reported in braces. See notes to Table 6 for details on the bootstrap
procedure.
** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10




                                                 43
A.3   Additional Balancing Exercises and Robustness Checks




                                          44
Table A.3: Canvassers' Political Engagement and Canvassed Voters' Characteristics Covariate
Balance: Precinct-Clustered vs. Wild-Bootstrap P-Values

                                           Canvassed by Canvassed byAll Canvasse
                                            Volunteers Candidates       Voters
                                                (1)          (2)           (3)
              Age                               2.44         1.75          2.02
                                              [0.542]      [0.321]      [0.290]
                                             {0.676}      {0.619}       {0.374}
              Female                           0.001        0.047         0.029
                                              [0.986]      [0.184]      [0.101]
                                             {0.978}      {0.659}       {0.118}
              Married female                  -0.018        0.013         0.001
                                              [0.457]      [0.581]      [0.949]
                                             {0.499}      {0.639}       {0.951}
              Widow                            0.013        0.040         0.029
                                              [0.697]      [0.063]      [0.092]
                                             {0.868}      {0.229}       {0.323}
              Married male or widower          0.015       -0.020       -0.007
                                              [0.666]      [0.381]      [0.691]
                                             {0.709}      {0.551}       {0.763}
              Born in the province             0.057       -0.048       -0.007
                                              [0.167]      [0.131]      [0.792]
                                             {0.276}      {0.202}       {0.802}
              Born abroad                      0.007        0.011         0.009
                                              [0.661]      [0.360]      [0.289]
                                             {0.596}      {0.598}       {0.396}
              Number of voters in building    -10.75         1.31        -3.41
                                               [0.17]       [0.78]       [0.34]
                                              {0.54}       {0.72}        {0.50}
              Did not vote in 2013             0.026       -0.031       -0.009
                                              [0.400]      [0.170]      [0.621]
                                             {0.496}      {0.381}       {0.708}
              Voted in 2013                   -0.017        0.045         0.021
                                              [0.592]      [0.160]      [0.397]
                                             {0.554}      {0.231}       {0.418}
              Not in the 2013 voter rolls     -0.008       -0.014       -0.012
                                              [0.700]      [0.441]      [0.406]
                                             {0.363}      {0.355}       {0.145}

              Sample size                        6,674         4,415          11,089
              Notes: This table reports the same point estimates as Table 3.
              Precinct-clustered asymptotic p-values are reported in brackets. Wild
              bootstrap p-values, robust to three-way clustering by precinct and by
              each of the two canvassers (if any) who canvassed a given address,
              are reported in braces. See notes to Table 6 for details on the
              bootstrap procedure.               45
Table A.4: Treatment Effects on Voter Turnout by Voter Gender, Place of Birth, and Age

                                       Control            Treatment Effects
                                        Mean          Volunteers    Candidates
                                         (1)             (2)             (3)
      Average effect                    0.747           0.014    *     -0.005
                                                       (0.006)        (0.010)
                                            A. Interactions with Gender
      Male                              0.757          0.015 *       -0.006
                                                      (0.008)        (0.013)
      Female                            0.738          0.014   ~     -0.004
                                                      (0.008)        (0.012)
                                          B. Interactions with Place of Birth
      Born in the province              0.776           0.022 **        0.001
                                                       (0.007)         (0.012)
      Born elsewhere in the region      0.738           0.022           0.016
                                                       (0.020)         (0.028)
      Born out of the region            0.684          -0.005          -0.025
                                                       (0.013)         (0.020)
                                                 C. Interactions with Age
      Main treatment effect                                0.032 *       -0.001
                                                          (0.016)        (0.024)
      Age*treatment                                      -0.0005        -0.0001
                                                         (0.0004)       (0.0005)
      Sample size                      13,181          26,352          26,352
      Notes: Each panel reports estimates from a separate regression. Panels A-
      B report results from pooled regressions that distinguish the effects of the
      volunteer (column 2) and candidate visits (column 3) on the set of voters
      defined by the row variable. All regressions control for strata dummies
      and the same set of baseline covariates reported in Table 4, column 2.
      Interactions between voters' characteristics and the candidate treatment are
      instrumented by interactions between the same voter characteristics and a
      dummy for whether the voters' address was assigned to be canvassed by
      candidates. Standard errors are clustered at the residential address level.
      ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10




                                          46
                    Table A.5: Precinct-Level Randomization Checks

                                                     Treatment - Control Difference
                                Control Mean    All Candidates        Only Major
                                                    Sample        Candidates Sample
                                     (1)               (2)                 (3)
Average age                         55.57              0.32   ~            0.38       ~

                                    (3.04)            (0.18)              (0.22)
Share female                        0.534             0.002               0.002
                                   (0.019)           (0.002)             (0.002)
Share married females               0.269            -0.002              -0.002
                                   (0.021)           (0.002)             (0.002)
Share widows                        0.089             0.002               0.003
                                   (0.029)           (0.002)             (0.002)
Share married widows                0.272            -0.001              -0.001
                                   (0.021)           (0.002)             (0.002)
Share born in Province              0.640            0.0005               0.001
                                   (0.036)          (0.0032)             (0.004)
Share born abroad                   0.033             0.001               0.001
                                   (0.008)           (0.001)             (0.001)
Average number of voters            703.7              3.53                4.23
 per building                      (106.4)            (7.20)              (8.65)
Share 2013 non-voters               0.132             0.006               0.007
                                   (0.026)           (0.004)             (0.005)
Share 2013 voters                   0.809            -0.006              -0.007
                                   (0.032)           (0.004)             (0.005)
Share voters not in 2013            0.059            0.0001              0.0001
                                   (0.014)          (0.0010)            (0.0012)
F-test                                                0.88                0.94
p-value                                              0.553               0.496
Sample size                         760               760                 228
Notes: The sample in columns 1-2 (resp. 3) consists of the 20 civic list's candidates
(resp. the 6 main candidates who were randomly assigned to canvass at least one
precinct) times the 38 precincts included in the experiment. Column 1 reports means and
standard deviations of row characteristics in control-group observations (precinct-
candidates). Each cell in columns 2-3 reports estimates and precinct-clustered standard
errors from regressions of a given precinct characteristic on a dummy for whether the
candidate was randomly assigned to canvass a certain precinct. All regressions control
for the random order used to assign precincts to canvassers.
** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10


                                          47
                    Table A.6: Treatment Effects on Candidates' Votes Received: Main Candidates Only

                                              Main Candidate i 's Votes              Other Main Candidates' Votes
                                                   in Precinct j                            in Precinct j
                                            (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                             A. OLS
     Candidate i canvassed precinct j      0.758         0.998    ~     0.969 ~    -1.240        -0.651        -0.969    ~

                                          (0.485)       (0.535)        (0.563)     (0.909)       (0.513)       (0.563)
                                                                            B. Poisson
     Candidate i canvassed precinct j      0.421    ~    0.738    **    0.854 ** -0.149          -0.106    ~   -0.145    *

                                          (0.233)       (0.279)        (0.307)      (0.110)      (0.059)       (0.064)
                                                                       C. Negative Binomial
48




     Candidate i canvassed precinct j      0.749    *    0.987    **    1.024 ** -0.164          -0.102    ~   -0.145    *

                                          (0.301)       (0.279)        (0.307)      (0.110)      (0.055)       (0.064)
     Candidate FEs                             yes          yes            yes          yes          yes          yes
     Precinct covariates                                    yes                                      yes
     Precinct FEs                                                          yes                                    yes
     Mean dep. var.                          1.715         1.715         1.715         8.575        8.575        8.575
     Sample size                              228           228           228           228          228          228
     Notes: The sample consists of the 6 main candidates of the civic list (i.e., candidates who were randomly assigned
     to canvass at least one precinct) times the 38 precincts included in the experiment. The treatment is a dummy for
     whether the candidate was randomly assigned to canvass a certain precinct. The dependent variable in columns 1-3
     (4-6) is the number of preferences the main candidate herself/himself (all main candidates but oneself) received in
     the precinct. Standard errors are clustered at the precinct level.
     ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05, ~ p < 0.10
                           Table A.7: Minimum Detectable Effects on Candidates' Votes Received

                                                 Candidate i 's Votes                      Other Candidates' Votes
                                                    in Precinct j                               in Precinct j
                                             (1)         (2)          (3)              (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                                             A. OLS
     Candidate i canvassed precinct j       1.378         1.410         1.418      -4.678          -2.009        -1.398
                                                                            B. Poisson
     Candidate i canvassed precinct j       0.662         0.784         0.910        -0.341        -0.146        -0.112
49




                                                                      C. Negative Binomial
     Candidate i canvassed precinct j          0.918      0.970         1.030         -0.344        -0.150        -0.112
     Notes: The table reports minimum detectable effects (MDEs) for each persuasion regression reported in Table 8.
     To compute these MDEs, we first generate a grid of 1000 equally spaced points with range equal to a given Table
     8's point estimate plus/minus 10 times the corresponding standard error. For each point on this grid, we take 9999
     random draws from a normal distribution centered around this grid point with standard deviation equal to the
     original estimate's standard error and compute the share of draws that are significantly different from zero. For each
     regression in Table 8, our MDE is the grid point with the smallest absolute value having at least 80% random draws
     that are significantly different from zero.
A.4   Toolkit (Translated from Italian) (For Online Publication)




                                             50
     This image
     cannot
     currently be
     displayed.




                                       [Party symbol]
51




                    KIT OF REALLY IMPORTANT
                    ITEMS!!!
                    Training camp
                    [City], 22 April, 2014
     This image
     cannot
     currently be
     displayed.




                    Some examples of phrases useful door-to-door
                     Introducing yourself
                     · "Good morning! My name's [Candidate's name], I'm a candidate for the City Council of [City] for the Civic List [List name]. [If
                       you live nearby: "I live here, in Magellano Street"]. I'm here to talk about the coming elections on May 25th."
                     · I'm here because I think it's important to take part in these elections that are relevant both for Europe and the local
                       community of [city] in such a difficult moment.
                     · Is your husband/wife at home too?
                     Talking to your interlocutor ­ Identifying the kind of voter
                     · "Do you know our list?"
                     · If not: "Until January I was town councilor for Urban Planning and Civil Protection. For example, I coordinated the extra
                       works needed during the overflowing of the river [river's name], last September and the snow storm two years ago. Do you
                       remember? Now I'm running with a Civil List made up of citizens like me and you."
                     · If yes: "What do you think of my work as councilor for Urban Planning and Civil Protection?"
                     · Try to understand if your interlocutor is right or left winged oriented : "What is your opinion about the work done by the
                       outgoing Mayor [Mayor's name] and his team?"
52




                             Non-voter belonging to the center/center-left political area                Convinced left wing voter                Other
                     · "When did you last vote? Why haven't you voted since then or why aren't         · "It would be great to have        · "Thank
                       you going to vote in the next elections?"                                         people like you taking part         you for you
                     · "Do you know where your polling station is? It's in XYZ Street in the same        in this activity. Would you         time."
                       building as the elementary school."                                               like to be involved?" If yes,
                     · "Many people I met here told me they are going to vote in these elections"        take note of his/her
                                                                                                         personal details.
                                                                                                       · If no "It's ok,. Anyway would
                                                                                                         you like to know more about
                                                                                                         our list's campaign? Can I
                                                                                                         keep your address to send
                                                                                                         informative materials?"


                                                                                                                   Do not forget to fill in the
                     Taking your leave                                                                              report of the contact
                                                                                                                                                          1
                     · "Thank you for your time. May I leave a brochure of our program?"
     This image
     cannot
     currently be
     displayed.




                Devising a convincing message


                                   +                                      -
                     Customize the message you            Don't waste your time insulting
                     want the citizens to share.          your opponents or false allies. It
                                                          does not work.

                     Think of examples from your
                     personal life to underline the       Do not use concepts that are too
53




                     importance of these elections and    abstract: very few people are
                     the impact that the city             interested in listening to a lecture
                     administration has on your life.     on the constitution.


                     LISTEN TO CITIZENS! Every            Don't recite your message by
                     citizen has different problems       heart, but try to be convincing
                     and opinions: the ideal message      about the relevance of what you
                     changes according to the people      are saying or doing.
                     you interview.

                                                                                               2
     This image
     cannot
     currently be
     displayed.




        ``Shopping list'' for a successful session
                                   Basic elements for a successful canvassing session                                      YES   NO
                                   Did you introduce yourself saying who you are and that you are on electoral
                                    campaign for the list [List name]?
                    Introduction  Did you ask the voter if he/she knows the party list?
                                  Did you ask the voter if he/she means to vote or not?

                                       Did you ask questions instead of just stating things?
                                       Did you exploit all possible clues to the kind of voter you are dealing with?
                    Dialogue
                                       Did you use a plain language?
                                       Did you use concrete examples from your personal experience?
                                       Did you explain why you are involved in this campaign?
                                       Did you customize your message instead of lecturing?
54




                                       Did you identify the kind of voter?
                                         ­ Is he/she an active voter or a non-voter?
                                         ­ Is he/she left, center or right oriented?
                                         ­ Did he/she vote in 2009? If yes, did he vote for a left, center or right wing
                                            party? Does he/she mean to vote the same party in 2014?
                                       Were you coherent in your behavior?
                    Conclusion
                                         ­ Center/center-right wing voter inclined to abstention: did you explain why
                                            you are involved in this electoral campaign?
                                         ­ Left wing voter who is not going to vote for your list: was the interview
                                            short but friendly at the same time?
                                         ­ Voter who doesn't know the list: did you say a few words about the list?
                                         ­ Disappointed voter tempted by [Other Candidate's name]: did you show
                                            sympathy, saying that you too are only temporarily involved in politics?
                                                                                                                                 3
     This image
     cannot
     currently be
     displayed.




               Practical hints for a successful session


                     Groups
                       ­ Always two of you!
                       ­ You both interact with the voter
                       ­ You don't need higher education to be convincing
                       ­ Mixed pairs are advisable: man/woman, younger/older person etc.
                       ­ One member only in charge of filling in the report during the interview

                     Interview timing
                       ­ Less than two minutes if the voter is not in the "target group" (that is, possible
55




                           center/center-left wing non-voter)!
                        ­ No more than five minutes in any other case

                     When to go door-to-door
                      ­ From Monday to Friday: from 6 to 8 p.m. (half an hour flexibility)
                      ­ Saturday: from 11 a.m. to 8 p.m.

                     Electoral material
                       ­ T-shirts
                       ­ Leaflets. BE CAREFUL: keep them with you till the end of the conversation!
                       ­ Contact report



                                                                                                              4
A.5   Toolkit (Original Version) (For Online Publication)




                                            56
                       [Party symbol]
57




     KIT DELLE COSE DAVVERO
     IMPORTANTI!!!
     Training camp
     [City], 22 Aprile 2014
     Consigli per i volontari: qualche esempio di formule per il porta-a-porta
      Presentarsi
      · « Buongiorno! Mi chiamo [Candidate's name], sono un candidato al Consiglio Comunale di [City] per la Lista Civica [List name].
        [Se abitate nelle vicinanze: « Abito qui vicino, in Via Magellano »]. Sono venuto per parlare delle elezioni del 25 Maggio
        prossimo. »
      · Sono qui perche', in un momento cosi' difficile per l'Europa e per la citta', credo sia importante partecipare alle prossime
        elezioni, che saranno appunto sia europee sia comunali.
      · C'e' per caso anche suo marito/moglie in casa?
      Dialogare con il vostro interlocutore ­ identificare il tipo di elettore
      · « Conosce [Candidate's name] o la nostra Lista? »
          · Se no: « Fino a gennaio, [Candidate's name] era assessore ai Lavori Pubblici e alla Protezione Civile. Si e' per esempio
            occupato di coordinare i lavori straordinari durante l'esondazione del [river's name] dello scorso settembre e della bufera di
            neve di due anni fa. Ricorda? Ora e' capolista di una Lista Civica fatta di cittadini come lei e come noi due.»
          · Se si': « Cosa ne pensa del suo operato come Assessore ai Lavori Pubblici e Protezione Civile?»
      · Prova a capire se il tuo interlocutore e' di destra o di sinistra : « Cosa ne pensa dell'operato del Sindaco uscente [Mayor's
        name] e della sua giunta? »
58




                        Astensionista di centro/centro-sinistra                           Elettore attivo di sinistraZ         Altro
      · « Quand'e' andato a votare l'ultima volta? Come mai non ha piu' votato da        · « Sarebbe davvero               · « Grazie lo
        allora o non e' intenzionato a votare alle prossime elezioni? »                    importante avere persone          stesso per il
      · « Sa dov'e' il suo seggio? E' in Via XYZ, nella scuola elementare »                come lei ad aiutarci in           suo tempo».
      · « Molte persone che ho incontrato qui hanno detto che andranno a votare a          questa attivita' . Le
        queste elezioni »                                                                  piacerebbe partecipare? »
                                                                                           Se si, prendere i contatti.
                                                                                         · Se no « Va bene lo stesso.
                                                                                           Sarebbe interessata a
                                                                                           sapere di piu' della
                                                                                           campagna di Paolo Nanni?
                                                                                           Accetterebbe di lasciarmi il
                                                        Non dimenticarti di compilare      suo indirizzo per ricevere
                                                            il report di contatto          del materiale informativo? »
      Congedarsi
      · «La ringrazio per il suo tempo ! Posso lasciarle un depliant informativo con il programma del nostro candidato?»
                                                                                                                                       1
     Costruire un messaggio convincente


                      +                                      -
       Personalizzate il messaggio che       Non sprecate tempo a insultare
       volete condividere con i cittadini    gli avversari o finti alleati. Non
                                             funziona!


       Pensate a esempi della vostra         No concetti troppo astratti:
59




       vita personale per sottolineare       poche persone sono interessate ad
       l'importanza di queste elezioni e     ascoltare una lezione di diritto
       dell'impatto che l'amministrazione    costituzionale
       comunale ha sulla vostra vita


       ASCOLTATE I CITTADINI! Ogni           Non recitate il vostro messaggio
       cittadino ha problemi e opinioni      come se fosse una poesia, ma
       diverse: il messaggio ideale varia    siate convinti dell'importanza di
       da persona a persona                  quello che state dicendo e facendo

                                                                                  2
     ``Lista della spesa'' per una sessione di successo
                       Elementi essenziali per una efficace sessione di canvassing                        SI'   NO
                     Ti sei presentato dicendo chi sei e che stai facendo campagna elettorale per la
                        lista [List name]?
     Introduzi       Hai chiesto se l'elettore conosce la lista?
     one
                     Hai chiesto se l'elettore pensa di andare a votare o di astenersi?

                        Hai fatto domande anziche' parlare sempre da solo?
                        Hai sfruttato ogni possibile indizio sul tipo di elettore che avevi davanti?
                        Hai usato parole semplici?
     Dialogo
                        Hai usato esempi concreti tratti dalla tua esperienza personale?
                        Hai detto che cosa ti ha spinto a partecipare a questa campagna elettorale?
                        Hai personalizzato il messaggio invece di fare una lezione?
60




                  Hai identificato il tipo di elettore?
                  ­ E' un elettore attivo o un astensionista?
                  ­ E' di sinistra, centro, o destra?
                  ­ Ha votato nel 2009? Se si', ha votato per un partito di sinistra, centro o destra?
                       Pensa di votare lo stesso partito nel 2014?
               Hai adottato un atteggiamento coerente?
     Conclusi  ­ Elettore di centro/centro-destra tentato dall'astensione: hai spiegato perche'
     one               partecipi alla campagna elettorale?
                   ­ Elettore di sinistra che non votera' mai per la tua Lista: hai mantenuto la
                       conversazione breve ma comunque cordiale?
                   ­ Elettore che non conosce la lista: hai speso qualche parola sulla Lista?
                   ­ Elettore deluso dalla politica e tentato da [Other Candidate's name]: hai mostrato
                       empatia e hai detto che anche tu sei un cittadino in prestito alla politica?
                                                                                                                3
     This image
     cannot
     currently be
     displayed.




               Suggerimenti pratici per una sessione di successo


                     Gruppi
                     ­ Sempre in coppia!
                     ­ Tutti e due interagiscono con l'elettore
                     ­ Non e' necessario avere un Dottorato per essere convincenti
                     ­ Gruppi eterogenei sono desiderabili: uomo/donna, giovincello/meno giovincello, ecc.
                     ­ Un membro di ciascuna coppia e' incaricato di compilare il ``report di contatto'' durante
                          le visite

                     Durata delle visite
61




                     ­ Meno di 2 minuti se l'elettore non e' nel `'gruppo obiettivo'' (cioe', possibile astensionista
                          di centro/centro-sinistra)!
                      ­   Non piu' di 5 minuti in tutti gli altri casi

                     Quando andare porta-a-porta
                     ­ Dal lunedi' al venerdi': dalle 6 alle 8 di sera (flessibili di +- mezz'ora)
                     ­ Sabato: dalle 11 di mattina alle 8 di sera
                     Materiale elettorale
                     ­ Magliette
                     ­ Volantini. ATTENZIONE: teneteli con voi fino alla fine della conversazione!
                     ­ Report di contatto


                                                                                                                        4
A.6   Leaflet (Translated from Italian) (For Online Publication)




                                 [Party Symbol]




                 [City]
                 [City]
                                            [Party  name]
                                             [List name]
                                             [Candidate's name]




                                                          FRONT OF THE FLYER




                                             62
In our complex society, hardly accustomed to facing complexity, the best possible town
administration must start from the present, from what we have. The way to do this is
through the promotion of people from every walk and stage of life.
                             "At work, I look after you"
                                        WORK
Work is a basic, natural human occupation. We must reward the work of individual
workers, small businesses, commercial and service-based firms. Our activities are
based on reciprocity. We aim to promote free and noble examples of solidarity by
offering services to one another. If the community needs a service, there must be
someone, appointed by the administration, ready to provide it in exchange for another
professional service. Every citizen should take on the responsibility to look after other
members of the community as if they were an extended family. The best possible
administration strives to spread this spirit of friendship among its constituents and
measures its performance using the index of public happiness.
                             "On the street, I look after you"
                            MAINTENANCE AND URBAN PLAN
We must take good care of shared spaces and public land to make our town friendly to
everyone ­ pedestrians, children, seniors and the disabled. Schools, roads, parks and
public lightings need continuous attention and maintenance. We must commit to
realizing the plan for railroad underpasses. We must upgrade existing buildings, expand
and reform public housing to create new rent-controlled units, and explore new ways of
sharing the community space.
                           "On dark nights, I look after you"
                                          SAFETY
We must make sure that even at night our town is safe for women, old people, the
disabled and teenagers. We must make targeted investments in the development and
coordination of civil protection.
                             "I don't sleep and look after you"
                               HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENT
We view good health as well-being in every field and stage of life. Sufficient and suitable
waste recycling according to citizens' needs. We must give attention and good care to
our parks, as they are the property of all citizens.
                         "As you find yourself, I look after you"
                                          SCHOOL
Let's take culture back to our schools and restore their dignity as the quintessential
educational space. Schools must be open to every age and feed every human art and
talent. Students, schools, administrators must be in constant dialogue to exchange
views and together fight against drugs, gambling, and eating disorders that are real
threats to our girls and boys.

                            Support the list!              BACK OF THE FLYER




                                                63
A.7   Leaflet (Original Version) (For Online Publication)




                                 [Party Symbol]




                 [City]
                 [City]
                                            [Party  name]
                                             [List name]
                                             [Candidate's name]




                                                            FRONT OF THE FLYER




                                             64
In una società così complessa e poco abituata ad affrontare la complessità, la migliore
Amministrazione possibile di una città deve assolutamente partire dal presente, da
quello che si ha. L'opportunità scaturisce dalla valorizzazione delle persane in agni
ambito ed età della vita.
                                    "Io lavoro e penso a te"
                                             LAVORO
Il lavoro inteso come disposizione naturale dell'uomo. Massima valorizzazione delle
piccole e piccolissime imprese artigianali, commerciali e di servizi. Attività basate sui
criterio di reciprocità. Si tratta di promuovere esempi virtuosi di solidarietà, gratuiti, in cui
si dona reciprocamente qualche servizio. Se la comunità ha bisogno di qualche servizio
ci deve essere qualcuno, individuato dall'Amministrazione, pronto a svolgerlo in cambio
magari di un'altra prestazione professionale. Ogni cittadino si assume le responsabilità
della cura della comunità come in una famiglia molto allargata.
La migliore Amministrazione possibile, si prodiga per diffondere e mantenere vivo
questo spirito di amicizia tra i cittadini basando il suo operato sull'lndice di Felicità
Pubblica.
                               "Io cammino e penso a te"
                        MANUTENZIONE E PIANO URBANISTICO
Massima cura del suolo pubblico e del territorio, per una città a misura di pedoni,
bambini, anziani, disabili. Scuole, strade, parchi e pubblica illuminazione esigono
manutenzione e controlli continui. lmpegno ad attuare il piano di interramento della
ferrovia. Riqualificazione dell'edilizia esistente ed ampliamento dell'edilizia sociale
destinata all'affitto e a nuove forme di coabitazione.
                               "Sono al buio e penso a te"
                                        SICUREZZA
Massima attenzione alla città anche nelle ore notturne perché sia a misura di donne,
anziani, disabili e adolescenti. Presidio del territorio da parte della Polizia Municipale
h24. Specifici investimenti sullo sviluppo ed il coordinamento della Protezione Civile.
                              "Io non dormo e penso a te"
                                   SALUTE E AMBIENTE
Salute intesa come ben-essere in ogni ambito ed età della vita. Una raccolta
differenziata a misura delle esigenze di tutti gli abitanti. Attenzione e cura particolare
dei nostri parchi, considerati come luoghi dei cittadini.
                                "Io mi cerco e penso a te"
                                           SCUOLA
Riportiamo la cultura nelle scuole e restituiamo alle stesse la dignità di spazio educativo
per eccellenza. Scuole aperte a tutte le età e a tutte le arti umane, una scuola adatta ad
aiutare chi la frequenta a capire quello che è. Studenti, istituzioni scolastiche,
amministratori devono mantenersi in dialogo in modo da garantire spazi comuni di
confronto per combattere quei fenomeni, come la droga, il gioco d'azzardo, le malattie
da disturbi alimentari, che sono vere e proprie piaghe per l'età adolescenziale.
                 Sostieni la lista!                                BACK OF THE FLYER




                                              65
