                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  BARBARIANS AT THE STORE? PRIVATE EQUITY, PRODUCTS, AND CONSUMERS

                                        Cesare Fracassi
                                      Alessandro Previtero
                                        Albert W. Sheen

                                      Working Paper 27435
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27435


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




The authors thank comments from and discussions with Shai Bernstein, Jonathan Cohn, Xavier
Giroud, John Grin, Laura Lindsey, Juhani Linnainmaa, Antoinette Schoar, Sheri Tice, and
Rebecca Zarutskie. The authors also thank comments from seminar participants at Indiana
University, the University of Calgary, University of Oregon, University of Texas at Austin,
University of Utah, Columbia University, Texas Christian University, Cornell University, and
Rutgers University, and participants at the following conferences: 2017 University of Kentucky
Finance Conference, 2017 SFS Finance Cavalcade, 2017 Western Finance Association, 2017
Tuck Private Equity and Entrepreneurship Research Conference, and 2018 UCLA finance
conference. We thank Wei Wang for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Cesare Fracassi, Alessandro Previtero, and Albert W. Sheen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Barbarians at the Store? Private Equity, Products, and Consumers
Cesare Fracassi, Alessandro Previtero, and Albert W. Sheen
NBER Working Paper No. 27435
June 2020
JEL No. G24,L11

                                            ABSTRACT

We investigate the effects of private equity on product markets using price and sales data for an
extensive number of consumer products. Following a buyout, target firms increase sales 50%
more than matched control firms. Price increases--roughly 1% on existing products--do not
drive this growth. The launch of new products and geographic expansion do. Competitors lose
shelf space and marginally raise prices. Results for public vs. private targets, during and after the
financial crisis, and in industries that vary in structure suggest private equity tailors strategies to
the environment, eases financial constraints, and provides expertise to manage growth.


Cesare Fracassi                                    Albert W. Sheen
University of Texas at Austin                      Lundquist College of Business
McCombs School of Business                         1208 University of Oregon
Department of Finance                              Eugene, OR 97403
1 University Station - B6600                       asheen@uoregon.edu
Austin, TX 78712
cesare.fracassi@mccombs.utexas.edu

Alessandro Previtero
Kelley School of Business
Indiana University
1309 E. 10th Street
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
aleprevi@indiana.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27435
                                      I.     Introduction

       Private equity firms have raised more than $3 trillion in capital over the last five years,
exercising a growing influence on the day-to-day purchases of millions of consumers.1 Private
equity (PE) firms have a simple goal: acquire businesses, and exit with gains. How they
achieve gains, however, is an open question. Do PE firms simply transfer wealth from
stakeholders,2 or do they create value by improving firm operations? Studies show that
PE firms improve total factor productivity (Davis et al., 2014a) and managerial practices
(Bloom et al., 2015, Bernstein and Sheen, 2016), focus patenting activity (Lerner et al.,
2011), increase employee safety (Cohn et al., 2016), and reduce agency problems (Edgerton,
2012).
       Firms, however, exist to sell goods and services. Despite this, the eects of private equity
on target firm products has received little academic attention. Thus in this paper, we use
micro-level retail scanner data to study private equity's strategies in the consumer product
market. We answer the following basic questions: When PE acquires a manufacturer of
consumer goods, what happens to product prices and sales? Does the product mix change?
And does product availability expand or contract? Answering these questions helps reveal
whether and how PE firms attempt to create wealth. It also provides insight into how
private equity impacts consumers, a topic under constant scrutiny by policy makers and the
media. We find that, in the years following the buyout, target firms increase sales by 50% on
average compared to matched control firms. Price increases do not drive this sales growth.
   1
      Bain and Company (2018) reports that private equity firms have raised $701 billion globally in 2017,
reaching a total level of over $3 trillion in the 2012-2017 period. A series of articles published by the New
York Times, titled "This is Your Life, Brought to You by Private Equity" 12/24/16, highlights the extensive
influence of private equity on consumers.
    2
      For example, by exploiting tax rules, extracting dividends, charging monopoly prices, or repackaging
assets.



                                                     1




                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
The launch of new products and geographic expansion do.
   We compile monthly store-level prices and unit sales for nearly two million unique con-
sumer products sold in nearly 43,000 locations in the United States between 2006 and 2016.
This sample covers over 50% of grocery and drug store sales and over 30% of mass mer-
chandiser sales in the United States. The data is remarkably detailed. For example, we can
see that in the first week of August 2008, twenty-four cans of Del Monte French style green
beans were sold in a particular store in Chicago at an average price of $1.15 per can. We link
each product to its parent company. Private equity firms acquired 236 of these companies
over our sample period. Most of these firms (222) were privately owned at the time of the
acquisition. These companies are the manufacturers of goods sold within retailers; we do not
study buyouts of retail chains themselves as, for example, in Chevalier (1995a) and Chevalier
(1995b).
   We test for changes in product prices and sales, innovation, and availability after a PE
buyout. Specifically, we first match each private equity target with a similar counterfactual
at the time of the private equity event. We go beyond the firm-level match commonly used
in the literature; the granularity of our data allows us to compare product lines and even
products within the same store. Each of these dierent treatment-control pairs represents
a cohort. We stack cohort-level observations and run a generalized dierence-in-dierences
estimation.
   We begin by documenting that in the five years post-buyout private equity targets increase
revenues by 50% on average compared to matched control firms. Price increases do not drive
this growth. The average price of the products in a firm's product line increases by about 5%
relative to competitors. Further, this increase is primarily a composition eect from either
the introduction of new products or expansion into richer areas, as the price of an existing


                                               2




                  Electronic
                Electronic   copyavailable
                           copy   available at:
                                            at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
product in a particular store increases by only about 1% relative to its direct competitors
sharing shelf space.
   Volume growth, therefore, drives revenue growth. How do firms increase units sold?
First, PE targets increase the number of products oered by 11% more than matched un-
treated firms by introducing more new products. Second, PE firms also innovate more into
new consumer categories, such as a green bean seller branching to cauliflower. Finally, PE
products expand to new stores (+25%), retail chains (+10%), and zip codes (+14%).
   Firms that compete with PE targets are aected by the deals. They marginally increase
prices following the buyout--less than half of one percent. This evidence is consistent with
typical oligopoly models of rivals' behavior when one firm raises prices (e.g., Hotelling, 1929).
Competing firms' product variety falls slightly, likely crowded out by the new oerings from
PE firms given finite shelf space.
   How do private equity firms enable this growth? Why weren't target firms undertaking
these actions on their own? To address these questions, we further investigate our results
by target firm type, time period, and industry (product category) structure. First, we study
the eects of PE for public vs. private firms. PE firms achieve high growth, innovation, and
geographic expansion only in private targets. In contrast, we find that public targets raise
prices, reducing sales for existing products. This evidence is consistent with PE firms pro-
viding access to capital or managerial expertise for private firms (Boucly et al., 2011, Bloom
et al., 2015) and taming agency costs for public firms (Jensen, 1986). Second, we examine
PE deals separately during and after the late-2000s financial crisis. PE firms achieve growth
in both periods and adjusts prices to economic conditions more than non-PE firms. Third,
we find PE buyout targets introduce more products in categories that are more fragmented,
and achieve higher growth in product categories where they have a stronger market share


                                                3




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
and in categories that are popular among high-income consumers. Last, we document that
PE firms alter target company strategy by increasing corporate acquisitions and advertis-
ing expenses. Overall, this evidence suggests that PE achieves growth by pulling several
operational levers: by strategically adjusting prices to economic conditions, by focusing in-
novation and geographic expansion in more appealing product categories, and by promoting
investments.
   A caveat in interpreting our results is that we cannot unambiguously conclude that pri-
vate equity firms cause target firms to increase sales, product innovation, and geographic
expansion, as "private equity treatment" is not randomly assigned. The standard approach
used in the literature to deal with this endogeneity concern is to match treated firms with
similar (in the pre-buyout period) untreated firms. A problem with this approach is that
firms might dier across a multitude of characteristics, leading to poor matches. Industry
codes are coarse; firms in the same broad industry are unlikely to have the same product
lineup. The granularity of our data helps mitigate this concern: we match not only similar
firms, but also similar product categories and products themselves, using store shelf neigh-
bors as counterfactuals. For example, we compare a can of green beans sold by a target
firm with a can of green beans sold by an untreated firm in the same store. This specificity
curtails--though does not eliminate--the role that unobservables could play in explaining
our results.
   Our work contributes to the empirical literature on the eects of private equity on corpo-
rate performance and behavior. Chevalier (1995a) and Chevalier (1995b) study the pricing
and market expansion behavior of supermarket leveraged buyouts and their competitors.
These papers dier from ours along several dimensions. We do not study retail chains them-
selves; instead, our buyouts are of firms that manufacture products that are then sold within


                                               4




                  Electronic
                Electronic   copyavailable
                           copy   available at:
                                            at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
supermarkets, drug stores, and mass merchandisers. Our price and sales data are thus at the
individual product level, not overall store level, and we are able to investigate product inno-
vation and geographic expansion. Moreover, we provide evidence on PE deals completed in
the 2000s in contrast to the supermarket deals of the 1980s, an important comparison given
the evidence that PE strategies have evolved significantly over the past few decades (see,
e.g Guo et al., 2011). Our results that PE firms spur growth complement the evidence in
Boucly et al. (2011) that French target firms increase profitability, sales, debt issuance, and
capital expenditures compared to control firms. Our evidence that PE deals do not seem to
significantly harm consumers nicely dovetails with findings that private equity could aect
firm stakeholders by, for example, reducing work-related injuries (Cohn et al., 2016), increas-
ing employee technological human capital (Agrawal and Tambe, 2016), improving sanitation
and food-safety (Bernstein and Sheen, 2016), and impacting student outcomes in for-profit
higher education (Eaton et al., 2019). Last, other studies have documented that PE creates
value for its investors (Robinson and Sensoy, 2013 and Harris et al., 2014). Our results on the
mechanisms (section VII) shed light on how PE firms might create this value: by promoting
investments and by tailoring their strategies to private vs. public target firms, to economic
conditions, and to industry (product category) structures.



                         II.      Hypotheses Development

      What happens in the product market after private equity buyouts? A popular view in the
media is that businesses suer under PE ownership. To generate cash flows, "you can expand
the company, but more likely you slash costs, close divisions, cut sta, curtail marketing,
eliminate research and development and more. In other words, cutting to the bone."3 If PE
  3
      Wall Street Journal, 3/29/15.


                                                   5




                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
firms follow such a strategy, target companies could trim product oerings and raise prices to
boost short term cash flow.4 Scaling back investment could also be optimal for some target
firms. Agency theory (e.g., Jensen, 1986) predicts that managers might engage in empire
building. The added leverage and incentive alignment typical in PE buyouts might, therefore,
impose discipline. If lower prices stem from an overinvestment in market share, then private
equity firms could raise prices. Analogously, if firms are selling too many products in too
many places, private equity could prune product oerings and distribution. Last, liquidity
constraints imposed by increased leverage could also lead to higher prices (Chevalier and
Scharfstein, 1996).
      An alternative and more recent stance on the role of private equity would predict, instead,
post-buyout product market expansion. Surveying PE firms, Gompers et al. (2016) find that
in target firms revenue growth is pursued more aggressively than cost cutting. Analyzing
data from 839 French PE deals, Boucly et al. (2011) indeed find that buyouts appear to
infuse capital and relax credit constraints, as target firms grow faster and become more
profitable than their peers, particularly when capital might be most dear ex ante. Bloom
et al. (2015) find that private equity may bring better management practices to target firms.
If these mechanisms are at play, we expect to see growth. Implications for pricing, however,
are unclear. New or better products might be more expensive. On the contrary, leaner
manufacturing or more skillful bargaining with retailers could lead to lower prices.
      These contrasting predictions can co-exist in the cross-section of target firms. For ex-
ample, agency theories might better describe dynamics in more mature industries and for
publicly traded firms (Jensen, 1986). Capital constraints may be more relevant for private
or small firms (Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist, 2016). Bloom et al. (2015) find that private
  4
      Kosman (2009) devotes an entire chapter to "Lifting Prices" in his book "The Buyout of America."



                                                     6




                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
firms are more in need of managerial expertise than public firms. Davis et al. (2014a) docu-
ment employment growth following private firm buyouts but contraction after public deals.
Boucly et al. (2011) find stronger growth results for private-to-private buyouts. To test these
dierent cross-sectional predictions, we repeat our main analyses separately for private and
public target firms (section VII.B).
     We also test if the eects of PE vary with economic conditions (section VII.C). Bern-
stein et al. (2019) study UK PE-backed companies during the financial crisis. Compared to
control firms, PE targets decreased investments less and increased market share more. They
attribute this findings to the ability of PE firms to raise capital or to provide strategic and
operational guidance in di cult times.
     How do competitors react to the entry of PE firms? Chevalier (1995b) finds that, following
the LBO of a supermarket chain, prices in a local market rise if rival firms are also highly
leveraged. Prices, instead, decline in local markets where competitors have low leverage
and are concentrated. Similarly, Goolsbee and Syverson (2008) study the airline industry
and find that incumbents cut fares when facing potential entry. Gerardi and Shapiro (2009)
find that competition has a negative eect on price dispersion in the airline industry. We
investigate competitor reaction in prices and product innovation in section VI.



                             III.      Data Description

A.     Nielsen Retail Scanner Data

     We combine private equity buyouts and retail store scanner data in our analyses. Product
market data comes from the Nielsen Retail Scanner database from the Kilts Center for
Marketing - Chicago Booth. This database tracks all purchases made in the United States


                                                 7




                    Electronic
                  Electronic   copyavailable
                             copy   available at:
                                              at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
from January 2006 to December 2016 at 42,928 stores from 91 U.S. retail chains (see Table
II). Almost all major chains are present in our data, but their identities are anonymized.
The largest chain in the sample has 10,129 stores. The sample covers roughly 50% of total
U.S. grocery and drug store sales and 30% of U.S. mass merchandiser sales. The stores are
spread across the United States, covering 98% of media designated market areas (DMAs).
Nielsen tracks weekly average prices and units sold at each store for close to two million
unique consumer products.
   The Nielsen data identifies products by name and Universal Product Code (UPC). The
data are very specific. For example, Table I lists all products available under the category
"Canned Green Beans" in a specific grocery store in Austin, Texas, in December 2007. Sev-
enteen green bean products are sold in the store diering in brand (e.g. Del Monte, General
Mills), type (e.g. organic, French style), and size (e.g. 8oz, 14.5oz). We exclude UPCs
that do not identify unique products (e.g., private label products, products temporarily sold
in dierent size). For each product, each week, in each store, we know the average price,
units sold, and total revenue. Table II provides summary statistics. The average product is
sold in 571 stores and an average store carries about 19,000 products. Nielsen groups items
into mutually exclusive groups such as "Vegetables-Beans-Green-Canned," "Fabric Softeners-
Liquid," or "Vacuum and Carpet Cleaner Appliance." These are called "product categories"
and should be thought of as highly-specific industry definitions. Panel B of Table II shows
that there are 1,127 dierent product categories, and each one includes on average 21 items
belonging to four firms.
   We match each UPC to its parent firm. The GS1 organization oversees the management
of UPCs. Manufacturers buy from GS1 the usage right to a UPC company prefix that
corresponds to the first six to nine digits of the UPCs of its products. Firms are required


                                               8




                  Electronic
                Electronic   copyavailable
                           copy   available at:
                                            at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
to disclose their name and address when buying a company prefix. Using the GS1 Data
Hub, we exactly match 82% of the UPCs in the data to a GS1 company prefix. We map the
remaining UPCs to companies by assuming that UPCs in the same firm share the first eight
digits. In Panel C of Table II, we present the characteristics of the sample's over 52,000
firms. The average firm sells 10.2 products in 2.9 product categories through nine retail
chains spanning 1,346 stores.
      The data allows us to precisely define competitors, market structure, and plausible coun-
terfactuals. We aggregate the data at the monthly level to make the dataset more manageable
and to smooth consumption peaks (e.g. Black Friday).5 The monthly frequency allows us
to accurately capture when firms introduce new products, discontinue products, and expand
into new markets. Despite the richness of the data, we miss two important pieces of in-
formation. First, we observe the prices paid by consumers­the sum of the wholesale price
and retailer markup. We cannot say with certainty which of these two price components
drives our results. That said, whether PE firms are changing wholesale prices or influencing
retailers to change margins, the ultimate eect on the consumer is the same. Second, we do
not observe manufacturing costs and markups and, thus, we cannot draw direct conclusions
about the profitability or optimality of firms' decisions before or after the private equity deal.


B.      Private Equity data

      We obtain data on private equity deals from Capital IQ and Preqin. From Capital IQ,
we select all "closed," North American, majority stake transactions classified as "Leveraged
Buyout", "Management Buyout", "Secondary Buyout", or "Going Private Transaction". We
  5
    The Nielsen data records weekly sales from Sunday morning to Saturday night. If the beginning or
the end of the month is not on a Sunday, we assign a pro-rata of the weekly units sold and sales to each
corresponding month.



                                                   9




                     Electronic
                   Electronic   copyavailable
                              copy   available at:
                                               at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                   https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
do not include venture capital deals. From Preqin, we collect all North American private
equity portfolio companies. We keep only deals closed between 2007 and 2015 as we require
at least one year of product market data before and after each deal, and the Nielsen data
spans 2006-2016. To link PE targets with firms in the Nielsen/GS1 database, we begin with
fuzzy match algorithms based on company name and state, and then manually check each
deal to make sure the firms are correctly identified. We also buttress this process with a
"top-down" approach, collecting the largest PE deals from Capital IQ and manually checking
if any belong in the sample. This makes sure we do not miss any large, obvious deals6 . We
end up with 236 private equity deals, of which 222 are buyouts of private firms and 14 are
public.
      To address the representativeness of our sample, we compare in the appendix our deals
with the universe of PE deals in Capital IQ during our sample period and with the PE deals
in consumer products (see Appendix Table A1). We find that our deals appear to be larger in
size and involve older firms compared to the average PE deal in Capital IQ and in consumer
goods. We provide more details on this comparison in the Appendix section II.
      Figure 1 shows the number of buyouts over time. Deals are more frequent during the
private equity boom of the mid-2000s to 2007 and less frequent during the financial crisis
starting in 2008. Online appendix Table A3 lists the most frequent PE buyers in our sample,
identified using the category Buyers in Capital IQ and Investors in Preqin. Table A4 lists the
private equity targets with the highest average sales in our sample. The three largest are Del
Monte, The Nature's Bounty, and the Pabst Brewing Company. These are not necessarily
the targets with the greatest deal value, just those with greatest presence in the consumer
product categories we analyze.
  6
      Expanded details on how the sample is formed are in the online appendix, section I.



                                                     10




                       Electronic
                     Electronic   copyavailable
                                copy   available at:
                                                 at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                     https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                        IV.       Empirical Methodology

A.      Research Design

      Private equity firms do not randomly select companies. As shown in Table A5 in the
online appendix, they are more likely to target product categories that are less concentrated
and more popular among high-income consumers, firms that are larger, and products that are
cheaper than competitors.7 While a comprehensive study of the characteristics of firms and
products taken over by private equity is beyond the scope of this study, we use a matching
strategy that controls for relevant observable trends. An advantage of our setting is that our
detailed data allows us to match each treated unit with a very similar counterfactual.
      Our matching strategy does not completely solve endogeneity problems. There are two
outstanding concerns. First, while we control for pre-deal observable characteristics, there
could be unobserved characteristics that explain dierences in post-event outcomes. Second,
even if we could match on all pre-deal characteristics, a firm could still be targeted because it
is expected to change in the future. We find evidence that alleviates the first concern: after
the match, treated and control groups are similar also on observable variables that we do not
use in the matching procedure (see Table A6). The granularity of the data helps with the
second concern. We are able to compare, for example, two cans of green beans on the same
store shelf. While it is possible that one brand has a dierent future trajectory than another
(e.g., buzz from an advertising campaign), matching with such specificity certainly reduces
the scope of variation (e.g., we control for a sudden increase in green bean popularity).
      An additional concern related to our empirical strategy is that both the treated firms/
product categories/ products and their control units could react to the treatment (the PE
  7
    We provide more details on how we identify category concentration and popularity among high-income
consumers in section VII.D.


                                                 11




                    Electronic
                  Electronic   copyavailable
                             copy   available at:
                                              at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
deal). In other words, if competitors react to the entry of PE, then our comparison of treated
vs. control units does not capture the full eects of PE entry. To address this concern, in
section VI we examine whether competitors change behavior when facing a PE competitor.
For example, we compare the prices of the same competitor product in stores where it faces
PE vs. stores in which it does not.


B.     Matching Procedure

     We match each private equity acquired firm, firm-product line, or product with a close
competitor chosen based on observable characteristics at the time of the private equity deal.
We define each resulting treated-control pair as a cohort and then stack all cohorts. Finally,
we run a dierence-in-dierences regression specification on this stack of cohorts.
     We match each of the 236 treated firms and 1,835 treated firm-categories with a similar
counterfactual based on four variables measured at the time of the private equity deal:
monthly sales, number of unique UPCs sold, number of stores in which they sell, and growth
in monthly sales. The first three variables are measured in the most recent pre-buyout
month, while growth in sales is computed from 12 months before the deal to the most recent
pre-buyout month. In the firm-level analyses, 220 control firms are matched to one treated
firm, six to two treated firms, and one to four treated firms.
     We also perform analyses at the individual product level. For each product-store--e.g.,
Del Monte 14.5 oz. French Style Green Beans sold in a particular store in Austin, Texas--we
select a matched product in that same store, in the same product category at the time of
the private equity deal. We choose the particular green bean item (UPC) with the closest
distance based on average price and units sold during the most recent month pre-buyout,
and growth in price and units sold from 12 months ago to the most recent month pre-buyout.


                                               12




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
       We match with replacement each treated unit with the closest control using the Abadie
and Imbens (2006) distance metric8 . Both treated and control units must be in the sample
for at least one year before and one year after the buyout event. In the Online Appendix,
we investigate if treated or control firms are more likely to disappear post-buyout. We thus
focus on deals from 2008 to 2011, so that we have the full two years before and five years
after the buyout. Figure A1 shows that the drop-out rate of PE targets and matched controls
is very low. Furthermore, PE targets are less likely to drop compared to control firms, with
this dierence becoming larger especially in the years three to five post-deal.9
       The matched control product categories and control individual products become the
object of our analyses when we investigate the response of competitors in section VI.


C.       Econometric Specification

       Our main empirical analysis employs a stacked cohort generalized dierence-in-dierences
strategy. Essentially, we take the dierence in outcome for each treated unit i (firm, product-
category, or product) after the private equity deal relative to before and compare it with the
dierence in outcome of its matched control unit within the same cohort c.


                                yi,c,t = (di,c  pt,c ) + i,c +     t,c   + ui,c,t                          (1)

       All regressions are estimated from 24 months before the event to 60 months afterwards.
We choose the pre-window to have enough periods to test the parallel pre-trend assumption
   8
     For each of the four matching variables, we compute the dierence between treated and control and then
divide this dierence by the variable's standard deviation in order to normalize the scale. We then compute
the overall distance by summing the four scaled dierences.
   9
     To the extent that PE targets that are more successful than their control firms are dropped from our anal-
yses because their match disappears, then this evidence would suggest that we are potentially understating
the eects of PE, especially in the three to five years post-buyout.



                                                      13




                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
and the post-window to allow enough time for any PE eects to emerge. The unit-cohort
fixed eect i,c ensures that we compare the outcome within the same unit in the period
before vs. after the deal. The time-cohort fixed eect                     t,c   ensures that the treatment unit
is compared only with the matched control at each point in time. di,c is a dummy variable
identifying treated units. pt,c is a dummy variable equal to one if the time period is after
the private equity buyout. The coe cient                   represents the di-in-di eect of the private
equity deal on the outcome variable relative to a matched counterfactual. The standard
errors are double-clustered at the firm and month level to adjust for heteroskedasticity,
serial correlation, and cross-sectional correlation in the error term (Bertrand et al., 2004).
   To test the parallel pre-trend assumption and learn how quickly private equity firms
implement change, we also estimate the impact of private equity month-by-month, using the
equation below:

                                     60
                                     X
                          yi,c,t =           k (di,c       t,k,c )   + i,c +    t,c   + ui,c,t              (2)
                                     k= 24

    t,k,c   is a dummy equal to one if time t is equal to k and zero otherwise. Standard errors
are also double clustered at the firm and month level. Given the large number of fixed eects
and observations, all regressions in the paper are estimated using the fixed point iteration
procedure implemented by Correia (2014).




                                                          14




                     Electronic
                   Electronic   copyavailable
                              copy   available at:
                                               at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                   https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
       V.      The Eect of Private Equity on Target Firms

A.       Sales and Prices

       What happens to the sales and pricing of goods sold by consumer products firms acquired
by private equity? We start by analyzing these variables at the firm level. Each target firm
is matched to an untreated firm as described in section IV.B. Panel A of Table III shows
estimated coe cients of regressions of each firm's log sales, sales-weighted average log price,
and log units sold on After, a dummy variable that equals one for firm-month observations
after the private equity deal close date for target firms. We find that revenues relative to a
matched firm increase dramatically. The coe cient on After is 0.406, translating to a 50%
increase in sales in the years following the deal10 . This result is consistent with papers that
document growth following PE buyouts (e.g. Boucly et al., 2011). This growth is primarily
driven by a 43% increase in units sold. The average price per firm increases by 5%. We
compute average product prices by dividing total revenues by units sold for each firm in each
month. This is a very rough price measure--it blends all categories, products, and stores
into a single number for each firm and will thus be influenced heavily by composition eects.
While it could capture well overall trends in pricing for single category firms, the average
price per firm is not likely informative for firms that sell both cheap and expensive items.
       To better understand price dynamics and what ultimately drives changes in sales and
units, we begin "peeling the onion". We break the unit of analysis down from the firm to
the firm-category. In other words, now instead of treating Del Monte as a single entity, we
analyze separately their green bean, canned peach, and spaghetti sauce businesses. This
sharpens the analysis in two ways. First, it increases the quality of the match, as individual
  10
   Throughout the text, we exponentiate the coe cients for regressions with logged dependent variables
when reporting magnitudes.


                                                 15




                     Electronic
                   Electronic   copyavailable
                              copy   available at:
                                               at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                   https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
product lines can be matched more precisely than entire firms; Del Monte and General Mills
do not participate in exactly the same product categories. Second, it allows us to separate
changes in existing product categories from changes in the category mix. The 236 PE treated
firms in our sample range from operating in a single Nielsen-defined product category (e.g.,
Noosa Yoghurt, LLC only sells products in the "Yogurt-Refrigerated" category in our sample)
up to 101 categories for American Roland Food Corp.
   In Panel B of Table III, we regress the logs of nationwide revenues, units sold, and average
prices for a firm in a particular product category on the After variable. This breakdown at
the product category level mimics the firm-level results. With the added precision of only
comparing product categories, not entire firms, we find that average prices of private equity-
owned firms increase by 3% relative to matched firms. Sales increase by 23% and units sold
increase by 18%. All are statistically significant at 1%. These point estimates for units and
revenues at the category level are a little smaller than at the firm level. This could be a sign
that either PE targets' larger categories are growing the most, or that they are expanding
to new categories. We explore this in the next section.
   Figure 2 plots the trend in log sales and average log prices over time with a 90% confidence
interval. The graphs show no obvious pre-trend in sales or price before the PE buyout. This
provides comfort that we are comparing similar firms and firm-categories. After the event,
at the firm and product-category level, there is a gradual increase in both sales and prices
over the next three to five years.
   After a PE buyout, we find small price increases and large unit sold increases at the
category level. Multiple paths can generate these results; distinguishing between them is im-
portant for understanding PE growth strategies. The relative increase in average nationwide
category-level prices could be because existing products have been marked up. Alternatively,


                                               16




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
the composition of goods sold within a category might have shifted towards more expensive
varieties (e.g., premium organic products), or the firm might be growing share in markets or
retailers that simply charge more (e.g., New York City).
   Similarly, there are dierent paths to the increase in firm-category units sold; PE targets
could be gaining share within a store or expanding to new stores.
   To peel the onion further, we zoom in to the individual product and store level. Instead
of comparing a PE target and control firm's green bean sales nationally, we now compare a
PE target's 16 ounce can of Italian-style green beans in a particular supermarket in Austin,
Texas with a non-PE can of Italian-style green beans in the same store. In other words, we
use literal store shelf neighbors as counterfactuals. This allows us to tease apart changes to
existing products from composition and location eects.
   The unit of observation is a specific UPC in a specific store in a month. A cohort is
defined as a treated-untreated pair of products within the same store and category. We
regress the logs of sales, average price, and units on After, product-cohort fixed eects, and
cohort-time fixed eects.
   In Panel C of Table III, we find a 1% increase in the price post-PE for a given treated
product relative to a competing product in the same store over the next five years. This 1%
increase for existing products implies that the average category price increase of 3% shown in
Panel B is mostly due to a composition eect: adding or shifting consumer tastes to products
that are more expensive or expanding to locations with higher prevailing prices or cost of
living. Results on revenues and units sold dier substantially from the results in Panels A
and B; both After coe cients are essentially zero. This means that existing products are
not gaining share within their current stores. Some combination of selling new products
or selling in new places must, therefore, drive unit and revenue increases at the firm and


                                              17




                  Electronic
                Electronic   copyavailable
                           copy   available at:
                                            at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
category level. We explore product innovation and geographic availability next.


B.     New Product Development

     Do private equity firms change the pace of new product introduction? Do they expand
into new industries? Lerner et al. (2011) and Amess et al. (2015) find that after a leveraged
buyout, firms increase their patenting activity and produce more influential patents, suggest-
ing either a relaxation of financial constraints or reduced agency problems. While patents
capture the early stages of innovation, our data allows us to study the end result with the
release of new products.
     Mimicking the price and sales analyses, we first answer these questions at the overall
firm level. We match each of the 236 firms acquired by private equity with a non-private
equity-owned firm with the closest sales, number of products, number of stores, and growth
in sales. The unit of analysis is a firm-month. Table IV illustrates the eect of PE on
product innovation. Number of Products is the log of the number of unique UPCs a firm
sells nationwide in month t. New products is the number of products introduced by the firm
in month t. A new product is a UPC that appears for the first time in the Nielsen database.
Discontinued Products is the number of products dropped by the firm in month t, meaning
the UPC never reappears again in the sample. To better ensure that we accurately measure
introductions and discontinuations in product lines, we exclude from our analyses products
that appear in the first six months of a firm's appearance in our sample. Analogously, we
exclude products that disappear in the last six months of a firm's presence in our data. The
reason for this is if a product (UPC) is sold in November 2016, but not December 2016
(the end of our sample), it may not have been permanently discontinued. It is possible the
product simply did not sell any units in December but returned to stores later in 2017. A


                                               18




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
six-month buer on both ends gives us more confidence that a product is truly discontinued
or new. Last, Number of Categories is the log of the number of categories in which a firm
sells products at time t. Nielsen defines 1,127 total categories.
   In Panel A of Table IV we compare the product portfolios of PE and non-PE firms.
Column 1 shows that, relative to matched firms, PE-treated firms expand their number of
distinct UPCs by 11% after the deal. How is this achieved? Columns 2 and 3 show greater
churn--more frequent introduction and discontinuation of products. However, the coe cient
on New Products is significant and more than double the coe cient on Discontinued Products,
resulting in increased product variety. We also find treated firms more likely to expand into
new product categories. In column 4, the coe cient on Af ter is 5% and it is statistically
significant. It appears that PE targets both create new varieties in existing product categories
and enter into new ones.
   To confirm this interpretation, in Panel B we run analyses at the firm-category level.
We compare each treated firm-category with the same category of an untreated competitor.
Within a category, PE controlled firms increase their product portfolio by 2.5% relative to
their pre-PE ownership days. Both new product introductions and discontinuations increase
at a faster rate. Given that existing products do not decline in sales (see Table III), these
new products do not cannibalize existing goods. Figure 3 shows that product innovation
happens gradually over the years following the PE buyout.
   Overall, private equity firms appear to engage in more creative destruction within their
product lines, with introductions of new products outpacing discontinuations, resulting in
greater product variety. We also find evidence of expansion into new product categories.
Since average category-level prices increase for treated firms, the new products must be
slightly more expensive. The higher number of products for sale helps explain why overall


                                               19




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
units sold grow for treated firms despite no change in existing product units sold at the store
level.


C.       Product Availability

     Private equity targets increase units sold and revenues more than competitors. In the
previous section, we show that introduction of new products contributes to this result. In
addition, PE may facilitate geographic expansion.
     We report results at the firm-level in Table V, panel A, and at the firm-category-level in
panel B. After is an indicator variable indicating a post-buyout firm-month or firm-category-
month for target firms. Column 1 shows that treated firms increase the number of physical
stores in which they sell their products by 25% after the deal, relative to matched untreated
firms. This result can happen by selling to more stores within the same retail chain or by
entering new retail chains. Column 2 shows that PE firms increase the number of retail chains
by 10% post-buyout. How widespread geographically is this expansion? Column 3 shows
that PE firms expand to 14% more 3-digit ZIP codes. We obtain similar unreported results
for counties, DMAs, and states (see figure A2 in the Appendix for a graphical illustration
of these results). The results at the firm-category level (in Panel B) are similar. Figure 4
shows that this expansion occurs steadily over the years following the deal.
     In the Appendix Table A7, we investigate more formally the timing of the PE eects
in all our major analyses, by interacting our treatment variable with each of the four years
following the buyout. We find that most of the results are significant starting from the first
year post-buyout and that the eects of PE linearly increase over time.




                                                20




                    Electronic
                  Electronic   copyavailable
                             copy   available at:
                                              at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                         VI.       Competitor Response

     The results thus far show what happens to private equity treated goods relative to
matched competitors. Competitors, however, do not necessarily stand still. In this sec-
tion, we investigate how competition responds to PE entry. Combined with the relative
changes documented in section V, these results paint a more comprehensive picture of the
eects of PE on products and, ultimately, consumers.


A.     Competitor Response: Prices

     Prices on existing products taken over by PE increase by about 1% relative to matched
products (Table III, Panel C). This result is consistent with private equity firms keeping
prices constant while competitors lower prices to run highly leveraged targets out of business.
Alternatively, the price eects could be bigger if competitors also increase prices. It is
ultimately an empirical question whether rivals match PE price increase behavior--as typical
oligopoly models would predict--or seize an opportunity for predation.
     To identify the pricing response of competitors to private equity entry, we exploit geo-
graphic variation in a given competitor's exposure to a PE buyout. As an example, assume
that Del Monte, a private equity takeover target, sells green beans in store A but not in
store B. General Mills, who is not private equity owned, sells green beans in both stores. We
compare the price response of General Mills in store A, which faces PE competition, to its
response in store B, which does not. We attribute a dierential price response following the
buyout to the PE deal. The identifying assumption is that absent the deal, the price of this
particular green bean product of General Mills would have moved similarly in both stores.
     The control firms in previous regressions now become the objects of interest. We first



                                                21




                    Electronic
                  Electronic   copyavailable
                             copy   available at:
                                              at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
extract from the same-store analysis of Table III the same non-PE products and store loca-
tions that face a PE competitor. We then identify the stores where these non-PE products
are sold absent the PE competitor. Given that each product is sold in thousands of stores,
we randomly select ten stores, and among these we select the closest match in terms of price
level and growth to the non-PE product which does face a PE rival. These two product-stores
form a cohort.
       In Table VI, After is an indicator variable equal to one for non-PE products after their
competitors' PE deals, in stores where that newly PE-owned product is sold. As in the
previous same-store product analysis, we include product-cohort fixed eects and time-cohort
fixed eects. In Panel A, Column 1, the coe cient on After is 0.4% and significant, suggesting
that private equity leads direct store competitors to marginally raise prices.
       A problem for our identifying assumption would be if pricing trends in stores with PE
competition are systematically dierent from trends in stores without PE. For example, PE
products could be sold in chains or in geographic areas experiencing dierential price changes.
We address these possibilities in Column 2 and 3. In Column 2, we require that all eleven
stores (ten which sell only the non-PE product, one which also sells the PE entrant) from
which the product-store cohorts are drawn are part of the same retail chain. In Column 3 we
require that all the stores used to define the cohorts are in the same DMA. The coe cients
on After in these regressions are 0.4% and 0.3% and still significant. Private equity entry
thus leads competitors to marginally raise prices in stores where they directly compete11 .
       Figure 5 plots the price response over time from Column 1. Price responses for Columns
2 and 3 are in the Appendix, Figure A3. Interestingly, the price change happens very quickly.
  11
    Price changes could be driven by the manufacturer (General Mills in our example) or the individual retail
store manager; Levy et al. (1997) notes that both impact final retail pricing. Whether the manufacturer or
the retailer is responsible for higher competitor prices when PE is present, however, it is still ultimately the
PE buyout that instigated the change.


                                                      22




                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
Added to the relative price increase of approximately 1% for PE-owned goods, the results
in panel A suggest the overall PE price increase experienced by consumers could be 1.3 to
1.4%.


B.      Competitor Response: Product Mix and Availability

     Private equity targets boost product introduction and thus increase variety. How do
competitors respond? To address this question we analyze if, after the buyout, there is a
change in the number of products these competitors sell in stores where they compete with
the PE firms vs. stores where they do not. As an illustrative example, General Mills, which
is not PE-owned, sells 10 varieties of green beans in stores A and B prior to the PE buyout
of its competitor, Del Monte. Del Monte sells green beans in store A but not store B. What
happens to General Mills' green bean variety in store A vs. store B after the PE deal?
Our identifying assumption is that any dierence in General Mills' store A variety is due to
the presence of private equity. The unit of analysis is now a firm's entire product category
within a store, not a specific product, since we want to count the number of products in the
category. For each store in which a non-PE firm competes with a PE in a given category, we
select ten random stores where the non-PE firm does not compete with PE. We form cohorts
using all eleven firm-category stores, one treated by a PE entrant and ten untreated. We use
all ten control stores because it is not obvious how to identify the best match and because
we want to reduce the noise in the measurement of product variety using one single store.
     We present these results in Table VI, Panel B. In Column 1, we find that a PE-buyout
competitor reduces the number of product oerings by 1.5%. We find similar results in
Column 2 where all 11 stores in each cohort are from the same retail chain, and Column 3
where all cohort members are from the same DMA. Unlike with prices, where competitors


                                               23




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
respond (marginally) in the same direction as their PE shelf neighbors, product variety
responds in the opposite direction. Given that shelf space is finite, more aggressive PE
product introduction appears to crowd out competitors.
       Our findings are at odds with evidence in Chevalier (1995b) that competitors enter and
expand into the LBO grocery chain's markets after the deal. There are key dierences
between the papers that could help explain the dierent results. First, Chevalier investigates
retail chains, while we focus on manufacturers that sell in these chains. Second, Chevalier'
sample is heavily influenced by publicly-traded firms, whereas most of our firms are private.
In section VII.B, we split our analyses by public and private firms and find results for public
firms at the product-store level that are more consistent with evidence in Chevalier (1995b).
Last, supermarket LBOs from the 1980's were undertaken as a takeover defense12 . Decades
later, the drivers of PE deals appear starkly dierent (see our evidence from press releases
in section VII.A).



                                   VII.        Mechanisms

       Private equity deals result in marginally higher prices but significantly higher sales, pri-
marily through aggressive introduction of new products in new locations. How do private
equity firms achieve these results? Why is private equity needed? In this section we investi-
gate the potential mechanisms in play. We start by examining cross-sectional and time-series
variation in PE impact. Knowing where and when PE is most eective can provide clues to
their particular skills and strategy. We study the eects of PE: i) on public versus private
  12
    "The vast majority of the leveraged buyouts were not the result of unconstrained decisions by managers
and shareholders. Instead, most of them were undertaken in response to unwanted takeover attempts. In
fact, all four of the biggest deals (and many of the smaller ones) were undertaken to thwart the unwanted
takeover attempts of the Haft family" (Chevalier, 1995b).


                                                   24




                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
targets; ii) around and after the financial crisis; iii) in product categories where target firms
have high vs. low market power; iv) in product categories with low vs. high barriers to
entry; and v) in categories popular among high-income vs. low-income consumers. We also
directly test whether buyout target firms become more acquisitive or increase advertising ex-
penditures. Last, we examine acquisitions of firms by operating companies (i.e., traditional
M&As) to test if our results are specific to PE acquisitions or occur whenever there is a
change in ownership.


A.       Private Equity Deal Press Releases

       A starting point for understanding how private equity firms achieve results is to investi-
gate their stated plans and strategies. Gompers et al. (2016) survey PE firms to understand
how they might create value. In the same spirit, we collect and analyze the press release
announcements for the deals in our sample. With the caveats that PE firms might strategi-
cally handle their press and likely overstate positive outcomes (e.g. growth) and downplay
negative ones (e.g. layos), announcements can still oer insights into the range of strategies
employed.
       We were able to find press releases for 237 deals.13 We categorize the stated reasons for the
deals in Table VII. Reasons are not mutually exclusive. Most press releases (69%) generically
mention growth; some specifically detail new product development, acquisitions, or access
to distribution. Capital infusion and human capital are mentioned as well. Motivations
pertaining to cost cutting and financial engineering are hardly present. There is no mention
of PE as a takeover defense, as, for example, in the case of supermarket LBOs in Chevalier
  13
    This 237 is out of 297 total firms. The sample here is larger than the final sample in our paper (236
firms) because we include firms here for which we do not have at least one year of data before and after the
deal. We have press releases for 184 out of 236 deals in our final sample.



                                                    25




                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
(1995a). Overall, the stated strategies are consistent with our growth results.


B.     Public versus Private Targets

     Public and private firms may be at dierent points in their life cycles. They could also
have dierent needs and face dierent challenges. Private firms are more likely to be small and
financially constrained (Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist, 2016), while public firms are usually
larger and more mature and could be more subject to agency and overinvestment problems
(Jensen, 1986). In Table VIII, we run our sales and price, product innovation, and product
availability tests separately on public and private PE target firms. Of the 236 treated firms,
222 are private and 14 are public. We classify as public to PE those deals where an entire
public firm is sold to PE. We do not include in this category the sales of divisions of public
firms. We find the impact of private equity is not the same for public and private targets.
     In Panel A, the results for private targets match those for the pooled sample (Table III)
at the firm level: post-PE prices increase by 5% while sales and units dramatically increase
by 52% and 45%. For public firms, however, although the coe cients have the same sign, the
magnitudes on sales and units increases are much smaller and not statistically significant. At
the firm-category level, the results for private firms are again consistent with the full sample
results--significant growth in sales and units and a 4% increase in prices. Directionally,
public firm sales and units within a product category fall post-buyout relative to a control.
These coe cient are not statistically significant. Public firm buyouts thus do not appear to
generate the same growth results.
     The within-product-store analyses for the full sample (Table III) document no change in
existing product sales and units and a marginal 1% increase in prices. These results mask
significant dierences between public and private firms. Panel A finishes by showing that for


                                                26




                    Electronic
                  Electronic   copyavailable
                             copy   available at:
                                              at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
private firms, existing products increase their sales post-buyout by 6%--a result statistically
significant at the 1% level. An increase in units sold, not in price, drives this result. This
is consistent with the fact that private targets spend more on advertising after the buyout
(see section VII.E). Public firms, instead, raise prices by 2% and see revenues fall by 6%.
       In Table IV we find that, in the full sample, product oerings expand within existing
categories and into new ones after a private equity buyout. In Table VIII, Panel B, we split
these innovation results by public vs. private firms. For private firms, post-buyout behavior
mimics the full sample findings: the number of products grows by 11% and categories grows
by 6%. There is scant evidence, however, that public firms introduce more new products
or enter more new product categories relative to controls in the post-buyout period. The
coe cient signs are mixed, and the results are not statistically significant.
       In Panel C, we revisit geographic expansion. Private firms drive the strong growth in
market penetration in the overall sample (Table V), registering higher growth rates across
stores, ZIP codes, and chains relative to matched firms post-buyout. The results hold both
at the firm and firm-category level. Public firms again show mixed results with no statistical
significance.
       This divergence in results between public and private firms suggests the existence of
both growth and agency motives for private equity deals. Access to financing, managerial
expertise, or business connections can help younger, private firms to expand their product
lines. The New York Times notes that "business owners with a product to sell often dream
of winning shelf space in the Wal-Marts and Targets of the world. But...it is a challenge to
get shelf space in any store."14 Public firms, in contrast, may be overinvesting in market
share by charging prices that are too low. Our results of growth for private targets and
  14
       "Getting Your Product Onto Retail Shelves" The New York Times 10/20/2010



                                                   27




                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
higher prices for pubic firms are consistent with other studies. For example, Davis et al.
(2014a) document that employment grows following private firm buyouts, while it declines
after public deals. Boucly et al. (2011) similarly find stronger growth for private target firms.
This variation in deal outcomes can also perhaps explain the negative portrayal of private
equity in the media: layos and contraction are associated with the most visible, well-known
targets.


C.     Financial Crisis

     The financial crisis of the late­2000's provides a setting to investigate how PE treated
firms operate when growth is low and capital is scarce, precisely when financial resources
and managerial expertise are likely to be important. In Table IX, we split the PE deals into
those that close between 2007 and 2010 (during the crisis) and those that close between 2011
and 2015 (after the crisis). Consistent with the full sample results, we find in Panel A that
prices, units, and sales increase for PE firm targets in the two time periods, both at the
firm and at the firm-category levels. Results at the store level diverge. During the crisis,
existing PE products do not gain or lose share relative to shelf neighbors, while their prices
fall by 1%. Post-crisis, however, existing products gain share in a given store, even as relative
prices increase by 3%. This evidence on prices suggests that PE treated firms could be more
responsive to economic conditions in their price setting policies, decreasing prices during the
crisis and increasing prices afterward. For product innovation in Panel B, we find that there
is more product turnover for PE treated product categories. The product availability results
in Panel C show that expansion to new locations is generally similar during the two periods.
     There are two main takeaways from these results. First, PE-driven growth occurs in
all economic conditions, including during the financial crisis when capital is scarce. This


                                                28




                    Electronic
                  Electronic   copyavailable
                             copy   available at:
                                              at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
evidence is consistent with Bernstein et al. (2019). They find that during the crisis UK
PE-backed companies decreased investments less and increased their market share more,
compared to control firms. They attribute this evidence to the ability of PE firms to raise
capital, to assist with operating problems, and to provide strategic guidance. Second, we find
evidence that PE strategies change based on general economic conditions. During the crisis
greater innovation and product turnover drive sales. After the crisis--in better economic
times--PE targets are also able to successfully raise prices and gain market share with their
existing products.


D.       Industry Structure

       In which industries/ product categories are PE firms more successful? We examine: i) the
PE target's market power within an industry; ii) the industry's overall competitiveness and
concentration; and iii) the popularity of an industry among high-income consumers. These
cross-sectional tests can provide insights into how PE firms achieve growth.
       Lerner et al. (2011) document that, following a buyout, new patent activity becomes
more concentrated in "core innovation" areas, i.e., those where there was more patenting
prior to the PE deal. Do PE targets in our sample focus their eorts analogously in product
categories where they are well-established, or do they direct attention to categories where
they have lower penetration and more room to grow? In table X, Panel A, we repeat our
main analyses at the product-category level but split the sample by market share. For
each firm, each month, we calculate its market share in each product category.15 A firm's
product category is "high market share" if it is above the median firm market share in that
  15
    For example, if in a month there are 30 firms nationwide that sell green beans, we divide each firm's
green bean sales by total green bean sales that month. We then categorize these 30 firms into those that are
above or below the median green bean market share.



                                                    29




                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
category and "low" otherwise. Growth in sales and units sold and higher average prices all
happen in the product-categories where target firms have higher market share. We also find
more product churn--introductions and discontinuations--and higher geographic expansion
in these higher share categories.
   We next analyze whether PE strategies vary based on industry concentration. Low
concentration industries are traditionally considered more competitive, but they are also less
likely to be dominated by a small number of firms. Do PE-treated firms expand where there
are many small sellers and, possibly, lower barriers to entry? Or do they pursue growth in
categories where few dominant players (e.g., Coke and Pepsi) have the lion's share of the
market? For each of the 1,127 product categories, each month, we calculate the nationwide
Hirfindahl-Hirschman Index value (HHI). Specifically, we compute the revenue market share
by firm and then square and sum these shares, resulting in a value between zero and one.
Lower HHI values correspond to lower industry concentration. We split categories into those
above and below the median HHI each month, labeled respectively "high HHI" and "low
HHI". In Panel B of Table X we run our main specifications separately for these two groups.
Many of the results are similar across high vs. low HHI categories. A notable dierence is
that innovation seems to be concentrated in low HHI categories. Here, target firms introduce
more new products and have greater variety.
   There is growing evidence that in the past decade product introductions have favored
high-income consumers (e.g., Argente and Lee, 2019 and Jaravel, 2018). Do PE-treated
firms concentrate their growth eorts in product categories popular among consumers with
higher income? We integrate our retail-scanner dataset with the Nielsen Consumer Panel
data to address this question. The Consumer Panel Data includes a representative panel of
households that provide information about their purchases and, important for our analysis,


                                               30




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
demographic information including income. We first classify each product category as high-
income consumer appealing if high--that is, above median--income consumers are more
likely to buy products in the category. In practice, for each product-category, we compute
the average income of the consumers that buy products in the category. We define a category
as "high-income" if the average income in the category is above the median income among
all categories. In Panel C of Table X we separately run our main specifications for high
vs low-income categories. All our results are stronger, and statistically significant, for the
high-income categories.
       Overall, the evidence in this section provides insight into where PE finds positive NPV
projects. PE firms are more successful when target firms have higher market power and more
popularity among high-income consumers. Innovation eorts seem also more pronounced in
categories with lower concentration and potentially lower barriers to entry. These results
nicely complement our previous evidence on PE deal selection (Table A5). PE selects cate-
gories that are less concentrated and more popular among high-income consumers. In these
same categories--as shown in Table X--PE is able to achieve more innovation and higher
growth.


E.       Company Strategy and Investments

       What specific levers do PE firms pull to spur growth? We examine two specific actions:
corporate acquisitions and product advertising. In Table XI, Panel A, we investigate if
private equity targets become more acquisitive after the buyout. For the years in our sample
period,16 we collect from Capital IQ all M&A transactions where the buyer is one of the
236 firms in our sample or their respective control firms. We find 651 such deals, 361 by
  16
    Following our empirical specification from equation 1, we limit our data collection to two years before
and five years after the deal.


                                                    31




                     Electronic
                   Electronic   copyavailable
                              copy   available at:
                                               at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                   https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
target firms and the remaining 290 by control firms. Our outcome variable is the number
of monthly acquisitions closed by the firm. We keep in the sample only firms that have
made at least one acquisition in Capital IQ. The regression follows equation 1. We find
that target firms indeed become more active buyers post-buyout, increasing the number of
acquisitions per month by 0.016, which translates roughly to one additional deal over the
next five years. This result holds whether targets are public or private and during or after
the financial crisis. This evidence is consistent with the finding in Davis et al. (2014b) that
acquisitions are a driver of growth in buyout deals. We thus investigate further if external
growth drives our results. This is an important test, as the growth in sales, innovation, and
geographic expansion could be simply driven by redrawing the boundary of the firm rather
than by creating new products and markets. In Tables A9, A10, and A11, we repeat our
main analyses for price and sales, product innovation, and product availability, excluding
the top decile of the most acquisitive target firms. These results are not materially dierent
from those using the entire sample (see Tables III, IV, V). Similar magnitudes for the eects
of PE after excluding the most acquisitive firms suggests that organic, internal expansion is
a substantial contributor to PE target growth.
   Another channel through which firms can achieve sales growth is investing in advertis-
ing. We compile data from Ad$pender by Kantar Media, which records the dollar value
of monthly advertising expenses for over 3 million brands across 18 major communication
media (e.g., television, magazines, radio, newspapers). Ad$pender aggregates these brands
to the firm level. The data reported by Kantar Media is sparse, with many missing obser-
vations for advertising expenditure. To smooth the data, we thus take the average monthly
advertising expenditure when reported and annualize it. We keep only firm-year data where
the advertising expenditure is reported for at least one month of the year. Overall we are


                                               32




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
able to identify monthly spending for 203 out of our 236 treated firms.
     We then run a generalized di-in-di regression between the treated firms and the matched
control firms where the dependent variable is the log of one plus the annualized monthly ad-
vertising expenditure. After the buyouts, treated firms increase advertising expenses by
roughly 49% compared to their matched control firms. This result is similar across public
and private firms, and it is stronger in the years following the financial crisis (2011 to 2015).
     PE target firms are more likely to acquire other firms and ramp up advertising following
the buyouts. We admittedly cannot disentangle whether PE firms provide managerial exper-
tise or financial resources to make these activities possible. We also cannot comment on the
cost-benefit trade-os of these activities. Nonetheless, these activities are concrete examples
of changes to the firm strategy implemented by PE firms.


F.     Non-PE Ownership Changes

     Are the changes that follow PE buyouts unique to PE buyers, or do acquisitions by
operating firms have the same eect? To test if non-PE acquisitions also lead to growth, we
repeat our main analyses on sales and prices, product innovation, and product availability,
replacing PE buyout targets with merger targets.
     We collect from Capital IQ all the target firms of M&A deals during our sample period.
Mimicking our process for PE targets, we match these firms first with the GS1 database and
then with the Nielsen data. Our final sample of M&A targets consist of 126 firms. For each
M&A target firm, we find the closest match using the process described in section IV.B.
     Appendix Table A8 mimics Tables III, IV, and V, examining what happens to targets
following an acquisition by an operating firm. The results in this setting are quite dierent
compared to PE deals. Most coe cients on the After variable are not significantly dierent


                                                33




                    Electronic
                  Electronic   copyavailable
                             copy   available at:
                                              at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                  https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
from zero.
   In stark contrast to PE buyouts, operational M&As do not seem to lead to growth in our
sample. Some M&A deals could happen to eliminate competition. For example, Cunningham
et al. (2019) find that pharmaceutical firms discontinue acquired drugs that directly compete
with their existing products. One caveat in interpreting these M&A results is that some of
the growth prospects that the target would have pursued as a standalone firm could instead
be implemented under the acquiring firm brand names. With this caveat in mind, our results
suggest that PE firms--and not any change in ownership--spur growth.



                                VIII.        Conclusion

   Private equity buyouts often elicit strong negative reactions: a common view is that
PE firms try to increase corporate profitability by laying o workers and increasing prices,
hurting stakeholders such as workers and consumers. Private equity is undoubtedly exercising
a growing influence on consumer products and the purchases of millions of people. Using
price and sales data for nearly two million unique UPCs sold in over 41,000 stores, we formally
investigate the eects of PE on consumer products.
   Retail scanner data has several nice features. First, we are able to study the evolution
of pricing strategies, product innovation, and geographic availability following a buyout.
Second, we can more precisely identify treated units and their counterfactuals in our empirical
analyses. In our dierence-in-dierences estimations, we analyze firms but also decompose
them into product categories and products sold within a particular store. This granularity
in the data helps mitigate concerns that selection, not actions of private equity firms, drive
our results. Last, thanks to the geographic richness of the data, we can also investigate how



                                               34




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
competitors react by comparing price changes in locations with and without a PE brand.
   Contrary to the critics' view, we find that target firms raise prices only marginally.
Compared to similar products sold in the same store, target firms raise price by about 1.0%.
Competitors respond by also marginally raising prices--by roughly 0.4%--only in those stores
where they face direct PE competition. An overall potential price increase of 1.4% in the five
years following a buyout does not support the view that private equity firms significantly
harm consumers on this dimension. Despite the marginal increase in the price of existing
products, target firms experience a significant boom in their overall sales of about 50% in the
years post-buyout. Compared to matched firms, target firms launch more products, expand
more geographically, and enter more retail chains. Target firms become more acquisitive
following buyouts, but organic growth is also strong. PE-driven growth is concentrated in
product categories popular among high-income consumers. To the extent that consumers
value higher product variety and availability (Lancaster (1990), Kahn and Lehmann (1991),
Petrin (2002), Brynjolfsson et al. (2003), and Broda and Weinstein (2006)), PE deals appear
to benefit consumers. Overall, our evidence is consistent with private equity being an avenue
of wealth creation and not simply wealth transfer. How does PE spur growth? To find clues,
we explore dierent PE target types, economic environments, and industry characteristics.
Growth is stronger for private targets, firms that likely demand more access to capital and
management expertise. PE product strategies vary with the economic environment: there
is more product turnover during the financial crisis; normal times bring higher prices. PE
firms are particularly successful in product categories where they hold a strong position
in a fragmented market. Our findings are limited to one single "industry" and might not
necessarily generalize outside of the consumer product space. Nonetheless, households spend
a significant fraction of their monthly budget to buy the products in our study.


                                               35




                   Electronic
                 Electronic   copyavailable
                            copy   available at:
                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                                 REFERENCES

Abadie, Alberto, and Guido W. Imbens, 2006, Large sample properties of matching estima-
  tors for average treatment eects, Econometrica 74, 235­267.

Agrawal, Ashwini, and Prasanna Tambe, 2016, Private equity and workers' career paths:
  The role of technological change, Review of Financial Studies 29, 2455­2489.

Amess, Kevin, Joel Stiebale, and Mike Wright, 2015, The impact of private equity on firms'
  innovation activity, DICE Discussion Papers 184.

Argente, David, and Munseob Lee, 2019, Cost of Living Inequality during the Great Reces-
  sion, Journal of the European Economic Association Forthcoming.

Bernstein, Shai, Josh Lerner, and Filippo Mezzanotti, 2019, Private equity and financial
  fragility during the crisis, Review of Financial Studies 32, 1309­1373.

Bernstein, Shai, and Albert Sheen, 2016, The operational consequences of private equity
  buyouts: Evidence from the restaurant industry, The Review of Financial Studies 29,
  2387­2418.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004, How much should we
  trust dierences-in-dierences estimates?, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249­
  275.

Bloom, Nicholas, Raaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen, 2015, Do private equity owned
  firms have better management practices?, The American Economic Review 105, 442­446.

Boucly, Quentin, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, 2011, Growth lbos, Journal of Financial
  Economics 102, 432­453.

                                              36




                  Electronic
                Electronic   copyavailable
                           copy   available at:
                                            at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
Broda, Christian, and David E Weinstein, 2006, Globalization and the gains from variety,
  The Quarterly journal of economics 121, 541­585.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Yu Hu, and Michael D Smith, 2003, Consumer surplus in the digital econ-
  omy: Estimating the value of increased product variety at online booksellers, Management
  Science 49, 1580­1596.

Chevalier, Judith A., 1995a, Capital structure and product-market competition: Empirical
  evidence from the supermarket industry, American Economic Review 85, 415­435.

Chevalier, Judith A., 1995b, Do lbo supermarkets charge more? an empirical analysis of the
  eects of lbos on supermarket pricing, The Journal of Finance 50, 1095­1112.

Chevalier, Judith A., and David S. Scharfstein, 1996, Capital-market imperfections and
  countercyclical markups: Theory and evidence, The American Economic Review 86, 703­
  725.

Cohn, Jonathan, Nicole Nestoriak, and Malcolm Wardlaw, 2016, How do employees fare in
  private equity buyouts? evidence from workplace safety records.

Correia, Sergio, 2014, Reghdfe: Stata module to perform linear or instrumental-variable
  regression absorbing any number of high-dimensional fixed eects, Statistical Software
  Components S457874, Boston College Department of Economics.

Cunningham, Colleen, Florian Ederer, and Song Ma, 2019, Killer acquisitions, working paper.

Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Kyle Handley, Ron Jarmin, Josh Lerner, and Javier
  Miranda, 2014a, Private equity, jobs, and productivity, American Economic Review 104,
  3956­90.


                                              37




                  Electronic
                Electronic   copyavailable
                           copy   available at:
                                            at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Kyle Handley, Ron Jarmin, Josh Lerner, and Javier
  Miranda, 2014b, Private equity, jobs, and productivity, American Economic Review 104,
  3956­90.

Eaton, Charlie, Sabrina Howell, and Constantine Yannelis, 2019, When investor incentives
  and consumer interests diverge: Private equity in higher education, Review of Financial
  Studies Forthcoming.

Edgerton, Jesse, 2012, Agency problems in public firms: Evidence from corporate jets in
  leveraged buyouts, Journal of Finance 67, 2187­2213.

Farre-Mensa, Joan, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2016, Do measures of financial constraints
  measure financial constraints?, Review of Financial Studies 29, 271­308.

Gerardi, Kristopher S, and Adam Hale Shapiro, 2009, Does competition reduce price disper-
  sion? new evidence from the airline industry, Journal of Political Economy 117, 1­37.

Gompers, Paul, Steven Kaplan, and Vladimir Mukharlyamov, 2016, What do private equity
  firms say they do?, Journal of Financial Economics 121, 449­476.

Goolsbee, Austan, and Chad Syverson, 2008, How do incumbents respond to the threat of
  entry? evidence from the major airlines, The Quarterly journal of economics 123, 1611­
  1633.

Guo, Shourun, Edith S. Hotchkiss, and Weihong Song, 2011, Do buyouts (still) create value?,
  Journal of Finance 66, 479­517.

Harris, Robert S., Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2014, Private Equity Performance:
  What Do We Know?, Journal of Finance 69, 1851­1882.


                                              38




                  Electronic
                Electronic   copyavailable
                           copy   available at:
                                            at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
Hitsch, Guenter J., Ali Hortacsu, and Xiliang Lin, 2019, Prices and promotions in u.s. retail
  markets: Evidence from big data NBER Working Paper No. 26306.

Hotelling, Harold, 1929, Stability in competition, The Economic Journal 39, 41­57.

Jaravel, Xavier, 2018, The Unequal Gains from Product Innovations: Evidence from US
  Retail Sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics Forthcoming.

Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers,
  American Economic Review 76, 232­239.

Kahn, Barbara E., and Donald R. Lehmann, 1991, Modeling choice among assortments,
  Journal of Retailing 67, 274­299.

Lancaster, Kelvin, 1990, The economics of product variety: A survey, Marketing Science 9,
  189­206.

Lerner, Josh, Morten Sorensen, and Per Stromberg, 2011, Private equity and long-run in-
  vestment: The case of innovation, Journal of Finance 66, 445­477.

Levy, Daniel, Mark Bergen, Shantanu Dutta, and Robert Venable, 1997, The magnitude
  of menu costs: Direct evidence from large u.s. supermarket chains, Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 112, 791­825.

Petrin, Amil, 2002, Quantifying the benefits of new products: The case of the minivan,
  Journal of political Economy 110, 705­729.

Robinson, David T., and Berk A. Sensoy, 2013, Do Private Equity Fund Managers Earn Their
  Fees? Compensation, Ownership, and Cash Flow Performance, The Review of Financial
  Studies 26, 2760­2797.

                                              39




                  Electronic
                Electronic   copyavailable
                           copy   available at:
                                            at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
               Table I. Example of Product Category: Canned Green Beans
List of canned green bean products available in a specific grocery store in Austin, TX, for the month of December
2007.


                                                                                      Size    Units              Av.
 UPC           Product Details                          Firm Name                    (Oz.)     Sold    Sales    Price
 2400016286    Cut Green Beans                          Del Monte Foods Inc.           14.5   109.43   101.88       0.92
 2400016287    Cut Green Beans (No Salt)                Del Monte Foods Inc.           14.5    86.14    81.68       0.92
 2400016289    French Style Green Beans                 Del Monte Foods Inc.           14.5    51.00    49.89       0.94
 2400016293    Whole Green Beans                        Del Monte Foods Inc.           14.5    37.29    39.15       1.05
 2000011197    Cut Green Beans                          General Mills, Inc.            14.5    30.43    30.12       0.99
 2400001546    French Style Green Beans                 Del Monte Foods Inc.           28.0    16.71    21.90       1.31
 3470001219    Cut Italian Green Beans                  Sager Creek Vegetable Co.      28.0    11.29    18.96       1.68
 3470001211    Cut Italian Green Beans                  Sager Creek Vegetable Co.      16.0    21.57    18.34       0.85
 3470001211    Cut Italian Green Beans                  Sager Creek Vegetable Co.      14.5    21.57    18.34       0.85
 2400039364    Pickled Green Beans with Dill Flavor     Del Monte Foods Inc.           14.5    15.29    18.05       1.13
 2000011196    French Style Green Beans                 General Mills, Inc.            14.5    17.29    17.11       0.99
 2400001830    Cut Green Beans                          Del Monte Foods Inc.           28.0     5.57     7.30       1.31
 2400016290    French Style Green Beans (No Salt)       Del Monte Foods Inc.           14.5     7.14     7.04       0.95
 2400001393    Cut Green Beans                          Del Monte Foods Inc.            8.0     8.14     5.94       0.73
 2400000087    Cut Green Beans (No Salt)                Del Monte Foods Inc.            8.0     3.71     2.71       0.73
 2400016292    French Style Green Beans with Onions     Del Monte Foods Inc.           14.5     1.00     1.05       1.05
 2400039201    Organic Cut Green Beans                  Del Monte Foods Inc.           14.5     0.29     0.49       1.73




                                                       40



                        Electronic
                      Electronic   copyavailable
                                 copy   available at:
                                                  at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                      https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                                        Table II. Summary Statistics
This table presents summary statistics for all variables and data used in the paper. Panel A introduces an overview
of the number of products, stores, firms, and private equity deals in the overall Nielsen data. Panel B shows the
characteristics of the product categories in Nielsen data. We calculate the Hirfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) for
each of the 1,123 product categories, each month. Panel C presents firm characteristics in the overall Nielsen data.
Panels D focuses on product characteristics split by treatment status.


 PANEL A: Overall Nielsen Data
                                   N.                                                              N.
 Products                   1,977,481                               Stores                     42,928
 Stores per Product               571                               Chains                         91
 Products per Store            18,909                               3-Digit ZIP                   877
 Firms                         52,205                               Counties                      276
 PE Deals                         236                               Designated Market Areas       206
 Private Target Deals             222                               States                         49
 Public Target Deals               14


 PANEL B - Product Category Characteristics
                                                            Mean                   Median                        S.D.
 N. Categories                                              1,127                        -                          -
 N. Products per Category                                   20.80                     8.07                      38.04
 N. Stores per Category                                    30,123                   36,762                     12,821
 N. Firms per Category-Store                                 4.43                     2.00                       5.94
 Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)                            0.60                     0.57                       0.34


 PANEL C - Firm Characteristics
                                                   Mean                        Median                             S.D.
 N.   Products per Firm                            10.22                         3.00                            41.22
 N.   Stores per Firm                           1,345.82                        62.00                         4,177.03
 N.   Chains per Firm                               8.83                         3.00                            14.78
 N.   Categories per Firm                           2.87                         1.00                             6.42


 PANEL D - Product Characteristics in Our Sample by Treatment
                                                Control Group                                 Treated Group
                                        Mean      Median              S.D.          Mean         Median          S.D.
 Price                                   5.33         3.99            5.16           5.19            3.76        5.34
 Monthly Units Sold per Store            8.51         1.00           42.26           8.62            1.00       39.40
 Monthly Sales per Store                20.42         4.96          106.36          19.64            4.99       81.67




                                                           41



                          Electronic
                        Electronic   copyavailable
                                   copy   available at:
                                                    at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                        https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                        10
                        8
              Number of PE Deals
                 4      2
                        0  6




                                   2007m1   2008m1   2009m1   2010m1   2011m1   2012m1   2013m1   2014m1   2015m1
                                                                           Date


                                             Figure 1. Private Equity Deals over Time

This figure shows the monthly number of private equity deals in our sample from January 2007 to December 2015.




                                                                         42



                                        Electronic
                                      Electronic   copyavailable
                                                 copy   available at:
                                                                  at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                                      https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                            Table III. Private Equity, Sales, and Prices
This table presents OLS coe cient estimates from regressing log of sales, log of average monthly prices, and log
of units sold on After, a dummy variable equal to one for post-buyout months for firms (Panel A), firm-categories
(Panel B), or product-stores (Panel C) that underwent a buyout during our sample period. We use the Abadie
and Imbens (2006) distance metric to pair each treated unit with the closest untreated unit. In Panels A and
B, we match on sales, unique UPCs sold, and store locations, all during the most recent pre-buyout month, and
growth in monthly sales from 12 months before the deal to the most recent pre-buyout month. In Panel C, we
match store-products using average price and units sold during the most recent pre-buyout month, and growth
in price and units sold from 12 months ago to the most recent pre-buyout month. The unit of analysis is unique
at the firm-month-cohort level in panel A, at the firm-product category-month-cohort level in panel B, and at
the product-store-month-cohort level in panel C. The estimation period goes from -24 months to +60 months
around the private equity deal closing date. The regressions are estimated using the fixed point iteration procedure
implemented by Correia (2014). Standard errors are in parentheses and are double-clustered by firm and month.
*p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


 Panel A: Within Firm
                                                                       Average                         Number of
                                        Sales
                                                                        Prices                         Units Sold
 After                                  0.406***                       0.053***                        0.355***
                                       (3.59)                         (2.86)                          (3.43)

 Adj. R-Square                          0.876                          0.933                           0.893
 N. Obs.                               31,596                         31,596                          31,596
 Firm-Cohort FE                           Yes                            Yes                             Yes
 Date-Cohort FE                           Yes                            Yes                             Yes


 Panel B: Within Firm-Category
                                                                         Average                       Number of
                                            Sales
                                                                          Prices                       Units Sold
 After                                      0.211***                      0.032***                      0.169***
                                           (3.58)                        (3.76)                        (3.14)

 Adj. R-Square                              0.868                         0.918                         0.884
 N. Obs.                                  224,454                       224,454                       224,454
 Firm-Cat.-Cohort FE                          Yes                           Yes                           Yes
 Date-Cat.-Cohort FE                          Yes                           Yes                           Yes


 Panel C: Within Product-Store
                                                                                                       Number of
                                                Sales                       Price
                                                                                                       Units Sold
 After                                          0.01332                     0.01084**                    0.00213
                                                  (0.76)                      (2.35)                       (0.15)

 Adj. R-Square                                   0.637                       0.797                          0.773
 N. Obs.                                   880,331,932                 880,331,932                    880,331,932
 Product-Store-Cohort FE                           Yes                         Yes                            Yes
 Date-Store-Cohort FE                              Yes                         Yes                            Yes



                                                           43



                         Electronic
                       Electronic   copyavailable
                                  copy   available at:
                                                   at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
 1.5




                                                               .2
 1




                                                               .1
 .5




                                                               0
 0
 -.5




                                                               -.1
       -24    -12    +1    +12   +24   +36   +48   +60               -24      -12    +1    +12   +24   +36   +48   +60



                    (a) Sales - Within Firm                                         (b) Price - Within Firm

                                                                .1
 .8
 .6




                                                                .05
 .4
 .2




                                                                0
 0




                                                                -.05
 -.2




       -24    -12    +1    +12   +24   +36   +48   +60                 -24    -12     +1   +12   +24   +36   +48   +60



             (c) Sales - Within Firm-Category                                (d) Price - Within Firm-Category



                          Figure 2. Time Trend of Total Sales and Average Price
These graphs plot the coe cient estimates of regressions following equation 2, where the dependent variables are
total sales for panels (a) and (c) and average price for panels (b) and (d). The unit of analysis is a firm-month-
cohort for panels (a) and (b) and a firm-category-month-cohort for panels (c) and (d). The coe cient estimate at
time t represents the dierence in the outcome variables between private equity firms/firm-categories and matched
non-private equity firms/firm categories t months away from the date of closing of the private equity deal. The
estimation period goes from -24 months to +60 months around the date of the closing of the private equity deal.
The closing date is indicated by the vertical line. The dotted lines show the 90% confidence interval.




                                                          44



                              Electronic
                            Electronic   copyavailable
                                       copy   available at:
                                                        at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                            https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                        Table IV. Private Equity and Product Innovation
This table presents OLS coe cient estimates from regressing innovation variables on After, a dummy variable
equal to one for the post-buyout months for firms (Panel A) or firm-categories (Panel B) that underwent a buyout
during our sample period. Number of Products is the log of the number of unique UPCs a firm or firm-category
sells nationwide in month t. New products is the number of products introduced by the firm or firm-category in
month t, while Discontinued Products is the number of products dropped in month t. Number of Categories is the
log of the number of product categories, out of a total of 1,127 defined by Nielsen, in which a firm sells at time t.
Each cohort is a pair of treated-untreated firms (panel A) or firm-categories (panel B). Treated and control are
matched as described in Table III. The unit of analysis is unique at the firm-month-cohort level in panel A and
at the firm-category-month-cohort level in panel B. The estimation period goes from -24 months to +60 months
around private equity deal closing date. The regressions are estimated using the fixed point iteration procedure
implemented by Correia (2014). Standard errors are in parentheses and double-clustered by firm and month.
*p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


 Panel A: Within Firm
                               Number of                    New                  Discont.               Number of
                                Products                 Products               Products                Categories
 After                         0.104***                  0.393**                0.159                   0.051**
                              (3.12)                    (2.06)                 (1.11)                  (2.22)

 Adj. R-Square                 0.942                    0.514                   0.739                   0.950
 N. Obs.                      31,596                   31,596                  31,596                  31,596
 Firm-Cohort FE                  Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Date-Cohort FE                  Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes


 Panel B: Within Firm-Category
                                           Number of                         New                          Discont.
                                            Products                       Products                       Products
 After                                      0.025**                         0.048**                        0.034*
                                           (2.13)                          (2.41)                         (1.77)

 Adj. R-Square                              0.920                           0.530                         0.727
 N. Obs.                                  224,454                         224,454                       224,454
 Firm-Cat.-Cohort FE                          Yes                             Yes                           Yes
 Date-Cat.Cohort FE                           Yes                             Yes                           Yes




                                                         45



                         Electronic
                       Electronic   copyavailable
                                  copy   available at:
                                                   at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                                   .6
                                   .4
                                   .2
                                   0
                                   -.2
                                         -24      -12   +1   +12    +24   +36   +48   +60



                               (a) Number of Products - Within Firm
                                     .15
                                     .1
                                     .05
                                     0
                                     -.05




                                            -24   -12   +1   +12    +24   +36   +48   +60



                          (b) Number of Products - Within Firm-Category
                                     .2
                                     .1
                                     0
                                     -.1




                                            -24   -12   +1   +12    +24   +36   +48   +60



                          (c) Number of Product Categories - Within Firm



                          Figure 3. Time Trend of Product Innovation
These graphs plot the coe cient estimates of regressions following equation 2, where the dependent variables are
number of products for panels (a) and (b) and number of product categories for panel (c). The unit of analysis
is a firm-month-cohort for panels (a) and (c), and a firm-category-month-cohort for panel (b). The coe cient
estimate at time t represents the dierence in the outcome variables between private equity firms/firm-categories
and matched non-PE firms/firm categories t months away from the date of closing of the private equity deal. The
estimation period goes from -24 months to +60 months around the closing date of the private equity deal. The
closing date is indicated by the vertical line. The dotted lines show the 90% confidence interval.


                                                               46



                        Electronic
                      Electronic   copyavailable
                                 copy   available at:
                                                  at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                      https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                        Table V. Private Equity and Product Availability
This table presents OLS coe cient estimates from regressing the logs of number of stores, retail chains, and 3-digit
ZIP codes where a firm or firm-category is present each month on After, a dummy variable equal to one for the
post-buyout months for firms (Panel A) or firm-categories (Panel B) that underwent a buyout during our sample
period. Each cohort is a pair of treated-untreated firms (Panel A) or firm-categories (Panel B). Treated and
control are matched as described in Table III. The unit of analysis is unique at the firm-month-cohort level in
panel A and the firm-category-month-cohort level in panel B. The estimation period goes from -24 months to +60
months around the private equity deal closing date. The regressions are estimated using the fixed point iteration
procedure implemented by Correia (2014). Standard errors are in parentheses and double-clustered by firm and
month. *p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


 Panel A. Within Firm
                                            N. Stores                   N. Chains                   N. ZIP Codes
 After                                       0.223***                    0.098***                    0.129**
                                            (3.07)                      (3.28)                      (2.47)

 Adj. R-Square                               0.907                       0.951                       0.899
 N. Obs.                                    31,596                      31,596                      31,596
 Firm-Cohort FE                                Yes                         Yes                         Yes
 Date-Cohort FE                                Yes                         Yes                         Yes



 Panel B. Within Firm-Category
                                            N. Stores                   N. Chains                   N. ZIP Codes
 After                                       0.130***                    0.052***                    0.095***
                                            (2.93)                      (2.92)                      (2.89)

 Adj. R-Square                               0.889                       0.920                       0.882
 N. Obs.                                   224,454                     224,454                     224,454
 Firm-Category-Cohort FE                       Yes                         Yes                         Yes
 Date-Category-Cohort FE                       Yes                         Yes                         Yes




                                                        47



                         Electronic
                       Electronic   copyavailable
                                  copy   available at:
                                                   at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                                                                    .6
 1




                                                                    .4
 .5




                                                                    .2
 0




                                                                    0
 -.5




                                                                    -.2
       -24    -12     +1   +12     +24   +36   +48   +60                  -24     -12   +1   +12   +24   +36   +48   +60



                    (a) N. Stores - Within Firm                                 (b) N. Stores - Within Firm-Category
 .4




                                                                    .3
 .3




                                                                    .2
 .2




                                                                    .1
 .1




                                                                    0
 0
 -.1




                                                                    -.1




       -24    -12     +1   +12     +24   +36   +48   +60                  -24     -12   +1   +12   +24   +36   +48   +60



             (c) N. Retail Chains - Within Firm                  (d) N. Retail Chains - Within Firm-Category
 .6




                                                                    .5
                                                                    .4
 .4




                                                                    .3
 .2




                                                                    .2
                                                                    .1
 0




                                                                    0
 -.2




       -24    -12     +1   +12     +24   +36   +48   +60                  -24     -12   +1   +12   +24   +36   +48   +60



             (e) N. 3-digit ZIPs - Within Firm                    (f ) N. 3-digit ZIPs - Within Firm-Category

                                    Figure 4. Time Trend of Product Availability
These graphs plot the coe cient estimates of regressions following equation 2, where the dependent variables are
number of stores for panels (a) and (b), the number of retail chains for panels (c) and (d), and the number of
3-digit ZIPs for panels (e) and (f). The unit of analysis is a firm-month-cohort for panels (a), (c), and (e), and a
firm-category-month-cohort for panels (b), (d), and (f). The coe cient estimate at time t represents the dierence
in the outcome variables between PE firms/firm-categories and matched non-PE firms/firm categories t months
away from the closing date of the private equity deal. The estimation period goes from -24 months to +60 months
around the date of the closing of the private equity deal. The closing date is indicated by the vertical line. The
dotted lines show the 90% confidence interval.
                                                               48



                                   Electronic
                                 Electronic   copyavailable
                                            copy   available at:
                                                             at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                                 https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                                   Table VI. Competitor Response
This table presents evidence from product-stores (Panel A) or firm-categories (Panel B) for the competitors of
firms that were acquired by a private equity. In Panel A, we present OLS coe cient estimates from regressing
the log of average monthly prices on After, a dummy variable equal to one in the post-buyout months if the
competitor's product was competing in the same store-category with at least one product that underwent a buyout
during our sample period. Each cohort is thus made of a treated product sold in a store with PE competition and
a matched control product--with the same UPC--sold in dierent stores without private equity competition. In
practice, for each treated product we randomly select ten of these stores without PE competition. Among these
ten stores, we then choose the closest match based on the level and growth in the product-store price before the
deal, using the Abadie and Imbens (2006) distance metric. In Column 1, we randomly choose ten among all the
US stores to select the match. In Column 2, we choose the ten stores within the same retail chain of the treated
product. In Column 3, the ten stores are from the same Designated Market Area of the treated product. In Panel
B, we present OLS estimates from regressing the log of number of products on After, a dummy variable equal to
one if the treated firm-category was competing with at least one product in the same category that underwent a
buyout during our sample period. Each cohort is thus made of a treated firm-category sold in a store with PE
competition and the same firm-category from ten dierent stores without private equity competition. In Column
1, we randomly choose the ten stores among all the US stores. In Column 2, we choose the ten stores within the
same retail chain of the treated firm-category. In Column 3, the ten stores are from the same Designated Market
Area of the treated firm-category. The unit of analysis is unique at the product-store-month-cohort level in Panel
A and the firm-category-store-month-cohort level in Panel B. The estimation period goes from -24 months to +60
months around the closing date of the private equity deal. The regressions are estimated using the fixed point
iteration procedure implemented by Correia (2014). Standard errors are in parentheses and double-clustered by
firm and month. *p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


 Panel A. Prices - Within Product-Store
                                                    Full                     Same                        Same
                                                 Sample                      Chain                       DMA
 After                                              0.004***                  0.004***                   0.003***
                                                   (6.06)                    (8.57)                     (5.69)

 Adj. R-Square                                     0.987                      0.991                      0.988
 N. Obs.                                       6,647,108                  5,713,080                  5,269,109
 Product-Store-Cohort FE                             Yes                        Yes                        Yes
 Date-Cohort FE                                      Yes                        Yes                        Yes



 Panel B. Number of Products - Within Firm-Category-Store
                                                    Full                     Same                        Same
                                                 Sample                      Chain                       DMA
 After                                             -0.015***                  -0.010***                 -0.021***
                                                 (-10.14)                    (-4.30)                  (-10.19)

 Adj. R-Square                                     0.924                      0.957                      0.937
 N. Obs.                                      25,200,128                 12,724,588                 12,191,146
 Firm-Category-Store-Cohort FE                       Yes                        Yes                        Yes
 Date-Cohort FE                                      Yes                        Yes                        Yes




                                                       49



                        Electronic
                      Electronic   copyavailable
                                 copy   available at:
                                                  at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                      https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                                    .015
                                    .01
                                    .005
                                    0
                                    -.005




                                            -24     -12   +1   +12    +24   +36   +48   +60



                                              (a) Competitor price response
                                       .04
                                       .02
                                       0
                                       -.02
                                       -.04
                                       -.06




                                              -24   -12   +1   +12    +24   +36   +48   +60



                                  (b) Competitor product mix response


                             Figure 5. Trend in Competitor Response
These figures plot the coe cient estimates of regressions following equation 2, where the dependent variables
are average monthly prices for panel (a) and number of products for panel (b). The coe cient estimate at
time t represents the dierence in the outcome variables between treated product-stores/firm-category-stores and
matched controls t months away from the date of closing of the private equity deal. This sample only includes
product-stores/ firm-category-stores for control firms that did not go through a private equity deal. In panel (a),
each cohort is made of a treated product that is sold in a store-category where a private equity deal occurred,
and the best match (with the same UPC) but selected from ten random stores across the US where there is no
private equity competitor. In panel (b), each cohort is made of a firm-category where the PE deal occurred, and
the average of the same firm-category from ten random stores across the US where there is no private equity
competitor. The estimation period goes from -24 months to +60 months around the date of the closing of
the private equity deal. The closing date is indicated by the vertical line. The dotted lines show the 90% con-
fidence interval. Regressions are estimated using the fixed point iteration procedure implemented by Correia (2014).




                                                                 50



                         Electronic
                       Electronic   copyavailable
                                  copy   available at:
                                                   at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                               Table VII. Mechanism: Press Releases
This table shows the number (and percentage) of press releases that mention a specific reason for the private
equity deal. Out of a total of 297 deals, we were able to find press releases for 237 firms. We compute percentages
out of these 237 firms. 44 press releases do not mention any specific reason for the deal. Reason are not mutually
exclusive and one press release could mention multiple reasons. The total sample of deals used here (297) is larger
that the final sample in our analyses (236), because we do not require to have one year of sales data before and
after the deal.




                              Reason                               N. Deals     (%)
                              Expansion Plans/General Growth            163   (69%)
                              Financial Capital for Growth               63   (27%)
                              Industry Experience/Expertise              58   (25%)
                              New Products                               49   (21%)
                              Acquisitions                               29   (12%)
                              Distribution                               26   (11%)
                              New Management/CEO                         24   (10%)
                              Cost E ciencies                             9    (4%)
                              Access To Talent                            2    (1%)




                                                        51



                         Electronic
                       Electronic   copyavailable
                                  copy   available at:
                                                   at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                      Table VIII. Mechanisms: Public vs. Private Targets
This table presents OLS coe cient estimates from regressing, in Panel A, logs of sales, average monthly prices, and
units sold on After, a dummy equal to one in the post-buyout months if the firm, firm-category, or product-store
underwent a buyout during our sample period. In Panel B we focus on product innovation, in Panel C product
availability. All the outcome variables are either indicator variables or in logs. Public targets are those deals where
the target was a public company before the private equity acquisition. Each cohort is a pair of treated-untreated
firms, firm-categories, or product-stores where the treated unit is matched to the untreated unit using the
same methodologies followed in the previous tables. The unit of analysis is unique at the firm-month-cohort,
firm-category-month-cohort, or product-store-month-cohort. The estimation period goes from -24 months to +60
months around the closing date of the private equity deal. The regressions are estimated using the fixed point
iteration procedure implemented by Correia (2014). Standard errors are in parentheses and double-clustered by
firm and month. *p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


 Panel A: Sales, Pricing, and Units
                                                    Public Target                              Private Target
                                         After        T-stat        N. Obs.         After         T-stat        N. Obs.
 Within              Sales                0.214        (0.53)          2,088         0.420***      (3.54)       29,508
 Firm                Average Prices       0.046        (0.94)          2,088         0.053***      (2.73)       29,508
                     Units Sold           0.119        (0.36)          2,088         0.372***      (3.41)       29,508

 Within              Sales               -0.074       (-0.43)         24,820         0.247***      (4.09)       199,634
 Firm-Category       Average Prices      -0.014       (-0.72)         24,820         0.038***      (4.16)       199,634
                     Units Sold          -0.059       (-0.40)         24,820         0.198***      (3.55)       199,634

 Within              Sales               -0.063*      (-1.95)    307,133,126         0.055***      (5.01)   554,415,032
 Product-Store       Prices               0.020**     (2.27)     307,133,126         0.007         (1.39)   554,415,032
                     Units Sold          -0.059**     (-2.09)    307,133,126         0.035***      (4.67)   554,415,032


 Panel B: Product Innovation
                                                          Public Target                         Private Target
                                                  After      T-stat      N. Obs.       After          T-stat     N. Obs.
 Within             N. of Products                 0.060     (0.47)       2,088         0.107***      (3.09)      29,508
 Firm               New Products                   1.766     (1.12)       2,088         0.296*        (1.78)      29,508
                    Discontinued Products         -0.424     (-0.43)      2,088         0.201         (1.48)      29,508
                    Number of Categories          -0.078     (-0.90)      2,088         0.060**       (2.53)      29,508

 Within             N. of Products                -0.008     (-0.22)      24,820        0.029**       (2.36)     199,634
 Firm-Category      New Products                   0.181     (1.51)       24,820        0.032**       (1.98)     199,634
                    Discontinued Products          0.043     (0.65)       24,820        0.032*        (1.69)     199,634




                                                            52



                         Electronic
                       Electronic   copyavailable
                                  copy   available at:
                                                   at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
Panel C: Product Availability
                                           Public Target                          Private Target
                                 After        T-stat         N. Obs.      After         T-stat     N. Obs.
Within             N. Stores       0.205      (0.98)          2,088        0.224***     (2.93)     29,508
Firm               N. Chains      -0.080      (-1.43)         2,088        0.110***     (3.49)     29,508
                   N. Zip          0.057      (0.37)          2,088        0.134***     (2.44)     29,508

Within             N. Stores      -0.116      (-0.97)        24,820        0.161***     (3.52)     199,634
Firm-Category      N. Chains      -0.086      (-1.61)        24,820        0.069***     (3.96)     199,634
                   N. Zip         -0.096      (-1.11)        24,820        0.119***     (3.50)     199,634




                                                        53



                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
Table IX. Mechanisms: During (2007-2010) vs. After (2011-2015) the Financial Crisis
This table presents OLS coe cient estimates from regressing, in Panel A, logs of sales, average monthly prices, and
units sold on After, a dummy equal to one in the post-buyout months if the firm, firm-category, or product-store
underwent a buyout during our sample period. In Panel B we focus on product innovation. In Panel C we
study product availability. All the outcome variables are either indicator variables or in logs. The columns
"2007-2010" and "2011-2015" include results from private equity deals that closed in those years. Each cohort
is a pair of treated-untreated firms, firm-categories, or product-stores where the treated unit is matched to the
untreated unit using the same methodologies followed in the previous tables. The unit of analysis is unique at
the firm-month-cohort, firm-category-month-cohort, or product-store-month-cohort. The estimation period goes
from -24 months to +60 months around the closing date of the private equity deal. The regressions are estimated
using the fixed point iteration procedure implemented by Correia (2014). Standard errors are in parentheses and
double-clustered by firm and month. *p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


 Panel A: Sales, Pricing, and Units
                                                   2007-2010                                     2011-2015
                                       After           T-stat        N. Obs.        After         T-stat       N. Obs.
 Within             Sales               0.589***       (2.98)         15,390         0.255**      (2.01)       16,206
 Firm               Average Prices      0.057*         (1.84)         15,390         0.049**      (2.23)       16,206
                    Units Sold          0.514***       (2.88)         15,390         0.223*       (1.89)       16,206

 Within             Sales               0.206*         (1.98)         99,864         0.215***     (3.20)       124,590
 Firm-Category      Average Prices      0.035**        (2.25)         99,864         0.030***     (3.11)       124,590
                    Units Sold          0.177*         (1.95)         99,864         0.163**      (2.54)       124,590

 Within             Sales               -0.021         (-0.73)     415,182,486       0.045***     (2.68)     465,149,446
 Product-Store      Prices              -0.011**       (-2.59)     415,182,486       0.031***     (6.04)     465,149,446
                    Units Sold          -0.021         (-0.87)     415,182,486       0.024**      (2.22)     465,149,446


 Panel B: Product Innovation
                                                          2007-2010                               2011-2015
                                               After             T-stat   N. Obs.      After         T-stat     N. Obs.
 Within            N. of Products               0.106*           (1.90)   15,390        0.102**      (2.57)      16,206
 Firm              New Products                 0.603            (1.59)   15,390        0.220        (1.40)      16,206
                   Discontinued Products        0.347            (1.43)   15,390        0.004        (0.02)      16,206
                   Number of Categories         0.048            (1.25)   15,390        0.054*       (1.94)      16,206

 Within            N. of Products               0.026            (1.35)   99,864         0.024       (1.66)     124,590
 Firm-Category     New Products                 0.082**          (1.99)   99,864         0.024       (1.34)     124,590
                   Discontinued Products        0.087**          (2.14)   99,864        -0.004       (-0.31)    124,590




                                                           54



                         Electronic
                       Electronic   copyavailable
                                  copy   available at:
                                                   at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
Panel C: Product Availability
                                            2007-2010                                 2011-2015
                                 After        T-stat     N. Obs.          After          T-stat   N. Obs.
Within            N. Stores       0.308**      (2.50)    15,390            0.153*        (1.82)   16,206
Firm              N. Chains       0.125**      (2.44)    15,390            0.075**       (2.17)   16,206
                  N. Zip          0.206**      (2.24)    15,390            0.064         (1.15)   16,206

Within            N. Stores       0.102        (1.43)    99,864            0.150***      (2.73)   124,590
Firm-Category     N. Chains       0.050**      (2.20)    99,864            0.053**       (2.11)   124,590
                  N. Zip          0.079        (1.64)    99,864            0.107**       (2.45)   124,590




                                                    55



                      Electronic
                    Electronic   copyavailable
                               copy   available at:
                                                at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                    https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                               Table X. Mechanism: Industry Structure
This table presents OLS coe cient estimates from regressing outcome variables on After, a dummy equal to one in
the post-buyout months if the firm-category underwent a private equity buyout during our sample period. In Panel
A, we split results based on the target firm's market share in the product categories. In Panel B, we separately
report results based on the concentration (HHI index) in the product categories. In Panel C, we split the evidence
based on the popularity of the product categories among high-end consumers. Market Share for each firm is its
sales divided by total sales, each month, in a particular category. High values of Market Share are firms above
the median in a category-month. HHI is the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index of each product category, each month,
calculated by squaring and summing the national market shares of each firm in a given category. High values
of HHI are those categories whose HHI is above the median that month. Using the Nielsen Consumer Panel,
for each product category, we compute the average income of the consumers that buy products in the category.
High-Income Consumers categories are those categories that have an average income that is above the median
income among of all categories. Each cohort is a pair of treated-untreated firm-categories where the treated unit is
matched to the untreated unit with the closest distance at the time of the private equity deal as described in Table
III. The unit of analysis is unique at the firm-category-month-cohort level. The estimation period goes from -24
months to +60 months around the private equity deal closing date. The regressions are estimated using the fixed
point iteration procedure implemented by Correia (2014). Standard errors are in parentheses and double-clustered
by firm and month. *p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



 Panel A: Market Share in the Product Category
                                                   High Market Share                         Low Market Share
                                              After            T-stat   N. Obs.       After        T-stat    N. Obs.
                   Sales                        0.265***       (3.13)   92,712         0.109       (1.39)    98,920
                   Average Prices               0.055***       (5.07)   92,712         0.013       (0.97)    98,920
                   Units Sold                   0.208***       (2.73)   92,712         0.089       (1.23)    98,920

 Within            N. of Products               0.014          (0.80)   92,712         0.043**     (2.57)    98,920
 Firm-Category     New Products                 0.107**        (2.53)   92,712         0.005       (0.43)    98,920
                   Discontinued Products        0.076*         (1.80)   92,712         0.002       (0.26)    98,920

                   N. Stores                    0.168***       (3.00)   92,712         0.079       (1.27)    98,920
                   N. Chains                    0.087***       (4.29)   92,712        -0.007       (-0.26)   98,920
                   N. Zip                       0.128***       (3.53)   92,712         0.058        (1.21    98,920


 Panel B: Product Category Concentration
                                                          High HHI                               Low HHI
                                              After            T-stat   N. Obs.      After         T-stat    N. Obs.
                   Sales                        0.186***       (2.72)   109,800        0.243***    (3.60)    114,490
                   Average Prices               0.037***       (3.23)   109,800        0.031***    (3.25)    114,490
                   Units Sold                   0.152**        (2.41)   109,800        0.193***    (3.14)    114,490

 Within            N. of Products               0.010          (0.71)   109,800        0.037**     (2.47)    114,490
 Firm-Category     New Products                 0.013          (0.69)   109,800        0.075**     (2.52)    114,490
                   Discontinued Products        0.041          (1.42)   109,800        0.020       (1.11)    114,490

                   N. Stores                    0.133**        (2.58)   109,800        0.128**     (2.55)    114,490
                   N. Chains                    0.041*         (1.89)   109,800        0.066***    (3.10)    114,490
                   N. Zip                       0.106***       (2.73)   109,800        0.087**     (2.36)    114,490

                                                          56



                         Electronic
                       Electronic   copyavailable
                                  copy   available at:
                                                   at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
Panel C: Category Popularity Among High-Income Consumers
                                          High-Income Consumers               Low-Income Consumers
                                        After        T-stat   N. Obs.       After       T-stat    N. Obs.
                Sales                    0.274***    (3.72)   147,044        0.093      (1.28)    77,410
                Average Prices           0.034***    (3.10)   147,044        0.030***   (2.67)    77,410
                Units Sold               0.231***    (3.51)   147,044        0.051      (0.74)    77,410

Within          N. of Products           0.026*      (1.86)   147,044        0.023      (1.38)    77,410
Firm-Category   New Products             0.063***    (2.84)   147,044        0.020      (0.65)    77,410
                Discontinued Products    0.055**     (2.17)   147,044       -0.008      (-0.39)   77,410

                N. Stores                0.168***    (3.19)   147,044        0.057      (0.99)    77,410
                N. Chains                0.070***    (3.63)   147,044        0.017      (0.61)    77,410
                N. Zip                   0.123***    (3.21)   147,044        0.043      (0.99)    77,410




                                                    57



                     Electronic
                   Electronic   copyavailable
                              copy   available at:
                                               at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                   https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
                 Table XI. Mechanism: Company Strategy and Investments
This table presents OLS coe cient estimates from regressing outcome variables of interest on After, a dummy
equal to one in the post-buyout months if the firm underwent a private equity buyout during our sample period. In
Panel A, we restrict the sample to firms for which we observe at least one acquisition in Capital IQ. The outcome
variable Acquisitiveness counts the number of acquisitions closed in a month. In Panel B, the unit of analysis
is a firm-year. We restrict the sample to firm-years in which we see at least one month of positive advertising
expenditure. The outcome variable is Advertising Expenditures, the log of one plus the annualized average monthly
advertising expenses for all the brands related to the firm as reported in Ad$pender by Kantar Media. Each cohort
is a pair of treated-untreated firms where the treated unit is matched to the untreated unit with the closest distance
at the time of the private equity deal as described in Table III. The unit of analysis is unique at the firm-month
level. The estimation period goes from -24 months to +60 months around the private equity deal closing date.
The regressions are estimated using the fixed point iteration procedure implemented by Correia (2014). Standard
errors are in parentheses and double-clustered by firm and month. *p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



 Panel A: Acquisitiveness
                               Full                     Target                                 Time Period
                             Sample            Public             Private           2006-2010             2011-2015
 After                       0.016***          0.017              0.016***          0.014***              0.018***
                            (4.71)            (1.21)             (4.47)            (3.25)                (3.48)

 Adj. R-Square               0.107            -0.016              0.112             0.081                0.120
 N. Obs.                    26,334             1,770             24,564            12,662               13,672
 Firm-Cohort FE                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                  Yes
 Date-Cohort FE                Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                  Yes


 Panel B: Advertising Expenditures
                               Full                     Target                                 Time Period
                             Sample            Public             Private           2006-2010             2011-2015
 After                       0.396**           0.499              0.376*            0.056                0.330
                            (2.26)            (1.46)             (1.84)            (0.14)               (1.65)

 Adj. R-Square              0.746             0.880              0.721             0.682                 0.787
 N. Obs.                      708                87                621               331                   377
 Firm-Cohort FE               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes
 Year-Cohort FE               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes                   Yes




                                                         58



                         Electronic
                       Electronic   copyavailable
                                  copy   available at:
                                                   at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3513007
                                                       https://ssrn.com/abstract=2911387
