                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE MACROECONOMICS OF STICKY PRICES WITH GENERALIZED HAZARD
                            FUNCTIONS

                                        Fernando E. Alvarez
                                          Francesco Lippi
                                         Aleksei Oskolkov

                                        Working Paper 27434
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27434


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




We thank the students in the 2019 Monetary Economics (33502) at The University of Chicago for
their comments. We also benefited from the comments of Andrea Ferrara, Rob Shimer, our
discussant Andre Silva and participants to the 2019 ECB-PRISMA Conference in Lisbon, the
2019 workshop Recent advances in macroeconomics at EIEF (Rome), and the Macro-
International Workshop at the University of Chicago. This paper originally circulated with the
title "The Analytics of Monetary Shocks with Generalized Hazard Functions". This material is
based, in part, on work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number
SES-1559459. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27434.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Fernando E. Alvarez, Francesco Lippi, and Aleksei Oskolkov. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Macroeconomics of Sticky Prices with Generalized Hazard Functions
Fernando E. Alvarez, Francesco Lippi, and Aleksei Oskolkov
NBER Working Paper No. 27434
June 2020
JEL No. C41,C61,E31

                                           ABSTRACT

We give a thorough analytic characterization of a large class of sticky-price models where the
firm's price setting behavior is described by a generalized hazard function. Such a function
provides a tractable description of the firm's price setting behavior and allows for a vast variety
of empirical hazards to be fitted. This setup is microfounded by random menu costs as in
Caballero and Engel (1993) or, alternatively, by information frictions as in Woodford (2009). We
establish two main results. First, we show how to identify all the primitives of the model,
including the distribution of the fundamental adjustment costs and the implied generalized hazard
function, using the distribution of price changes or the distribution of spell durations. Second, we
derive a sufficient statistic for the aggregate effect of a monetary shock: given an arbitrary
generalized hazard function, the cumulative impulse response to a once-and-for-all monetary
shock is given by the ratio of the kurtosis of the steady-state distribution of price changes over the
frequency of price adjustment times six. We prove that Calvo's model yields the upper bound and
Golosov and Lucas' model the lower bound on this measure within the class of random menu
cost models.

Fernando E. Alvarez                               Aleksei Oskolkov
University of Chicago                             Department of Economics
Department of Economics                           University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street                             Saieh Hall
Chicago, IL 60637                                 1126 E. 59th St.
and NBER                                          Chicago, IL 60637
f-alvarez1@uchicago.edu                           aoskolkov@uchicago.edu

Francesco Lippi
Luiss University and EIEF
francescolippi@gmail.com




A data-appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27434
1     Introduction and Summary of Results

Several sticky price models employ a "generalized hazard function", a function relating the firm's
price adjustment probability to its state. Such a function provides a tractable description of
the firm's price setting behavior and allows for a vast variety of empirical hazards to be fitted.
Compared to the workhorse Calvo (1983) model, where the adjustment probability is constant,
a generalized hazard function (x) allows this probability to depend on the state x, the firm's
desired adjustment, like the markup deviation from the desired level. Such state dependence is
appealing theoretically, see e.g. Barro (1972); Dixit (1991); Caplin and Spulber (1987); Golosov
and Lucas (2007), and has been found to be relevant empirically, see e.g. Eichenbaum, Jaimovich,
and Rebelo (2011); Gautier and Saout (2015). The notion of a generalized hazard function, and
its derivation from first principles, were developed in seminal "menu-cost" papers by Caballero
and Engel (1993a, 1999, 2007) and Dotsey, King, and Wolman (1999), and later revisited using
information theoretical foundations by Woodford (2009) and Costain and Nakov (2011b). Several
authors have since employed the generalized hazard function in applications and empirical work.1
    This paper mostly follows the setup introduced by Caballero and Engel (2007) to frame a broad
class of sticky price models where the firm's pricing decisions are represented by a generalized
hazard function  (|x|). The symmetry of the function arises since we focus on economies where
the state is driftless and is subject to idiosyncratic productivity shocks, an accurate benchmark
for low-inflation economies.2 A large number of models are nested by this framework: starting
with two "extreme" versions such as the canonical Calvo model with a constant hazard  (x) =
and unbounded x, and the Golosov and Lucas (2007) model with x bounded by the adjustment
threshold ±X and a zero hazard on |x| 2 (0, X ) with a spike that can be thought of as an "infinite
hazard" at the adjustment thresholds,3 and other intermediate cases, such as the so called Calvo-
   1
     For recent applications see e.g. Costain and Nakov (2011a); Carvalho and Kryvtsov (2018); Sheremirov (2019);
for empirical work see e.g. Berger and Vavra (2018); Petrella, Santoro, and de la Porte Simonsen (2018), and for
related theoretical work Baley and Blanco (2019).
   2
     See proposition 7 in Alvarez, Le Bihan, and Lippi (2016) for a result explaining why inflation has no first order
eects on the propagation of monetary shocks in this class of models. See Baley and Blanco (2019) for extensions
to large drift, as in the case of large inflation.
   3
     The infinite hazard at the threshold should be thought of as an approximation of the behaviour at an sS barrier.
In our results we make the dierent behaviour precise. In Proposition 4 we produce a rigorous approximation of
the behaviour at barrier as a very high hazard rate, which justifies this analogy.



                                                          1
plus model by Nakamura and Steinsson (2010), the random menu cost problem of Dotsey and
Wolman (2020), as well as the cases discussed above which explicitly use a generalized hazard
function.
      We employ this setup to prove five new analytical results which gives a thorough understand the
workings of sticky price models, their mapping to the data, and the propagation of monetary shocks.
First, we establish an invertible mapping between the fundamental cost of price adjustment (menu
cost or information cost) and the "reduced form" generalized hazard function. We consider two
possible foundations underlying this mapping. One, introduced in the seminal work by Caballero
and Engel (1993b), assumes the firm can change its price upon paying a fixed (menu) cost
that is drawn every period from an unrestricted distribution of costs G( ). We prove that the
mapping between any given menu cost distribution G( ) and the generalized hazard function (x)
is invertible. This means that any non-decreasing generalized hazard function can be rationalized
by a unique choice of the distribution of the random fixed costs G( ).
      While the non-decreasing nature of the generalized hazard function was established by Caballero
and Engel (1993a), we prove the invertibility of the mapping and give an explicit formula to recover
G( ) from any (x) non-decreasing in |x|. We also provide an identical result for an alternative
foundation with the firm optimally selecting the "probability" of adjustment opportunity in every
period subject to a cost c(·), a simplified version of Woodford (2009), where the cost is modeled
in a rational inattention framework.4 We show that every non-decreasing generalized hazard rate
 can be rationalized by a convex cost function c(·).
      Second, we derive a mapping between the theory and the data on the size-distribution of price
changes, which have been heavily used to discipline sticky price models over the past two decades
(see e.g. Klenow and Malin (2010); Cavallo and Rigobon (2016)). We provide an invertible mapping
between the (observed) distribution of price changes Q( p) with density q ( p), frequency of price
changes Na , and the generalized hazard function (x). A price change             p=     x is chosen by a
firm with desired adjustment x that is given the option to adjust. A straightforward relation links
the density of price changes q ( x) to the hazard function and the cross-sectional distribution of
  4
    See also Costain and Nakov (2011b) for a sticky price model where firms must pay a cost to increase the
probability of a price change.



                                                    2
desired adjustments, f (x), namely q ( x)Na = (x)f (x). Previous contributions such as Berger
and Vavra (2018) retrieve f (x) by postulating a parametric form for (x) and then using this
relation. We show that, surprisingly to us, (x) and f (x) are both fully encoded in q ( p) and
Na , and that it is possible to identify both functions using the distribution and frequency of price
changes alone. We derive the expression to retrieve f (x) and (x) from q ( p) and Na in closed
form. The recovery of the function f (x) from observables relates to the work by Baley and Blanco
(2019) who obtain all the moments of f (x) even in the presence of drift and asymmetries. Using
our first result, we can then recover the entire distribution of random menu cost, G( ). We propose
an estimator for such distributions that is consistent with the theory, and allows for unobserved
heterogeneity among products.
   We complement these results by establishing that, under regularity conditions, the survival
function S (t), measuring the distribution of durations of unchanged prices, uniquely identify (x)
as well. Summarizing, the generalized hazard rate  is identified either by the distribution of price
changes Q and one temporal statistic (the frequency), or by the distribution of durations S and
one statistic on the size of price changes (the variance).
   To illustrate our proposed procedure, we estimate the underlying distribution of price changes,
measure its kurtosis, and recover (x), f (x), and G( ) using publicly available scraped-price data of
Cavallo's (2015). Interestingly, accounting for measurement error and aggregation, and correcting
for unobserved heterogeneity, we find values around 2, much smaller values of kurtosis than those
typically reported in the literature, and roughly consistent with the quadratic generalized rate.
   Furthermore, we define a statistic C (for "Calvo-ness") that measures the fraction of price
changes happening independently of the state of the firm. Using our characterization of the rela-
tionship between the observed distribution of price changes and the generalized hazard rate, we
show that C is proportional to q (0), the density of price changes near zero. We estimate C in
Cavallo's (2015) data set and found it to be about 6%, i.e. about 94% of price changes show some
state dependence.
   Third, we establish that the cumulative impulse response (CIR) of output to a once-and-for-all
monetary shock in any model characterized by a generalized hazard function (x) is a simple



                                                  3
function of two steady state statistics: the Kurtosis of the distribution of price changes divided
by six times the frequency of price changes. The CIR, namely the area under the output impulse
response function, is a convenient summary measure of the non-neutrality of monetary shocks.
The notion of CIR was introduced in Alvarez, Le Bihan, and Lippi (2016), which showed that
the "kurtosis result" holds for a Calvo-plus model (and multi-product firms), a class that implies
a constant hazard function (x) =               in the inaction region. Alvarez, Lippi, and Paciello (2016)
showed that the kurtosis results holds in a large class of rational inattention models, as proposed by
Reis (2006), which are purely time dependent.5 This paper provides a substantive extension to the
previous cases: we establish that the kurtosis result holds for any symmetric (x) function, allowing
for both finite and infinite X .6 This includes decreasing or non-monotone hazard functions (which
are not rationalized by random menu cost models), and hazards with discontinuities corresponding
to mass points in the distribution of menu cost. For instance, this provides a rigorous (negative)
answer to Dotsey and Wolman (2020) who conjecture, based on numerical simulations of a dierent
model, that the "kurtosis result" may fail to apply in a model with random menu costs.7
       The fourth contribution establishes that within the class of non-decreasing generalized hazard
functions the largest Kurtosis is six, attained by the constant hazard rate model, like the pure
Calvo (1983) case. The smallest one, equal to one, corresponds to the pure (non-random) menu
cost model of Golosov and Lucas (2007). This result is interesting because non-decreasing hazard
rates are an implication of either the random menu cost or the information gathering setup, and
thus it establishes Calvo as an upper bound within this broad classes of models. Indeed, due to
our first result, the class of non-decreasing generalized hazard functions describes the entire set of
models with random menu costs or the entire class of information gathering models. For a Kurtosis
higher than six, the value of the pure Calvo model, one would need to come up with an economic
foundation for a (locally) decreasing hazard function.
   5
      Our initial use of the cumulative response was restricted to problems with zero drift (inflation). In Alvarez and
Lippi (2019, 2020) we extend the result to the cumulated output response for problems featuring a non-zero but
small inflation. Baley and Blanco (2019) extend our result, characterizing the CIR in terms of objects related to the
distribution of price gaps, to any moment of interest for the CIR, and allowing for non-zero drift and asymmetries.
    6
      The only case where this result was already established is the Calvo+ model with (x) constant on (0, X ).
    7
      We conjecture that the reason their numerical simulations fail to establish this property is due to the presence of
a fraction of firms that have flexible prices. In such settings it is essential to properly aggregate across the dierent
types of firms. Failing to do so will obfuscate the result, which holds for each firm's type.



                                                           4
   The fifth contribution studies the scope of the Flexibility Index, F , a notion introduced by Ca-
ballero and Engel (2007) to analyze the link between the microeconomic behavior and aggregate
stickiness. Subsequently this measure has been used by some authors as a summary measure of
monetary non-neutrality, see e.g. Berger and Vavra (2018); Petrella, Santoro, and de la Porte Si-
monsen (2018). We show that the index corresponds to the slope of the impulse response on
impact (right after the shock). For models with barriers, where X is bounded, the flexibility index
is not informative about the non-neutrality since it is always infinite. For models without barriers,
where X is unbounded, F is finite, and can be computed in closed form for isoelastic hazards ,
including the widely used quadratic case. We present non-pathological examples where the same
F corresponds to dierent values of the cumulative impulse response, and where F is not even an
accurate summary of the short-term response of output.


Structure of the paper. The next section provides two foundations for the generalized hazard
function. In the first one (Section 2.1), firms choose when to change prices subject to random
menu costs, distributed according to CDF G. In the second one (Section 2.2), firms choose the
intensity with which they can change prices, subject to a cost function c. In both models, the
optimal decision rule is summarized by a generalized hazard function . We show that in both
models, given , one can recover the primitive cost, either the G or c. Section 3 characterizes the
steady-state statistics of a model where the firms' decisions follow a generalized hazard function.
Section 4 shows how to recover  starting from an observed distribution of the size of price changes,
and estimate it in Cavallo's (2015) data set. Section 5 establishes that, under some conditions, the
information encoded by the size distribution of price changes can equivalently be obtained from
the distribution of spell durations. Section 6 discusses the propagation of a once-and-for-all small
aggregate shock in an economy characterized by a generalized hazard function, and proves that its
eect can be summarized by a simple su cient statistic. Section 7 discusses scope and limitations
of the flexibility index, a summary measure for the non-neutrality of monetary shock that is often
used in the literature.




                                                 5
2         Foundations of the Generalized hazard function (x)

The generalized hazard function is a building block of several macro models featuring sticky prices.
It is a function that maps the state of the firm, x, e.g. the deviation of the current markup from
the profit maximizing one, into the likelihood of a price adjustment (x). Such a function is
appealing to scholars because it allows for substantive flexibility in fitting cross-sectional data on
price setting behavior while, at the same time, having explicit microeconomic foundations. This
section presents two alternative settings for such foundations, and provides an invertible mapping
that allows one to recover the foundations from a given hazard function.
        Our first setup uses a random menu cost model, first proposed by Caballero and Engel (1993a)
and elaborated in Caballero and Engel (1999, 2007). A particular case, the Calvo-plus model, was
analyzed by Nakamura and Steinsson (2010). The second setup relates to models of inattention as
in Woodford (2009), where firms choose the arrival rate of opportunities to change prices.8
        Both setups feature a firm that maximizes the present discounted value of a per-period profit
function given by       Bx2 , a second order approximation of the profit function, where x is the price
gap, and the parameter B > 0 measures the curvature of the profit function. If prices are not
                                                                                                                   2
changed, the price gap x evolves as a standard Brownian Motion with zero drift and variance                            .
The lack of drift indicates that the economy under consideration has no inflation.9 The two setups
dier in the friction that prevents the firm from setting x = 0 at all times. In the first, the friction
is due to the presence of random fixed costs of price adjustment; in the second the friction is due
to an information cost.


2.1        The Random Menu Cost Model

The Calvo-plus model supplements the traditional Calvo model with the possibility that the firm
can change its price by paying a fixed menu cost at any time. The advantage of this model is
    8
     In Woodford (2009) the form of the firm's problem and the specification of c(·) are derived assuming constraints
on information flows.
   9
     See The Online appendix B in Alvarez and Lippi (2014) for a detailed microfoundation of this model. The
focus on a model with zero inflation provides an accurate approximation for economies where inflation is low, as
the eects on decision rules are of second order when inflation is close to zero, as shown theoretically and validated
empirically in Alvarez et al. (2019); Alvarez and Lippi (2020).



                                                         6
to eliminate a long tail of delayed adjustments that seems counterfactual. The generalized model
allows the firm to draw a fixed menu cost                      from a distribution G at random times ­ arriving at
a Poisson rate  > 0.
     As in Caballero and Engel (1993a), we call the dierence between the current price of the
firm and its ideal price a "price gap". We will specify the process for the demand and cost of
the firm, so that the price gap is the state of the firm's problem. The menu costs drawn by the
firm can be zero or strictly positive. If the cost is zero the firm changes its price to the ideal one
(i.e. it "closes its price gap"). If the firm draws a strictly positive cost, it will either ignore it
or change its price depending on the value of the "price gap" relative to the realization of the
fixed cost. In particular, the optimal decision rule will be characterized by a threshold rule that
gives the maximum adjustment cost that the firm is willing to pay for adjustment. For all fixed
costs smaller than the threshold the firm changes its price, while for larger costs it keeps the price
unchanged.
     We also allow the firm to have a price change at any time by paying a (relatively large) fixed
cost, which we denote by           > 0 and refer to as the "deterministic fixed cost". If              = 1, then the
firm has no such alternative. We can write the value function of the firm, v (x), as:

                         2                    Z                n                          o                       
                   2          00
rv (x) = min Bx +            v ( x) +                 min                   x)
                                                                   + min v (~    v (x) , 0 dG( ) , r  + min v (~
                                                                                                               x)
                        2                         0                    x
                                                                       ~                                   x
                                                                                                           ~



Two points are worth making. First, given the symmetry of Bx2 , the value function is symmetric
around x = 0. A proof can be constructed by a simple guess and verify argument. Second, if
     = 1 then X = 1, and thus there is no second branch in the Bellman equation. Note that as
long that either r > 0 and/or that  > 0, the value function v is finite and well defined in the case
of     = 1.
     The term minx
                 ~ v (~
                      x) is the value right after adjustment, and given the symmetry of the return
function, we have v (0) = minx
                             ~ v (~
                                  x). Thus we can simply write that for all x

                                    2                  Z
                                         00
       rv (x) = min Bx2 +               v ( x) +               min { + v (0)     v (x) , 0}dG( ) , r ( + v (0))
                                   2                       0




                                                                   7
For the case where           < 1 we can use that the optimal decision rule has a threshold X < 1 such
that if |x|     X the firm pays the fixed cost              . Thus we can write

              8                            v ( x)
              >
              >          2
                              00
                                                R v(0)
              <Bx2 +    2
                             v ( x) +                    dG( ) +  [v (0)     v (x)] G (v (x)   v (0)) , |x|  X
  rv (x) =                                     0                                                                   (1)
              >
              >
              :r (v (0) + ) ,                                                                          | x| > X


                                               ¯ : [0, ] ! [0, X ] as solving
Note that we can define the threshold function x


                                         v (¯
                                            x( )) = v (0) +       for all   2 [0, ]                                (2)


It is easy to see that v is increasing in |x|, since the period cost Bx2 is strictly increasing in |x|,
the uncontrolled process is a brownian motion, and the adjustment cost is independent of x. Since
                                                          x( )) > 0. We can let the function ¯(x) be the
                                          ¯0 ( ) = 1/v 0 (¯
v is strictly increasing in [0, X ], then x
inverse of x
           ¯( ).
       For simplicity, in the characterization of the problem that follows we will assume a distribution
function G with a continuous density. We require G to be continuously dierentiable at all points,
with the possible exception of             = 0. For completeness, Appendix C considers the case of a discrete
distribution G, where              takes finitely many values.10 In either case we have the following smooth
pasting and optimal return point conditions:


                                              v 0 ( X ) = v 0 (X ) = v 0 (0) = 0                                   (3)


       We are now ready to define the generalized hazard rate,  : ( X, X ) ! R+ , which gives the
probability (per unit of time) that a firm with x 2 ( X, X ) will change its price. It is defined
by the optimal decision rule, or the value function, as well the Poisson arrival rate  > 0 and the
distribution of fixed cost G:


                                    ( x) =  G ( v ( x)     v (0)) for all x 2 ( X, X ) .                           (4)
  10
    The two cases dier on whether x     ¯(·) is a continuous function, and on whether the value function v (·) is twice
dierentiable everywhere or it has jump discontinuities on finitely many values. Indeed in the latter case we need
to rewrite the value function since v 00 (x) is not defined at all points.


                                                              8
The function  is symmetric around x = 0 and weakly increasing in |x|. It is continuous at x if G
is continuous at    = v ( x)       v (0), and bounded above by . While the function  is not defined
at x = ±X , we abuse notation and let (X ) = limx!X (x) =  G ( ) = .


2.1.1   Rationalizing a given generalized hazard 

We next show that any increasing, dierentiable, symmetric and bounded hazard rate  can be
rationalized as the solution to the firm problem in equation (1) by a unique menu cost distribution
G and two parameters {, }. Our proof is constructive: we provide an algorithm to compute
{G, , } from , proving existence and uniqueness. Indeed G is obtained by solving a linear
ordinary dierential equation of the second order. Section 2.2 describes an alternative problem of
the firm that also generates a non-decreasing generalized hazard function. We find this interesting
because it allows us to relate to setups costly information collection, as in Woodford (2009).
   The main result in this section shows how to recover the distribution G, with a density G0 = g ,
                                                                       2
given  and the values of three parameters: r, B , and                      . Three remarks are in order. First, the
values of the fixed costs       are measured relative to B , and thus the optimal decision rules depend
                                                                             2
only on the distribution of         /B . Second, we show that                    , while in principle unobservable, is
encoded in the frequency and variance of price changes. Thus, once  is given, we can recover
all the parameters of the firm's problem, except the discount rate r. Third, while in this section
we consider the case where G is dierentiable for                    > 0 to simplify the exposition, Appendix C
considers discrete distributions of costs which imply an hazard  that is a step function. In this
case we can recover G starting from  by solving a system of linear equations.
   Assume the firm faces a distribution G of the menu costs with a density g for all                         > 0, and
possibly a mass point at        = 0. In this case its Bellman equation solves

                                             v (xZ) v (0)
                            2
        rv (x) = Bx2 +          v 00 (x) +              [ + v (0)     v (x)]g ( )d + [v (0)         v (x)]G(0)     (5)
                            2
                                                0


for all x 2 [ X, 0], and we can use the symmetry of v to define it as v (x) = v ( x). The boundary
conditions are v 0 (X ) = 0 and v (X ) = v (0) + , the smooth pasting and value matching. Note that



                                                            9
in the interior (0, X ) the function v solves a non-linear ordinary dierential equation.
   Before the main result on the existence of a unique invertible mapping between  and G, we
state an intermediate result that provides a solution for the value function v and a new auxiliary
function that will be used to solve the general problem. Consider the function  describing the
probability per unit of time of a price adjustment if the price gap is |x| < X . We have the following:

Lemma 1. Let the function u solve the linear ordinary dierential equation

                                                                       2
                           [r + (x)] u(x) = 2Bx +                          u00 (x) for x 2 [0, X ]                     (6)
                                                                       2

with boundary conditions u(0) = u(X ) = 0. The solution for u is unique. Moreover, v is given by

                                              2       Z       x
                                       0
                            v (x) = u (0)         +               u(z )dz      for x 2 [0, X ] .                       (7)
                                             2r           0




   The auxiliary function u can readily be used to compute the value function and, as shown
below, to characterize the distribution of costs that rationalizes the postulated hazard function.
We now state the main result of this section:

Proposition 1.         Fix a discount rate r > 0, the curvature of the profit function B > 0, the
volatility of shocks    > 0, and the threshold X , with X 2 R+ [ {+1}. Consider a generalized
hazard function (·) : ( X, X ) ! R+ that is symmetric around zero, increasing in |x|, dieren-
tiable on (0, X ), and bounded. There exist real numbers { > 0,                            > 0}, both positive, and a cost
distribution G(·) : [0, ] ! [0, 1] with a density g (·), continuous on (0, ), and possibly a mass
point G(0) > 0, that uniquely rationalizes  with a value function that solves equation (5). Using
                                                 Rx
the auxiliary function u in Lemma 1 and U (x) = 0 u(z )dz for x 2 (0, X ),

                                                                                             (0)
                                = lim (x) ,                        = U (X ) , G(0) =                                   (8)
                                      x" X                                                   
                                         0
                                       ( x)
                        g (U (x)) =           for all x 2 (0, X ) with                      = U ( x)                   (9)
                                      u( x ) 



                                                                  10
       The proposition allows us to retrieve the primitives of a fully specified price setting problem
starting from any given non-decreasing hazard function . Note that whenever (0) > 0 the model
implies a mass point at       = 0. Intuitively, rationalizing a non-zero probability of adjustment when
the gap is small requires a mass point of zero menu costs. Also note that g (·) > 0 requires 0 (·) > 0.


Application: a quadratic hazard function. We conclude with an application to a quadratic
generalized hazard function (x) = 0 + 2 x2 where 0                           0, 2     0 and |x| 2 [0, X ].11 We can
solve for the auxiliary function u(x) using Lemma 1. This yields a polynomial:

                                                         1
                                                         X
                                              u( x ) =         a2i+1 x2i+1                                      (10)
                                                         i=0


satisfying the ODE in equation (6) and the boundary conditions u(0) = u(X ) = 0. Straightforward
application of the method of undetermined coe cients gives the recursive relation

                                     ( r +  0 ) a1 2 B
                              a3 =                                                                              (11)
                                           3 2
                                     ( r +  0 ) a2 i 1 +  2 a2 i    3
                           a2i+1   =          2 i(2i + 1)
                                                                        for      i = 2, 3, ...                  (12)


All coe cients are determined as a function of a1 , which is pinned down by the boundary condition
                                                           P a 2i 1 2 i
u(X ) = 0. Application of Proposition 1 gives U (x) = 1       i=1 2i x , the value function v (x) =
   2
a1 2r + U (x), the arrival rate  = 0 + 2 X 2 , the distribution function G( ) with

                                                             0
                                               G(0) =                                                           (13)
                                                          0 + 2 X 2

Note that if 0 > 0 the proposition implies a mass point at                    = 0. For |x| 2 [0, X ], the proposition
gives the menu cost density function
  11
    If  is symmetric and smooth, it often admits a quadratic approximation close to zero. This feature, mentioned
by Caballero and Engel (2007) and Berger and Vavra (2018), makes quadratic generalized hazard functions especially
appealing. In Appendix I we show that if  does not admit a quadratic approximation around x = 0, the underlying
density g exhibits non-generic behavior.




                                                          11
                                                              22 x
                                              g (U (x)) =                                                     (14)
                                                               u( x )

                                                                             2 2
The limit of the density is finite and positive, lim          #0   g( ) =    a1
                                                                                 .   This happens because v (x) is
smooth and symmetric, so u(x) = v 0 (x) admits a linear approximation close to zero.


2.2    An Optimal Adjustment Intensity Model

In this section we describe an alternative setup that yields a similar mapping between an underlying
cost function and the generalized hazard. Now the firm does not face random menu cost. Instead,
it directly controls the arrival rate of a free opportunity to change prices. At each moment the firm
must pay a flow cost c(`) to obtain an arrival rate `. We assume that the flow cost is increasing
and convex. This will give rise to the choice of the optimal rate of price changes as a function of
the price gap, leading to a generalized hazard function . As in the previous case, we also allow
the firm to pay a deterministic menu cost            to change its price with certainty. This            will give
rise to a barrier X , and we allow        = 1, in which case this will never be used, so X = 1.
   The main result of this section is that, analogously to the previous setup, any increasing
symmetric function  can be rationalized by some increasing and convex cost function c. One
dierence between the two setups is that the resulting  in this setup does not need to be bounded
above. This justifies the use of some of our examples later on. Additionally, this setup imposes
fewer constraints on the tails of the implied distribution of price changes.
   The firm's problem is:

                                     2
          rv (x) = min Bx2 +             v 00 (x) + min{` (v (0)        v (x)) + c(`)} , r ( + v (0))         (15)
                                     2             ` 0



We assume that the cost function c : R+ ! R+ is increasing and convex in `, and that c(`) ! 1
as ` ! 1. We can also allow c to have finitely many flat segments, and do not assume that c
is continuously dierentiable. The possibility of kinks in c may be needed to rationalize constant
segments on . Allowing for flat segments in c implies that the minimizer ` may be an interval


                                                         12
for some x, which we can represent with a discontinuity in  at that value of x. We can now state
a result that echoes the one in Proposition 1:

                                                                                                  2
Proposition 2. Fix a discount rate, curvature, variance, and a value of the threshold (r, B,          , X ),
all positive. Let (·) : ( X, X ) ! R+ . Assume that (·) is symmetric around zero, (x) = ( x),
increasing in |x|, and dierentiable on (0, X ). Then, there exists an increasing convex cost func-
tion c(·) : R+ ! R+ that uniquely rationalizes the postulated decision rule as in equation (15).
Moreover, the marginal cost c0 (·) can be constructed by solving a second order linear ordinary
dierential equation.

      The proof of the statement follows the same logic used in the proof of Proposition 1. Appendix D
provides more details on the solution of this model. Note that observation on the frequency and size
of price changes cannot in general distinguish between the random menu cost model of Section 2.1
and the optimal intensity of price adjustment of this section. In this sense, the generalized hazard
function  is a more fundamental object. Furthermore, as explained above, the model of this
section allows a slightly larger set of generalized hazard functions .



3       Steady State observable statistics

In this section we show how to use the hazard function  to derive several observable statistics
produced by our model in the steady state. In particular, we solve for the implied invariant
distribution of price gaps, with density f (x), the number of price changes per unit of time, Na ,
and the distribution of price changes, with density q ( p). We focus on two moments of this
distribution, the variance and the Kurtosis, denoted V ar( p) and Kurt( p). The setup allows
for      ¯ +  R+ [ {1}. If
        2R                         is finite then the inaction range is bounded, X < 1. Otherwise,
the support is unbounded, X = 1. Both cases are encompassed by the analysis of this section.
The starting point of this section is the function  that summarizes the firm's optimal decisions:

Assumption 1. Let  : ( X, X ) ! R+ , be non-negative, piece-wise continuous, symmetric, i.e.
(x) = ( x) for all x, with at most finitely many discontinuities xk           0, and let J  {xk }. If
X = 1, we assume that there is a        > 0 and 0 < xH < 1 such that (x)           for all |x| > xH .

                                                   13
   Note that if  is the solution to the firm problem studied in Section 2, then (x) must be
weakly increasing for x > 0, although Assumption 1 does not impose that.
   Next we define the invariant distribution of price gaps, with density f (·) : ( X, X ) ! R+ .
Importantly, f must be continuous everywhere, continuously dierentiable at |x| 2 (0, X ), twice
continuously dierentiable at all |x| 2 (0, X )/J, and symmetric around x = 0. Given the symmetry,
we only define f on positive real values. It solves the following equations:

                                2
               f ( x)  ( x) = f 00 (x) for all x 2 [0, X ) , x 6= 0 and x 2
                                                                          /J                  (16)
                            2
                                                         Z X
                                                    1
                    with boundary conditions:         =        f (x)dx and lim f (x) = 0 .    (17)
                                                    2      0                 x!X



Note that if      < 1, then f (X ) = 0 is an implication of X being an exit point, i.e. a barrier.
Otherwise it is a requirement for integrability. Figure 1 plots three examples of the invariant
distribution of price gaps which solves equation (16)-(17) for a hazard function with power form
           x 
 ( x) =    X
              .     The quadratic case,  = 2, has been considered for instance by Caballero and
Engel (1993a); Berger and Vavra (2018).


                Figure 1: Density function f (x) for the invariant distribution of gaps
                                                               x 
                            Power hazard function: (x) =       X
                                                                    , X<1




                                                   14
Frequency of price changes Na . There are two types of price changes: those that occur when
x reaches X , if it is finite, and those that occur when the firm draws a low enough fixed cost. Since
                                                                                                              2
X is an exit point, the number of price changes of the first type is given by                            2 2 f 0 (X ). The sign
is negative because f 0 (X ) is negative. The 2 in front is becaus the same number of price changes
happens when x reaches X as when x reaches                        X . Note that if X = 1 then f 0 (X ) = 0. The
second type of price changes occurs when |x| < X , which happens with density f (x), and draws a
su ciently low fixed cost, which happens with probability (x) per unit of time. This gives

                                          Z       X                           2
                                 Na = 2               f (x)(x)dx                  f 0 (X )   .                            (18)
                                              0                           2

We remark for future reference that, as shown in Alvarez, Le Bihan, and Lippi (2016) for a very
wide class of models that includes the ones in this paper, the following relation holds for any
feasible policy in this class of menu cost problems:12


                                                                          2
                                                  Na V ar ( p) =                                                          (19)


       This equation will be useful later in applications. We will use s for the fraction of price changes
that occur before hitting the boundary ±X . We can use equation (18) to replace the Kolmogorov
forward equation for f , and integrate by parts to obtain that:

                    RX
                       X
                           (x)f (x)dx                 2
                                                          |f 0 (X )|      |f 0 (X )|
                s                     =1                             =1              since Na =          2
                                                                                                             |f 0 (0)|    (20)
                            Na                             Na              |f 0 (0)|

where |f 0 (0)|, with a slight abuse of notation, is the absolute value of either the right or left
derivative of f (x) evaluated at x = 0.


Distribution of price changes. Recall that upon any price change the firm "closes" its gap x,
i.e. the size of the adjustment is       p=           x. If X < 1 then the distribution of price changes has
                                                                                                 2
a mass point at       p=     X . The mass of such price changes is equal to                      2
                                                                                                     |f 0 (X )|. There are also
  12
    The key assumption for this result to hold is that the price gap is closed upon adjustment. This assumption is
not true in e.g. models with high inflation or models with price plans, see Alvarez and Lippi (2020).



                                                               15
price changes of size | p| < X that occur when a firm has x < X and draws a su ciently low fixed
cost. This occurs with probability (x) per unit of time for a firm with price gap x. Recall also
that at steady state, there is a density f (x) of firms with price gap x. This density is symmetric
around zero. The distribution of price changes is thus symmetric around zero as well. It has the
following form:            8
                           >
                           >                                       ( x) f ( x)
                           < x         w/ density q ( x)                         for x 2 (0, X )
                                                                     Na
                      p=                                                                                       (21)
                           >
                           >
                                                         2
                                                           |f 0 ( X ) |
                           : X         w/ probability   2
                                                            Na


Note that 1 s, as defined in equation (20), is also twice the size of the mass point at the boundary
of the support of this distribution.

              Figure 2: Density function q ( p) of the distribution of price changes
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                   2
         Quadratic Hazard function: (x) = x2 , X = 1, shape parameter:                             2
                                                                                                       4




   Figure 2 plots a few examples of the density of price changes implied by a quadratic hazard
                                                                                                            (x) f ( x)
function (x) = x2 with an unbounded support X = 1. This uses the definition q ( x)                           Na

from equation (21), where the density of price gaps f solves the Kolmogorov forward equation
equation (16). The generalized hazard function and frequency of price changes alone are su cient
to construct both f and q .
   We note that in the quadratic case the distribution of price changes is indexed by a single


                                                  16
                      1
                 2
parameter         2
                      4
                          determining its shape, and features no mass points at the boundary of the
inaction region since X = 1. This means s = 1 in terms of equation (20). The parameter  is
recurring in the class of generalized hazard functions of the power form, and generally determines
the shape of the distributions of price changes.
   For future reference we define two useful moments. The variance and the Kurtosis of the price
changes Kurt( p) can be defined using the distribution in equation (21):

                                       hR                                                  i
                                             X                              2
                                   2        0
                                                 x2 (x)f (x)dx        X2   2
                                                                                f 0 (X )
                      V ar( p) =                                                                                      (22)
                                                               Na
                                       hR                                                  i
                                             X                              2
                                   2        0
                                                 x4 (x)f (x)dx        X4   2
                                                                                f 0 (X )            1
                   Kurt( p) =                                                                                         (23)
                                                               Na                              [V ar( p)]2

Standardization. It is useful to rescale the firm's decision rule to isolate the role of the shape
of  and of other parameters. Standardization clarifies which objects matter conceptually, and
also helps to bring the model to the data, as shown in Section 4. Let's start with a price-setting
problem represented by the triplet {X, ,                 2
                                                             } with   2
                                                                          > 0 and  : ( X, X ) ! R+ satisfying
                                                    2
Assumption 1. Given the triplet {X, ,                   }, we can compute the corresponding density of price
changes q (·) : ( X, X ) ! R, the variance of price changes V ar( p), the frequency of price changes
Na , and the share of price changes away from the boundaries s. We have the following result:

                                                                                      2
Proposition 3. Consider an economy characterized by {X, ,                                 }, and associated q, V ar( p), Na
                                             ~ 
and s. For any b > 0 define another economy {X, ~ , ~ 2 , } where X
                                                                  ~ = b X, ~ (z ) = (z/b) for all
      ~ X
z 2 ( X, ~ ), and ~ = b . These economies feature: (i) the same frequency of price changes,
~a = Na , (ii) the same fraction of price changes away from the boundaries, s
N                                                                           ~ = s, and (iii) the
                                                    ~(z ) = q (z/b)/b for all z 2 ( X b, X b) .
same shape of the density of price changes, namely: q

   Note that we can choose b2 = 1/V ar( p), for instance, so that the variance of price changes
                                ~ ar( p) = 1. This new economy can then be referred to as
in the rescaled economy is one, V
"standardized". The proposition shows that Kurt( p) and the share s only depend on the shape
of , described by ^ . In general, the shape cannot be summarized by a finite number of parameters,

but in some situations a single parameter will su ce. For instance, below we consider a case where


                                                              17
 is a power function and ^ is described by a single parameter.

      In addition to the standardization described above, we can also consider transformations akin to
changing the time units, thus only aecting the frequency of adjustment, but not the distribution
of price changes. In particular, consider a scalar k > 0, and define ^ (x) = (x)/k for all x,

^2 =     2          ^ = X . It easy to see that {X,
             /k and X                            ^                             ^ (x) = Q(x) for all x.13
                                                                  ^a = kNa and Q
                                                    ^ , ^ 2 } has N


A useful approximation. We conclude with a proposition showing that for the case in which
    < 1, so that X < 1, the invariant distribution can be accurately approximated by one
corresponding to a generalized hazard function  with unbounded support and arbitrarily large
values for x > X . This approximation is useful because the case with unbounded support is
somewhat simpler to analyze, since it does not involve discussing the mass points at the boundary
of the inaction region.

Proposition 4.            Let X < 1 and let  : [0, X ) ! R+ be a continuous generalized hazard
function, where f : [0, X ] ! R+ is its corresponding invariant density, assumed to be symmetric.
Let k : [0, 1) ! R+ be defined as k (x) = (x) if x < X and k (x) = k otherwise. Let also
fk : [0, 1) ! R+ be the invariant density associated with k , also assumed symmetric for negative
x0 s. Then fk converges uniformly to f in [0, X ] as k ! 1.




4       From Price Changes to Price Gaps and Hazards

In this section we show how to recover the invariant density of price gaps f and the adjustment
hazard  from the observable distribution of price changes. These two objects then allow us to
recover the underlying distribution G of adjustment costs                in a random menu cost model of
Section 2.1. We apply the algorithm to data taken from Cavallo (2015), fitting the distribution of
price changes Q and recovering f , , and G. For future reference, we pay particular attention to
estimate the kurtosis of the distribution of price changes.
      To do this, we first characterize the restrictions that an increasing hazard function  imposes
on Q and establish a mapping from the observables (price changes) to the distribution of price
 13
      In Appendix H we consider an alternative normalization, suitable for the case where X < 1.


                                                       18
gaps f and adjustment hazard . We then propose a non-parametric identification strategy to
identify the distribution of price changes which takes into account unobserved heterogeneity across
dierent products consistent with the theory as described in Proposition 3 . We illustrate these
results fitting a flexible functional form to the distributions Q for several product categories in the
dataset from Cavallo (2015). Interestingly, using this data set which have no time aggregation,
arguably minimum measurement error, and accounting for unobserved heterogeneity, we find dis-
tributions with much smaller Kurtosis than in the literature. From this estimated distribution, we
then recover f and , and from them obtain the distribution of random menu cost G using the
characterization in Proposition 1.


Identification of f and . We start with a lemma that describes the properties of the distribu-
tion of price changes generated by a generalized hazard function. It only requires Assumption 1:

Proposition 5.        Let Q be the CDF of price changes corresponding to a generalized hazard
function  satisfying Assumption 1. Then, Q is absolutely continuous on ( X, X ), so that Q(x) =
         Rx
Q( X ) + X q (s)ds for x < X . The density q (·) : ( X, X ) 7! R+ is symmetric around zero,
                                    / J. Q has mass points if and only if X < 1, in which case
q (x) = q ( x), and continuous at x 2
they are at   X and X , and is fully identified by the collection of all its moments.

   The next proposition, which is one of the main results of the paper, obtains the density f of
price gaps from the distribution of price changes. The idea is simple: we integrate the Kolmogorov
                                       2
forward equation twice and replace         as in equation (19). Once we have f , it is straightforward
to get  using f (x)(x) = q (x)Na .

Proposition 6. Let        p be price changes, and let Q and q be the CDF and corresponding density
of price changes corresponding to a generalized hazard function  satisfying Assumption 1. Let
Na be the frequency of price changes. The density for the invariant distribution f (x) is given by

                                          Z       X
                                   2
                      f ( x) =                        (1   Q(z )) dz   for all x 2 (0, X )        (24)
                               V ar( p)       x



and f ( x) = f (x), where V ar( p) is the variance of the price changes computed using Q. The

                                                           19
generalized adjustment hazard (x) is given by

                                 Na V ar( p)      q ( x)
                       ( x) =                RX              for all x 2 [0, X )                                    (25)
                                      2         (1 Q(z )) dz
                                              x


and ( x) = (x).

   Recall that the function  implied by the models of Section 2.1 and Section 2.2 is increasing
in x 2 (0, X ). If  is increasing in (0, X ), the right hand side of equation (25) must be increasing.
At any x where  is dierentiable,

                    0 ( x)   q 0 ( x)      1             Q ( x)
                           =          + RX                                                             /J
                                                                              0 for all x 2 (0, X ), x 2            (26)
                    ( x)     q ( x)        (1             Q(z )) dz
                                              x


The model of Section 2.1 also implies that (·) is bounded above on (0, X ). If this is the case, the
right hand side of equation (25) must be bounded. If  is increasing, this is equivalent to

                                              q ( x)                              q 0 ( x)
                              lim R X                             = lim                    C                        (27)
                              x! X       (1       Q(z )) dz            x! X     (1 Q(x))
                                     x


for some constant C . Moreover, if X < 1, then limx!X (1                              Q(x)) > 0 and hence limx!X q 0 (x)
                                                   q 00 (x)
must be finite. If X = 1, then limx!X               q ( x)
                                                               C by L'Hopital rule. Note that if q has exponential
tails, equation (27) is satisfied even if X = 1. Moreover, since the model of Section 2.2 does not
imply a bounded  it does not require equation (27).


A simple measure of state dependence. The expression for  in Proposition 6 evaluated at
x = 0 can be used to measure a simple index of the lack of state dependence in pricing. We label
it as C , for "Calvo-ness":

                                                                  (0)
                                                              C                                                     (28)
                                                                  Na

The index C measures the fraction of price changes that happen independently of the price gap
x. In terms of the random menu cost model, it measures the fraction of price changes with no
adjustment cost paid. Alvarez, Le Bihan, and Lippi (2016) use the same statistic to index multi-


                                                                  20
product version of the Calvo+ model. In that special case, the function  is constant, equal to
(0) for all |x| < X , and then it jumps to infinity, i.e. there is a barrier in this case X is simply
equal to the fraction of price changes that do not occur at the barriers ±X . Clearly, the setup
here is much more general, and the definition captures all the price changes that are unrelated to
the value of the price gap. Hence, C is a broad measure of lack of state dependence. The next
corollary of Proposition 6 shows that C can be measured using data on the distribution of price
changes.

Corollary 1.           The fraction of price changes independent of the price gap C defined in equa-
tion (28), is given by
                                                    V ar( p)
                                               C=                q (0) .                        (29)
                                                    2 E [ | p| ]

Moreover, using equation (18) for Na , C  1 if  is increasing.

      The expression in Corollary 1 is intuitive: the fraction of price changes independent of the
state is proportional to the density of price changes at zero, a magnitude that can be estimated.
The constant of proportionality is a ratio of two easily measurable statistics. The importance of
Corollary 1 is that the right hand side of equation (29) involves three observable quantities which
depend exclusively on the distribution of price changes: the density at zero, q (0), and two of its
moments: the variance V ar( p) and the expected absolute value E[| p|].


Unobserved Heterogeneity. Armed with Proposition 6 we can recover f , , and the model
primitives, like the distribution of menu cost, using Proposition 1. As an intermediate step,
we discuss how to account for a simple, yet pervasive, form of unobserved heterogeneity in the
estimation of q . We assume that products in a narrowly defined category have the same distribution
of price changes up to an (unobserved) shift in the size, i.e. the distributions have the same
shape but dierent scale. Proposition 3 discusses exactly this type of transformation that changes
the scale without aecting shape. The reason we want to account for this form of unobserved
heterogeneity is that, as is well known, a mixture of distributions with identical kurtosis but
dierent variances has itself a higher kurtosis.14 The setup is similar to a random eect model,
 14
      See Appendix G for the formal treatment of this result.


                                                         21
yet without assuming any functional form for the distributions. In particular we use a variation
of Kotlarski (1967)'s lemma. The products (within a category) are indexed by i, and t is the
chronological number of adjustment. Let I be the set of all products and T (i) be the set of
adjustment instances for a product i 2 I . We use the following specification:


                                               ~t for i 2 I and t 2 T (i)
                                      pit = bi p                                                                  (30)


Here bi corresponds to the scaling factor b in Proposition 3. The six identification assumtpions are

   1. #T (i) > 1, so there are at least two price changes for each i
                                                                                                       S
   2.      ~t are drawn from a distribution Q, described by Proposition 5, for all t 2
           p                                                                                               i 2I
                                                                    S
   3.      p
           ~t and p  ~s are statistically independent for all t, s 2 i2I T (i)

   4. bi     0 are drawn from a distribution H for all i 2 I
                                                                                S
   5.   ~t and bi are statistically independent for all i 2 I and t 2
        p                                                                           i 2I   T (i)
                                   S
   6. E[( p ~t )2 ] = 1 for all t 2 i2I T (i)


   That the distribution Q is described by Proposition 5 means, in particular, that it is symmetric
around zero. The last assumption is a normalization, since the variances of H and Q are not
identified together. We can show the following result:

Proposition 7. Consider two pairs of integer numbers (j, k ) and (j 0 , k 0 ) such that j + k = j 0 + k 0 .
Under the assumptions stated above we have:

                                E[( p~t )j ]E[( p~t )k ]    E[( pit )j ( pis )k ]
                                                          =                                                       (31)
                                E[( p
                                    ~t )j 0 ]E[( p
                                                 ~t )k0 ]   E[( pit )j 0 ( pis )k0 ]

for any (t, s) with t 6= s.

   This proposition has two important implications. First, we can establish a recursive expression
for the even moments of the distribution of           p
                                                      ~t :

                                                          E[( pit )2k+2 ]
                      E[( p
                          ~t )2k+2 ] = E[( p
                                           ~t )2k ] ·                          for all k           0              (32)
                                                        E[( pit )2k ( pis )2 ]



                                                        22
which only uses equation (31) and the normalization assumed above that E[( p
                                                                           ~t )2 ] = 1. Starting
from the normalized second moment, we can construct all even moments recursively using equa-
tion (32), thus obtaining a non-parametric identification of the density q .15 Second, for future
reference we display an expression for the Kurtosis of           p
                                                                 ~:

                       E[( pit )4 ]                        Kurt( pit )
       Kurt( p
             ~t ) =                       =                                           for t 6= s              (33)
                    E[( pit )2 ( pis )2 ]   1 + corr( p2     2         2         2
                                                       it , pis )CV ( pit )CV ( pis )



The first equality is how we estimate kurtosis, correcting for this unobserved heterogeneity. The
second equality shows how our method to measure kurtosis amounts to a correction of the kurtosis
computed by pooling dierent goods without accounting for heterogeneity. Whenever the squares
of price changes of individual products are positively correlated, as we have systematically found
in the data, the correction leads to a substantial downward adjustment of the estimated kurtosis.
      Data and estimation.         We use the open access data from Billion Prices Project presented
by Cavallo (2015).16 We have chosen scraped price data to reduce the measurement error present
in other data sets for example due to time aggregation using average revenue. It is important to
avoid this form of measurement error to accurately estimate the kurtosis of the distribution of
price changes, one of the goals of this section. The time span of our sample is between May 2008
and June 2010. From daily data on prices we construct the series of spells together with the size
of the price change at the end of each spell. We trim the sample at price changes larger than 150
log points size in absolute value.17 To fit a symmetric density, for each value             p in the sample we
use points in the band around it and around                 p as well. The left panel of Figure 9 plots the
histogram of price changes for a narrowly defined product category. The right panel presents the
symmetrized histogram with a fitted density. This fitted density is not the underlying density q ,
since it is confounded by the unobserved values of bi .
      Table 1 presents summary statistics on the seven categories we use, as well as the estimated
kurtosis. The kurtosis is estimated in two ways: first by (incorrectly, according to our assump-
tions) pooling dierent products in the same category (p), and second by accounting for product
 15
    This fully characterizes the distribution of p
                                                 ~t , since its odd moments are equal to zero due to symmetry.
 16
    Link: http://www.thebillionpricesproject.com/datasets/. We use the US store number 1.
 17
    We remove 87 (larger than 150 log points) out of 326,570 price changes for products with at least three spells.


                                                       23
                    Figure 3: Distribution of price changes in a narrow category

                Histogram for      p                       Symmetrized histogram with a fitted density




    Pooling all products for category 561, COICOP label "Non-durable household goods"



heterogeneity (u). To implement the latter procedure, we use equation (33). This equation is a
particular case of equation (31) with j = 4, k = 0, and j 0 = k 0 = 2. Importantly, the expectation is
taken over t 6= s, and any such pair (t, s) can be taken to estimate it. Our estimator is constructed
as follows: for any pair (j, k ), we estimate E[| pit |j | pis |k ] by

                            1 X           1                    X
                                                                            | pit |j | pis |k      (34)
                           #I i2I #T (i)(#T (i)       1)
                                                           t,s2T (i),t6=s



where # denotes the number of elements in the set. Note that this estimator includes all available
price changes t, s 2 T (i) for every product, maximizing the use of the data. Individual products
in the sample have around 20 price changes each. Distributions are centered around zero, with
the mean being around one hundredth of the standard deviation. It is evident from the table
that properly accounting for heterogeneity reduces the estimated kurtosis to about half. This
points to a substantial correlation in absolute values of the consecutive squared price changes. In
Appendix B we tabulate implied correlations recovered from equation (33). These turn out to be
in the range between 0.29 and 0.45.
   To estimate Q we use a Gamma distribution. In principle, the distribution could be estimated
non-parametrically, since every moment is identified. In practice, this would require estimating a



                                                     24
                      Table 1: Summary statistics and kurtosis estimates
 Category    Number     Number    ^ ( pit ) ^ ( pit ) Kurtosis Kurtosis
                                  E                                                       Cpooled      C
             Products P. changes                       Pooled w/Unobs.                              w/Unobs.
                                                                  Heterog.                          Heterog.
    111         3437         74464        0.002      0.341       3.418        1.656       0.077       0.071
                                                                (0.162)      (0.071)
    119         3225         56527        0.002      0.328       3.831        1.955       0.085       0.064
                                                                (0.092)      (0.050)
   1212         2551         30343        -0.001     0.245       3.524        2.052       0.040       0.039
                                                                (0.272)      (0.162)
    122         1401         27321        0.002      0.342       2.956        1.677       0.118       0.091
                                                                (0.089)      (0.051)
    118         1388         30111        0.003      0.308       3.624        2.044       0.080       0.078
                                                                (0.240)      (0.118)
    117         1154         20995        0.007      0.309       3.487        1.989       0.071       0.058
                                                                (0.135)      (0.047)
    561         1032         17724        0.002      0.260       3.324        1.778       0.034       0.030
                                                                (0.221)      (0.133)

   Categories legend: 111 "bread and cereals", 119 "other food products", 1212 "electric appliances for personal
   care", 122 "soft drinks", 118 "sugar, honey, and confectionary", 117 "vegetables", 561 "non-durable household
   goods"


large number of moments, substantially decreasing precision. Instead, we estimate the Kurtosis
and use the unit variance restriction to fit the scale and size. The fitted density q is presented
on the left panel of Figure 4 together with the underlying generalized hazard function  and the
density of price gaps f . In the Appendix B, we detail our algorithm and show extended results from
fitting a mixture of two Gamma distributions, for which we estimate moments using Proposition 7
to fit five parameters: scale and size of the distributions and the weight.
   Finally, the right panel contains the distribution of menu cost recovered from the resulting
hazard . The units on the horizontal axis correspond to the annual profit of the firm. There is no
mass point at zero, since the recovered generalized hazard function has (0) = 0. Note that the
model with random menu cost can only rationalize a bounded generalized hazard function. Gamma
distribution is convenient, since by Proposition 6 it implies a bounded . In the Appendix B, we
show the procedure to recover the cost function c corresponding to the model in Section 2.2.



                                                     25
This model allows for an unbounded , so we use a power specification (x) = x , deriving the
moments of Q and using the analytical expressions to fit the parameters.

          Figure 4: Estimated distribution of price changes and implied cost functions

     Estimated q (·), recovered f (·) and (·)         Recovered CDF and density of menu costs




Estimating the degree of state dependence. We now turn to measuring C . We do this in
two ways. First, we ignore the unobserved heterogeneity and assume that the price data for the
narrowest category of goods all come from the same primitives of the model. These primitives
                                                                                      2
are the generalized hazard function  (including the value of X , the barrier) and         . Recall from
Proposition 6 that these objects fully describe the data-generating process, and this mapping is
injective. In this exercise we just estimate all the objects on the right hand side of equation (29).
The results are shown in the column labelled "Cpooled " in Table 1. Their average across categories
is 0.072, i.e. just above 7% of price changes are independent of the state. This small number is
due to the small value of the density q at   p = 0, which is apparent from the right hand side panel
of Figure 9.
   Second, we account for unobserved heterogeneity of the type described above. If there is
heterogeneity of this type across products in the narrowest category, using the simple expression
for C from equation (29) produces an upward bias in the estimate. We derive an unbiased estimator,
the result being analogous to the one in Proposition 7. We express this estimator as a function of
the pooled estimator Cpooled and a correction due to the unobserved heterogeneity:

                                                 26
Proposition 8. Under the assumptions 1-5 stated above,

                                                                             
                                                         Cov (bi 1 , b2 i)
                                     C = Cpooled      1+                        < Cpooled                           (35)
                                                         E [ bi ] E [ bi ]
                                                               1       2



where the two components are given by

                q (0)V ar( pit )         Cov (bi 1 , b2  i)        E [ bi ]         E[| pit | 1 | pis |2 ]
    Cpooled =                    and 1 +                    =                    =                           for t 6= s
                   2 E[| pit |]          E [ bi 1 ] E [ b2
                                                         i]   E [ bi 1 ] E [ b2
                                                                              i]   E[| pit | 1 ]E[| pit |2 ]




     The estimate for Cpooled is obtained from the pooled data, and the correction for unobserved
heterogeneity is measured using the (short) time dimension of the panel. The last column, la-
belled "C w/Unobs. Heterogeneity", in Table 1 contains the estimation results. Averaging across
categories, the fraction of price changes independent of the state is 0.062 or just above 6%.
     The correction multiplier is smaller than one because 1/bi and b2
                                                                     i are negatively correlated. Of

course, if data for all products i in the narrowest category come from the same model primitives
         2
(, X,        ), then there is no variation in bi , and C = Cpooled .



5      Duration Analysis and Generalized Hazard Rate

In this section we consider the Survival and the Hazard Rate as functions of the duration of the
price spells. Duration-based functions are often used in sticky price models. It is interesting
to know whether the information encoded in them is dierent from that encoded in the size-
distribution of price changes used above. We establish conditions for a non-trivial equivalence
result: the distribution of durations and the variance of price changes together contain the same
information about the fundamentals of the model as the distribution of price changes and frequency
of adjustment. The distribution of spells with one statistic on the size of changes (the variance) is
as informative as the size-distribution of changes and one temporal statistic (the frequency).
     Denote by S (t) the Survival function, the probability that a price spell lasts at least t units of
time. We will show that, when X = 1, an analytical Survival Function S uniquely identifies an


                                                             27
analytical Generalized Hazard Rate function . When X = 1, the Survival function is given by

                                              h     Rt                       i
                                 S ( t) = E e       0    (x(s))ds
                                                                    | x(0) = 0 for all t   0                (36)


where the expectation is taken with respect to the paths of the drift-less Brownian motion x with
                                              2
variance per unit of time equal to                . The value of S (t) is the Feynman-Kac formula evaluated at
x = 0. The hazard rate h(t) =                S 0 (t)/S (t) measures the probability per unit of time of a price
spell ending conditional on lasting at least t. For example, the Survival function and its associated
hazard rate for the case of a quadratic generalized hazard rate (x) = (0) + x2 are:

                                                                        r            p     
                    e t(0)                                                   2
      S ( t) =      p       1 and h(t) = (0) +                                   tanh t 2 2 for all t   0   (37)
                            2                                                2
                cosh t 2 2


This was obtained by Kac in his seminal study of what we now know as the Kac formula. The
next lemma gives the main technical result to establish the link between the Survival function,
which can in principle be measured in the data, and the generalized hazard function (x).

                                       2
Lemma 2.     Fix a value of                > 0, and assume that X = 1. Assume that S is related to  by
equation (36). The derivatives of the Survival function S a time t = 0 and the derivatives of  at
x = 0 are related by the recursively generated functions {Fn } as follows:

            @ n S ( t)
                               = Fn (0) and all n = 1, 2, . . . where Fn (·) are given by                   (38)
              @ tn       t=0
                                   2
                                   @ 2 F n ( x)
               Fn+1 (x) =                            (x)Fn (x) for all x 2 R and n = 1, 2, . . . and        (39)
                                  2 @ x2
                   F 1 ( x) =      (x) for all x 2 R                                                        (40)




   Lemma 2 is the base of an algorithm to compute the derivatives of S at t = 0 given  and the
derivatives of  at x = 0 given S . Using this lemma, we obtain the main result of this section:

                                              2
Proposition 9.           Assume that              > 0, X = 1, and  satisfies Assumption 1. Let S be the
Survival function of , as in equation (36). If the generalized hazard function  is analytical, then

                                                                28
the Survival function S uniquely identifies . Likewise, if the Survival function S is analytical,
then the generalized hazard function  uniquely identifies S .

   As remarked before, Lemma 2 gives an algorithm to recursively compute an expansion of S
based on the derivatives of , or an expansion of  based on the derivatives of S . An implication of
Lemma 2 and Proposition 9 is that the hazard rate and its first three derivatives at zero duration
(t = 0) are given by particularly simple expressions involving the level and first two even derivatives
of the generalized hazard function evaluated at zero price gap, i.e. x = 0:

                                               2 2
                                                                                  2 2 4
                              @ h ( t)           @  ( x)        @ 2 h( t)              @  ( x)
         h(0) = (0) 0 ,                |t=0 =        2
                                                         |x=0 ,      2
                                                                          |t=0 =               |x=0 ,
                                @t            2 @x                @t                2   @ x4
                                       2 3 6                     2 2                 2
                  @ 3 h( t)                   @  ( x)                  @  ( x)
              and           |t=0 =                    |x=0 4                    |x=0
                    @ t3                  2     @ x6                2 @ x2

These formulas give a simple connection between the local behavior of  around x = 0 and h around
t = 0. Note that if (x) is, in addition of being symmetric and dierentiable in x, increasing in
|x| around x = 0, then 00 (0) > 0, and hence the hazard rate as function of duration, h(t), must
be increasing in duration, at least for small durations t. Likewise, if (x) were decreasing in |x|
around x = 0, then 00 (0) < 0 and hence h(t) must be locally decreasing in duration.
   Comparing with the case of Proposition 6, in this case we use much more restrictive conditions
for , and obtain a more cumbersome representation -- an infinite expansion instead of a closed-
form expression involving an integral. In spite of this Proposition 6 and Proposition 9 have the
same flavor: they show that if  is analytical and X = 1, then  can be fully identified either
                                                                                                        2
using the information contained in the Survival function, i.e duration on price changes, and                ,
which can be recovered from Na and the variance of price changes with equation (19). Of course,
this also means that the information on the survival function and the size distribution of price
changes can be used as an over-identifying test of the model.
   Finally, we can also estimate C  (0)/Na , the fraction of price changes independent of the
state, by using duration data. Given the results above, C can be estimated as h(0)/Na . This can
be an alternative to the estimates presented in Table 1 using the size distribution of price changes.
As in Section 4, a correction of unobserved heterogeneity may be important.


                                                     29
6     A Su cient Statistic for Monetary Shocks

This section characterizes the real output eect of monetary shocks using a simple summary
statistic, the cumulative output generated by a once and for all monetary shock. This is the area
under the output's impulse response function. It combines in a single value the persistence and the
size of the output response. The key result we present is that for small monetary shocks, like the
ones typically considered in the literature, the area is completely encoded by the kurtosis and the
frequency of price changes. These two moments are thus su cient to compare dierent models.
    We also find that, among the models with non-decreasing adjustment hazards, the kurtosis of
price changes is maximized in the Calvo model. As was established above, only a non-decreasing
generalized hazard function can be rationalized by random menu costs. Calvo model is the limiting
case with no randomness and no option to adjust, so it minimizes the amount of selection and
hence maximizes the output response. To establish this, we develop a general result that compares
kurtoses generated by two dierent hazard functions.
    The contribution to the cumulative impulse response of a firm with price gap x is

                                              Z       
                                m( x) =   E              x(t)dt | x(0) = x                    (41)
                                                  0



where  is the stopping time defined as the first time when x(t) hits ±X or a reduction in adjust-
ment costs causes the firm to change price. This stopping time is stochastic, so the expectation
accounts for both the diusion of the firm's price gap and the possible event of adjustment that
happens with a Poisson intensity (x(t)). In words, m(x) is the expected (cumulative) price gap
of a firm that starts with a gap x. Notice that in the Calvo case, where (x) =      is independent
of x, we immediately obtain m(x) =     x/ , where 1/ is the expected duration of a price spell.
    The definition above uses the steady state decision rule (x), thus ignoring the general equi-
librium feedback eect of the shock on the firm's decision. In Proposition 7 of Alvarez and Lippi
(2014) it is shown that, given a combination of the general equilibrium setup in Golosov and Lucas
(2007) and the lack of the strategic complementarities, these general equilibrium eects are of sec-
ond order. In addition, we use the fact that after the first price change the expected contribution


                                                      30
to output of each firm is zero, since positive and negative output contributions are equally likely, so
m(0) = 0. This allows us to characterize the propagation of the monetary shocks without tracking
the time evolution of the whole price gap distribution.
   The expectation in the right hand side of equation (41) is with respect to the process for x,
                                                                             2
a jump-diusion with jump intensity (x), diusion variance                         , and zero drift. The function
m : [ X, X ] ! R is once continuously dierentiable, antisymmetric around x = 0, and satisfies:

                                     2
              m( x)  ( x) =     x+       m00 (x) for all x at which  is continuous                         (42)
                                     2
                                                             | m( x) |       1
                          0 = m(X ) if X < 1 and lim                               if X = 1 .              (43)
                                                         x!1    x       inf y (y )

Now we can define the cumulative impulse response to a monetary shock of size                   as

                                                Z   X
                                     M( ) =             m( x   )f (x)dx .                                  (44)
                                                    X



This is simply the aggregate contribution of the firms to the cumulative impulse response. The
response of a firm with the price gap x before the shock is m(x                   ).
                 2
   Let {X, ,         } characterize an economy, with its corresponding invariant density f and firm's
                             ~ 
contribution to CIR, m. Let {X, ~ , ~ 2 } be the standardized economy, defined as in Proposition 3,
                         ~, m
that has its associated {f  ~ } with m            ~ (z ) = m(z/b)/b for b2 = 1/V ar( p) and
                                     ~ defined as m
                                                                          ~ . Define M
satisfying the corresponding ODE with the boundary conditions for ~ 2 and X          ~ ( ), the

cumulative impulse response of output to a monetary shock for the standardized economy, as

                                               Z    ~
                                                    X
                                     ~( )=
                                     M                   m      ~(x + ) dx
                                                         ~ ( x) f                                          (45)
                                                    ~
                                                    X



   The next proposition relates the CIR of output in an economy to the one of its standardized
version by scaling the monetary shock with the steady-state standard deviation of price changes.
In words, for small monetary shocks the dispersion of price changes is immaterial, although in
general the size of monetary shocks should be measured relative to the steady-state dispersion of
price changes.


                                                         31
                          ~ be the cumulative impulse responses of an economy {X, ,
Proposition 10. Let M and M                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                   }
                                                                       ~ 
with Std( p) = V ar( p)1/2 and the corresponding standardized economy {X, ~ , ~ 2 }. Then

                                                                  
                                            ~
                                     M( ) = M                        Std( p)                                  (46)
                                                     Std( p)

                  ~ 0 (0).
and thus M0 (0) = M

       The proof is immediate, using the properties of m     ~ established above, dierentiating
                                                       ~ and f
equation (45), and evaluating at       = 0. Summarizing, Proposition 10 says that for small monetary
shocks, the steady state standard deviation of the price changes is not important. For large shocks
it clearly is. For example, take the case X < 1. For                     ¯ , we have M( ) = 0, because the
                                                                        2X
shock displaces all the firms far enough, and they adjust immediately. Since the standardized
            ~ = X/Std( p), this shows the importance of the size of the shock for large values.18
version has X
The marginal version of this cumulative impulse response is

                                                     Z   X
                                           0
                                       M (0) =                m0 (x)f (x)dx                                   (47)
                                                         X



This term can be used for a linear approximation of M around zero. Our main result is that it
can be expressed as a function of two su cient statistics: Kurt( p), the kurtosis of the steady
state distribution of price changes, and Na , frequency of price changes.

Proposition 11.          Let (x) be any function satisfying Assumption 1. Then the cumulative
impulse response for a small monetary shock is given by the ratio of two steady state statistics:

                                                  Kurt( p)
                                        M( ) =             + o( 2 )                                           (48)
                                                    6 Na




                                                                                                        3
       The approximation is accurate up to second order terms, so the remainder is of order                 . This
happens since M00 (0) is zero, which follows from M being an antisymmetric function, because m
  18
    A similar result was shown in Alvarez and Lippi (2014) for the case of multiproduct firms, which only overlap
with the current set up for the Golosov and Lucas case -- with one product per firm.


                                                         32
is antisymmetric and f is symmetric.
       Our results from Proposition 1 and Proposition 17 show that only weakly increasing  can be
rationalized by the solution of a firm problem subject to random menu costs. But Assumption 1
allows for a very large class of generalized hazard functions, including decreasing and non-monotone
ones. Proposition 11 holds for such functions too. It makes no reference to the micro-foundations
behind  and hence also applies to setups where firms's behaviour is not described by an increasing
hazard. An example is the model in Woodford (2009), where firms conduct costly reviews and
have imperfect recall and access to their state. Also Costain and Nakov (2011b) use generalized
hazard functions, without linking them to random menu costs.


Aggregation across heterogenous firms. We briefly discuss how the above results can be
applied to economies composed of heterogenous firms. Assume that there are S groups of firms
with dierent parameters, each with an expenditure weight e(s) > 0, N (s) price changes per unit
of time, and a distribution of price changes with kurtosis Kurt(s). In this case, after repeating
the arguments above for each group and aggregating, we obtain that the area under the IRF of
aggregate output for a small monetary shock          is

                                    X e ( s)                            X
   M( ) = M0 (0) + o( 2 ) =                        Kurt(s) + o( 2 ) = D     d(s) Kurt(s) + o( 2 )                (49)
                                  6 s 2 S Na ( s )                   6  s2S


                                                                            P          e (s )                    e (s )
where D is the expenditure-weighted average duration of prices D                s 2 S N a (s ) ,   and d(s)    N a (s )D

are weights that take into account both relative expenditures and durations. When all groups have
the same durations, then d(s) = e(s) and M is proportional to the average of the kurtosis of the
sectors. As explained in Section 4, and shown in Proposition 18 in Appendix G, this average
is also dierent from the kurtosis of the pooled data. This applies even if all the groups have
the same kurtosis.19 However, if groups are heterogenous in duration (or expenditures), then the
kurtoses of the groups with longer duration (or higher expenditures) receive a higher weight in the
computation of M. Suppose for instance that a fraction of firms have flexible prices (zero duration
in our model, or infinitely many price changes per unit of time), as in Dotsey and Wolman (2020).
  19
    The eect of heterogeneity in Na ( pi ) on aggregation is well known for the Calvo model: D is dierent from
the average of Na ( pi )'s, see for example Carvalho (2006) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2010).


                                                     33
The above formula implies that the group of the flexible price firms are excluded (zero duration
yields a zero weight), and that the cumulative impulse response (CIR) is computed on the mass of
firms with sticky prices. Notice that this is dierent from computing the CIR as the ratio of the
cross-sectional average kurtosis and the average frequency. Since the latter is diverging because of
the firms with flexible prices, the CIR computed this way would be zero, while obviously it is not.


Kurtosis. The next proposition shows the properties of generalized hazard functions that de-
termine the Kurtosis of price changes. We will concentrate on the case where we will hold the
adjustment frequency constant. Recall that that fixing the frequency of price changes can be ac-
complished as fixing the units of time. This procedure allows us to isolate the eect of a change
in  on selection from its eect on the frequency. Moreover, with the frequency fixed, the kurtosis
of price changes directly maps into the approximate cumulative impulse response.

Proposition 12.        Fix Na and consider two hazard functions 1 (x) and 2 (x) with the corre-
sponding boundaries X1 and X2 , where 0 < X2  X1  1. Let 1 (0) > 2 (0) and let the function
 1 ( x)   2 (x) change sign at most once. Then, 1 (x) generates a higher kurtosis of price changes.



    The condition that 1     2 changes sign only once means that it is positive at first and maybe
negative for x far from zero. This is to say that 1 generates more adjustment for smaller x,
and 2 generates more for larger ones. Selection is therefore more pronounced with 2 , and the
kurtosis of price changes is lower. There are two interesting corollaries of this result. The first is
that for a fixed X the highest kurtosis is attained by the constant generalized hazard function.
This corresponds to the Calvo+ case:

Corollary 2. Fix Na , the number of adjustments per unit of time, and X < 1. The function
(x) that is constant on ( X, X ) maximizes the kurtosis of the price changes over all functions
(x) that are weakly increasing on (0, X ) and satisfy Assumption 1.

    Second, a constant hazard function in combination with the infinite boundary X maximizes
the kurtosis of price changes over all weakly increasing hazards. This is the pure Calvo case:


                                                 34
Corollary 3.       Fix Na . The constant function (x)           maximizes the kurtosis of the price
changes over all weakly increasing functions (x) satisfying Assumption 1.

   By Proposition 11, it also means a constant  maximizes M0 (0) for a fixed Na . This highlights
the role of selection. A strictly increasing rate of adjustment  implies positive selection, so the
firms with larger deviations are more likely to adjust. When  is flat, there is no selection, so the
price changers are drawn randomly from the population. Shocks are accommodated more slowly in
this case, because the adjustment frequency does not depend on how much a firm needs to adjust,
so the response of price takes longer, and hence the response of output is larger.
   Finally, Proposition 12 sheds some light on the relationship between the strength of state
dependence and the magnitude of output response. As we noted before, one measure of the strength
of state dependence is the index C  (0)/Na , the share of adjustment happening independently of
the price gap. We can show that, holding constant the shape of  (captured by its curvature) and
adjustment frequency, this index co-moves with the Kurtosis. Hence, a higher share of adjustment
independent of x means a stronger output response for the same shape of the hazard.
   Define the curvature of the function  as

                                                     00 (x)x
                                          k ( x) =                                             (50)
                                                      0 ( x)

To understand what it means for two functions to have the same curvature, take some arbitrary
 and decompose it into two parts, the intercept and the rest: (x) = (0) + ((x)          (0)). Now
consider two simple linear transformations of the two parts of the hazard:


             1 (x) = a1 (0) + b1 ((x)     (0)),       2 (x) = a2 (0) + b2 ((x)   (0))          (51)


The transformation scales the intercept and the rest with dierent numbers, changing the strength
of state dependence but broadly preserving the shape (it is easy to see that both 1 and 2 have
the same curvature as ). When 1 and 2 generate the same adjustment frequency, the one with
a weaker state dependence (higher C ) corresponds to a higher Kurtosis.




                                                 35
Corollary 4.        Consider two generalized hazard functions 1 (x) and 2 (x) with the same
boundary X  1. Furthermore, assume that they have the same curvature k everywhere and the
frequency of adjustment Na . Then Kurt1 ( p) > Kurt2 ( p) if and only if C1 > C2 .

   An immediate implication of the Corollary 4 is that for two economies with the same frequency
of price changes and the same curvature of the generalized hazard function, the one with higher
value of C has a higher cumulative impulse response after a monetary shock.


6.1    Illustration with a power hazard function

In this section we describe the case where the generalized hazard function is a power function with
the power parameter  . In particular, we let (x) = |x/X | on ( X, X ) for some             0. This
functional form nests Calvo-plus models with  = 0 and quadratic generalized hazard functions
with  = 2.
   We use this example to illustrate how the parameters aecting the shape of  determine the
Kurtosis of price changes. To do this, we first show that, with  fixed, the Kurtosis of price
changes varies one-to-one with the share of adjustments from strictly between the barriers, s.
This highlights the role of selection: the output response is weaker when fewer firms reach the
boundaries, because fewer firms are close to adjustment right before a monetary shock happens.
Second, we show that for any s the Kurtosis of price changes decreases monotonically with the
power  , which governs the shape of .
   We now describe the invariant density f . Upon a renormalization, we can solve for a symmetric
        ^(z ) defined by f
density f                ^(z ) = Xf (zX ). The function f
                                                        ^ satisfies



                                                            Z       1
                         ^(z ) = f (z ) with f
                       z f           ^00     ^(1) = 0 and               ^(z )dz = 1
                                                                        f                     (52)
                                                                0                 2

where   2X 2 / 2 . The solution to equation (52) is given by

                                  p                   p     
                   p             2   +2      p       2   +2
          ^(z ) = c1 z I
          f                 1       z 2  + c2 z K 1     z 2  for all z 2 [ 1, 1]              (53)
                            +2   +2               +2 +2


                                                36
   This is a combination of modified Bessel functions of the first and second kind I         1    and K    1
                                                                                             +2            +2

            1
of order    +2
               ,   where the constants c1 , c2 are chosen to satisfy the two boundary conditions described
                           ^ depends on the parameters (,  ) that capture adjustment coming
in equation (52). The form f
from random menu costs. Note that if X = 1 then c1 = 0.
   From the previous result, we can see that if two models have the same (, ), then the distri-
bution of price changes in one is a rescaling of that in the other. The dimensionless statistics such
as the kurtosis, the fraction of adjustment strictly within the boundaries s, or equivalent the mass
of Q on ±X , are the same. We can summarize this result as follows:

Proposition 13. Let (x) = |x/X | . The Kurtosis of price changes, the share of adjustments
                                                                                        ^ (,  ),
strictly between the boundaries, and the frequency of price changes satisfy: Kurt( p) = K
                               2
  ^(,  ), and Na =
s=S                                ^ (,  ) respectively, where these functions have no other parameters.
                                   N
                              X2

                          ^(·,  ) is increasing in , and K
For fixed  , the function S                              ^ (·,  ) is decreasing in .

   Using this proposition we can fix s, say to s = 1, or X = 1, then Kurt( p) is just a function
of  only, displayed in Figure 5. Alternatively, fixing  we have that Kurt( p) is only a function
of the fraction of price changes strictly between barriers, s as displayed in Figure 6 below.

                          Figure 5: Kurtosis of power hazard function as  varies

                                    Hazard function (x) =  x and X = 1




                                                       37
   Figure 5 displays the value of Kurt( p) for the case where X = 1 as a function of  . Note
that Kurtosis goes from 6, corresponding to  = 0, or pure Calvo, to a value of 1, corresponding
to  ! 1 which approximates Golosov and Lucas. Increases in  clearly change the shape of ,
making it more convex, which is reflected in lower kurtosis of price changes. This illustrates how
the shape of  determines the selection eect on price changes. Note that for  = 2, the quadratic
case, Kurt( p)  1.75.

             Figure 6: Kurtosis behavior with a power hazard function as s varies
                                                        x 
                          Hazard function (x) =         X
                                                             and X < 1




   Figure 6 displays the value of Kurt( p) for the case of X < 1 as a function of s, the fraction
of price changes strictly between the boundaries. We display such relationship for three values of
 . Note that fixing  , as we change , and obtain a larger share of price changes strictly inside the
barriers s, which corresponds to a lower Kurt( p). This illustrate the smaller selection eect of
price changes when barriers are hit less often. Recall that s = 0 is equivalent to X = 1. For each
value of s, the dierence lines shows that curvature  corresponds to lower Kurt( p).




                                                38
7     Flexibility Index: scope and limitations

Caballero and Engel (2007) introduced the concept of the Flexibility Index (F ), subsequently
used in several studies such as Berger and Vavra (2018), as an inverse measure of monetary
nonneutrality. We show below that F measures the slope of the impulse response of prices right
after a small once-and-for-all monetary shock. Below we define F in terms of the model, using
Caballero and Engel's (2007) formula, and study the extent to which it is an accurate summary of
the model's non-neutrality. We show that for models with barriers, where X < 1, the flexibility
index is always infinite. This prompts us to focus on the cases without barriers, X = 1, where
F is finite. In such cases we can compare F with the summary measure given by the cumulative
impulse response defined in equation (44). We display non-pathological simple examples where
the F is not an accurate summary of the eect on output, neither of its cumulative response, nor
of its short term response.
    The IRF of the aggregate price level after a shock                     can be written as

                                                              Z       t
                                      P (t, ) = ( ) +                     ! (s, ) ds                         (54)
                                                                  0



where ! (s, ) is the flow contribution to the IRF at time s > 0, and ( ) is the time t = 0 jump in
                                 @
the price level. By definition   @t
                                    P (t,   ) = ! (t, ). The flow value of the IRF of the aggregate price
level at time t > 0 is given by

                                  Z   X
                     ! (t, ) =            x(x)f (x, t)dx + X               2
                                                                               [f 0 ( X, t)   f 0 (X, t)]
                                      X



where f (x, t) is the distribution of the price gaps among the firms that have not adjusted prices t
units of time after the monetary shock. The first term is the change of prices across the distribution
of price gaps at time t, with f (x, t) solving the time dependent Kolmogorov Forward Equation:

                                             2
          @t f (x, t) =   (x)f (x, t) +          @xx f (x, t) for all x 2 [ X, X ] and t                0,   (55)
                                            2
           f (X, t) = f ( X, t) = 0 for all t > 0, and f (x, 0) = f0 (x) for all x 2 [ X, X ]                (56)



                                                         39
The initial jump is given by

                                               Z     X+
                                      ( ) =               ( x + ) f0 (x) dx                                       (57)
                                                    X



The initial distribution f0 that we consider is a uniform shift by                                  ^:
                                                                               of some distribution f

Assumption 2.                                           ^(x + ), where f
                      The initial condition is f0 (x) = f              ^ i) equals zero at the
            ^( X
bounds, 0 = f       ^(X
               ¯) = f                                                  ^0 ( X
                      ¯ ), ii) increases close to the lower bound, 0 < f    ¯ ) < 1, and iii) is
                  ¯ 0).
dierentiable on ( X,

                     ^0 (x) + o( ) and consider the case of small . Note that the assumptions
   We write f0 (x) = f
      ^ to be the invariant distribution corresponding to {X, ,
allow f                                                                   2
                                                                              }, but they do not require it. In
            ^ can be any distribution that has for any strictly positive time evolved according to
particular, f
                                                                                        @
equation (55) and equation (56). The Flexibility index is defined as F                  @
                                                                                            ! (0, )|   =0 ,   which is
equivalent to the definition in equation (17) in Caballero and Engel (2007).

Proposition 14.        Let  and ! be the jump and flow values of the IRF of prices at t = 0.
Let X < 1, let  satisfy Assumption 1, and assume that the initial distribution f0 satisfies
Assumption 2. Then (0) = 0 ( )|          =0   = 0. Moreover, @ ! (0, )|   =0   = 1 and ! (0, 0) = 0. Thus, if
X < 1, the flexibility index is infinite for any .

   Because of this result we will move to analyze the flexibility index for models with X = 1,
where it is finite. We will will do so for a family of hazard functions which is a slight generalization
of the one treated in Section 6.1.


7.1    Power plus family of generalized hazard functions

We consider a simple four parameter family of models where (x) = (0) + x . We label this
case as power-plus, because it adds a constant to the power case. Besides (0), , and  , the other
                               2
parameter of the model is          . We introduce the parameter  and let  be the adjusted intercept:

                                                     +2
                                                     1
                                              2                    (0) 
                                     =         2
                                                          ,    =        .                                         (58)
                                                                    

                                                          40
The quadratic case is  = 2 and  = 0. This adjusted intercept measures the relative magnitude
of (0) and the slope , increasing in the former and decreasing in the latter. We will show that
for a fixed power the Kurtosis, adjustment frequency, and the flexibility index only depend on .

                              2
Proposition 15.         Fix       and let (x) be a power-plus hazard function parameterized by
(, (0),  ). The adjustment frequency, the kurtosis of price changes, and the flexibility index are

                                        2 2 ~
                                      Na =  N ( ,  )                                            (59)
                                          2
                              Kurt( p)    1 ~
                                       = 2 2K ( ,  )                                            (60)
                                6 Na    
                                        2 2 ~
                                     F=     (N (, )(1 +  )         )                            (61)
                                          2

      ~ (, ) and K
where N          ~ (, ) only depend on  and ; N
                                              ~ (0, )  1 + , and K
                                                                 ~ (0, )  2/(1 + ).

With no intercept, the flexibility index and adjustment frequency are related by a simple formula
via the elasticity of the hazard:


                                           F = Na (1 +  )                                       (62)


   If two models have the same (, ), the density of price changes in one is a rescaling of that
in the other. This implies that kurtosis (and other dimensionless statistics) is the same. If  also
coincides in the two models, the distributions of price changes are identical.
   The power-plus parameterization allows us to illustrate substantial disconnect between the CIR
and the flexibility index. In one example where we vary one parameter at time: in this case the
flexibility index and the cumulative IRF move in the same direction. In the second example we
change three parameters at a time and show how for the same flexibility index cumulative IRF
can vary substantially, even keeping the adjustment frequency fixed.

                                                                                  2
Proposition 16.       Assume that  is given by a power-plus function. Fix (,          ) and take two
dierent power plus generalized hazard functions 1 and 2 . If they generate the same frequency
Na , then Kurt1 ( p) > Kurt2 ( p) if and only if F1 < F2 .


                                                 41
   This result is not surprising, since we are varying one parameter only. This comparative static
exercise is very far away from the idea of a "su cient statistic", where one finds a statistic that
summarizes significant outputs of a class of models. Even the simple power-plus parameterization
aords much more flexibility than varying one parameter can oer.
   Now we turn to the second case, where we argue that, however intuitive this might be, relying
on the flexibility index can be quite misleading. In Figure 7 we display a number of economies
with the same adjustment frequency Na , and with the same Flexibility Index F , but with very
dierent cumulative response to a monetary shock. That is, we vary the parameters in such a way
that both F and Na stay constant, while M0 (0) varies substantially. This is done by increasing
the power parameter  and finding the pairs ((0), ) that keep Na and F constant. We solve this
problem numerically and find that for the same Na and F the Kurtosis of price changes varies by
90% when  increases from 2 to 20, as plotted on the Figure 7. The slope of the impulse response
at t = 0 does not capture the area under it quite well.

Figure 7: Values of Kurt( p) or CIR relative to the case of  = 2, all cases have F = 3, Na = 1




   In Figure 8 we take two examples from the previous plot, one with  = 2 and the other with
 = 10, and display the entire output impulse response function Y (t) as a function of time t. Thus,
both IRF's have the same frequency Na and flexibility index F . The areas under both IRF's are

                                                42
clearly dierent, the one for  = 10 is at least 50% larger than the one for  = 2, consistent with
the values displayed on Figure 7. By construction the slope of Y (·) at t = 0 is the same for both
cases (i.e. for  = 2 and  = 10), since both IRF's have the same Flexibility index F . Yet, the
slopes of both impulse responses starts to dier substantially even for low values of t. Since in
both cases Na = 1, the values of time in the horizontal axis can be measured in terms of expected
adjustment time. For instance, if prices change on average three times a year, meaning Na = 3,
then t = 1 represents 4 months. The ratio of the two IRF evaluated at t = 1 is higher than 4,
namely Y10 (1)/Y2 (1)  4.4. This example shows that even the short run output eect can be
substantially dierent with the same flexibility index.

       Figure 8: Impulse Responses for power plus case, both cases with same F and Na



                  1



                 0.9



                 0.8



                 0.7



                 0.6



                 0.5



                 0.4



                 0.3



                 0.2



                 0.1



                  0
                       0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8        1   1.2   1.4   1.6   1.8   2




8    Conclusion

We discuss the economic foundations of the generalized hazard function, a flexible modeling block
used in several sticky-price setups, and map it to the primitives underlying the firm's optimiza-

                                                   43
tion. We show how to identify the generalized hazard function using observable objects, such as
the distribution of price changes, and provide a procedure to recover the hazard and the other
microeconomic primitives from data. On the analytical side, we extend the "Kurtosis result" of
Alvarez, Le Bihan, and Lippi (2016) to a considerably larger class of models and prove that the
Calvo model yields the maximum amount of monetary non-neutrality within the broad class of
models we consider. Within a narrower class where the inaction region is bounded, the upper
bound is Calvo+ . Our empirical strategy addresses unobserved heterogeneity in dierent prod-
ucts, which we show can be important in estimating the Kurtosis of price changes, and hence in
quantifying the real eects of monetary shocks. Finally, we show that another convenient account-
ing measure for sticky price models, the flexibility index, can sometimes be a poor summary of
monetary non-neutrality, both over the long-term as well as over the short-term.




                                               44
References
Alvarez, Fernando, Martin Beraja, Martin Gonzalez-Rozada, and Pablo Andres Neumeyer. 2019.
  "From Hyperinflation to Stable Prices: Argentinas Evidence on Menu Cost Modles." The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 143 (1):451­505.

Alvarez, Fernando and Francesco Lippi. 2020. "Temporary Price Changes, Inflation Regimes,
  and the Propagation of Monetary Shocks." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
  12 (1):104­52.

Alvarez, Fernando E., Herve Le Bihan, and Francesco Lippi. 2016. "The real eects of monetary
  shocks in sticky price models: a su cient statistic approach." The American Economic Review
  106 (10):2817­2851.

Alvarez, Fernando E. and Francesco Lippi. 2014. "Price setting with menu costs for multi product
  firms." Econometrica 82 (1):89­135.

------. 2019. "The Analytic Theory of a Monetary Shock." Working paper, EIEF.

Alvarez, Fernando E., Francesco Lippi, and Luigi Paciello. 2016. "Monetary Shocks in Models
  with Inattentive Producers." Review of Economic Studies 83:421­459.

Baley, Isaac and Andres Blanco. 2019. "Firm Uncertainty Cycles and the Propagation of Nominal
  Shocks." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (1):276­337.

Barro, Robert J. 1972. "A Theory of Monopolistic Price Adjustment." Review of Economic Studies
  39 (1):17­26.

Berger, David and Joseph Vavra. 2018. "Dynamics of the U.S. price distribution." European
  Economic Review 103:60 ­ 82.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M. R. A. Engel. 1993a. "Microeconomic Adjustment Hazards
  and Aggregate Dynamics." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (2):359­383.

------. 1999. "Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S. Manufacturing: A Generalized (S, s)
  Approach." Econometrica 67 (4):783­826.

Caballero, Ricardo J. and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel. 1993b. "Heterogeneity and output fluctuations
  in a dynamic menu-cost economy." The Review of Economic Studies 60 (1):95.

------. 2007. "Price stickiness in Ss models: New interpretations of old results." Journal of
  Monetary Economics 54 (Supplement):100­121.

Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. "Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework." Journal of
  Monetary Economics 12 (3):383­398.

Caplin, Andrew S and Daniel F Spulber. 1987. "Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money." The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (4):703­25.

Carvalho, Carlos. 2006. "Heterogeneity in Price Stickiness and the Real Eects of Monetary
  Shocks." The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics 6 (3):1­58.


                                              45
Carvalho, Carlos and Oleksiy Kryvtsov. 2018. "Price Selection." Sta Working Papers 18-44,
  Bank of Canada.

Casella, George and Roger L Berger. 2002. Statistical inference, vol. 2. Duxbury Pacific Grove,
  CA.

Cavallo, Alberto. 2015. "Scraped Data and Sticky Prices." NBER Working Papers 21490, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Cavallo, Alberto and Roberto Rigobon. 2016. "The Billion Prices Project: Using online prices for
  measurement and research ." Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (2):151­178.

Costain, James and Anton Nakov. 2011a. "Distributional dynamics under smoothly state-
  dependent pricing." Journal of Monetary Economics 58 (6):646 ­ 665.

------. 2011b. "Price Adjustments in a General Model of State­Dependent Pricing." Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking 43:385­406.

Dixit, Avinash. 1991. "Analytical Approximations in Models of Hysteresis." Review of Economic
  Studies 58 (1):141­51.

Dotsey, Michael, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman. 1999. "State-Dependent Pricing
 And The General Equilibrium Dynamics Of Money And Output." The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 114 (2):655­690.

Dotsey, Michael and Alexander L. Wolman. 2020. "Investigating nonneutrality in a state-dependent
 pricing model with firm-level productivity shocks." International Economic Review 61 (1):159­
 188.

Eichenbaum, Martin, Nir Jaimovich, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. "Reference Prices, Costs, and
  Nominal Rigidities." American Economic Review 101 (1):234­62.

Gautier, Erwan and Ronan Le Saout. 2015. "The Dynamics of Gasoline Prices: Evidence from
 Daily French Micro Data." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47 (6):1063­1089.

Golosov, Mikhail and Robert E. Jr. Lucas. 2007. "Menu Costs and Phillips Curves." Journal of
 Political Economy 115:171­199.

Klenow, J. Peter and Benjamin Malin. 2010. "Microeconomic Evidence on Price-Setting." Hand-
  book of monetary economics 3:231­284.

Kotlarski, Ignacy. 1967. "On characterizing the gamma and the normal distribution." Pacific J.
 Math. 20 (1):69­76.

Lian, Hairong, Peiguang Wang, and Weigao Ge. 2009. "Unbounded upper and lower solutions
  method for Sturm?Liouville boundary value problem on infinite intervals." Nonlinear Analysis:
  Theory, Methods & Applications 70 (7):2627­2633.

Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. 2010. "Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multisector Menu Cost
  Model." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3):961­1013.



                                              46
Petrella, Ivan, Emiliano Santoro, and Lasse de la Porte Simonsen. 2018. "Time-varying Price
  Flexibility and Inflation Dynamics." Discussion Paper 13027, CEPR.

Reis, Ricardo. 2006. "Inattentive producers." Review of Economic Studies 73 (3):793­821.

Sheremirov, Viacheslav. 2019. "Price dispersion and inflation: New facts and theoretical implica-
  tions." Journal of Monetary Economics .

Woodford, Michael. 2009. "Information-Constrained State-Dependent Pricing." Journal of Mon-
 etary Economics 56:s100­s124.




                                               47
