                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             SOCIAL NORMS AS A BARRIER TO WOMEN'S EMPLOYMENT
                         IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                    Seema Jayachandran

                                     Working Paper 27449
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27449


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




I thank Christine Cai, Rebecca Dizon-Ross, and Akhila Kovvuri for helpful comments and
UNU WIDER for providing financial support for this work. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Seema Jayachandran. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Social Norms as a Barrier to Women's Employment in Developing Countries
Seema Jayachandran
NBER Working Paper No. 27449
June 2020
JEL No. J16,J20,O10

                                          ABSTRACT

This article discusses cultural barriers to women's participation and success in the labor market in
developing countries. I begin by describing how gender norms influence the relationship
between economic development and female employment, as well as how gender norms vary
substantially across societies at the same level of economic development. I then examine several
specific gender-related social norms and how they constrain women's employment. I present
examples of policies aimed at dismantling these cultural barriers to female employment and the
impacts they have.


Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Dr
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
seema@northwestern.edu
1       Introduction
        Globally about one out of every two adult women participates in the labor force, com-
pared to three out of every four men (World Bank, 2020).1 Women who do participate in
the labor market earn less than their male counterparts, on average. This article discusses
cultural barriers to women's participation and success in the labor market, with a focus on
developing countries.
        Engaging in market labor does not imply greater well-being; a person might prefer not
to be employed. In addition, women contribute more than men to domestic chores and
child care, and this household labor also creates economic value (Beneria, 1981). Nonethe-
less, this article focuses on women's market labor, which is of policy interest because paid
employment often confers more autonomy and influence in the family and in society than
unpaid household labor does (Sen, 1990; Kessler-Harris, 2003; Kabeer, 2008). Greater power
for women is a valuable outcome per se and could also be a pathway for women to achieve
more equality in other domains, such as access to health care.
        Moreover, at least some of the gender gap in employment and earnings is due to norms
that constrain women's choices and achievements. By norms, I mean a society's informal
rules about appropriate or acceptable behavior. I use the terms `social' and `cultural' inter-
changeably here.
        While gender norms restrict female employment in both developed and developing
countries, I limit the scope of this article to developing countries, for the most part. I begin
by discussing how gender norms mediate the relationship between economic development
and female employment. I then lay out some specific social/cultural norms that impede
women's access to and success in the labor market, as well as case examples of policies
aimed at circumventing or directly dismantling these barriers. Neither the set of norms nor
the policies discussed are intended to be exhaustive. Rather than being a thorough review,
this article's goal is to make a case for the importance of gender norms in determining
women's labor market outcomes and the scope for policy to counter these restrictive norms.
    1
     These statistics are for labor force participation, but most studies I discuss assess employment. The
distinction is that labor force participants also include those who are actively looking for employment but
are not currently employed. I will use the terms interchangeably and usually mean employment.


                                                    1
I will mainly discuss policies and programs that have been evaluated with experimental or
quasi-experimental methods.


2    Gender norms, economic development, and female
     employment
    An influential view dating back fifty years is that the female labor force participation
follows a U-shape with economic development (Sinha, 1965; Boserup, 1970; Durand, 1975).
At low levels of economic development, women participate extensively in production, which
is mostly home-based, for example on family farms. Several forces then cause female em-
ployment to decline as a society industrializes. One force is productivity growth and hence
higher income. With more financial resources, the extra consumption a household can enjoy
by having a second earner is less valuable due to diminishing returns. Also, insofar as there
is stigma attached to women working, avoiding the stigma becomes more "affordable" to
a household when it is richer; the material comfort it needs to sacrifice is lower. In ad-
dition, jobs move from the home to factories at this early stage of industrialization, and
employment in "dirty" factories or alongside strangers might heighten the stigma of women
working. The upward swing in female employment that completes the U-shape is due to
increased education and the growth of the service sector as the structural transformation
of the economy continues: Women have a comparative advantage in mentally intensive jobs
compared to physically intensive jobs. In addition, jobs in offices and the service sector
might be viewed as "cleaner," with less stigma attached to them.
    Goldin (1986) brought renewed attention to the U-shape hypothesis by showing its
relevance for explaining the evolution of female employment in the United States in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Goldin (1995) and several subsequent scholars have also
examined the pattern across countries and find general support for a U-shape. However,
Gaddis and Klasen (2014) and Klasen (2019) argue that the relationship is more tenuous
than much research suggests. Figure 1(a), adapted from Heath and Jayachandran (2017),
shows that female employment across countries follows a U-shape, on average, but that this
relationship still leaves much of the variation in the data unexplained. No doubt many


                                             2
factors contribute to the differences among countries at the same stage of development, but
one that is particularly relevant for this article is that gender norms differ across societies
for reasons besides their stage of development, a point I return to at the end of this section.
    Importantly, a U-shape pattern could hold even without introducing the idea that
there is stigma attached to women working. While the theory needs some reason that men
and women respond differently to structural changes in the economy, the reason could be
women's comparative advantage in rearing at least very young children or men's comparative
advantage in physically demanding work. For example, a stripped-down version of the theory
is that female employment declines with development initially simply because the income
effect and diminishing returns to consumption cause couples to shift from having two earners
to one earner, with child-rearing being the reason that women are the ones who drop out of
the labor force. Alternatively, the U-shape could be due to the larger challenge of balancing
child care and work once jobs move away from the home. The rising part of the U could
be due to more jobs becoming mentally intensive, without these jobs needing to be deemed
"clean."
    Despite stigma not being needed in a mathematical sense, in research on the U-shape,
the concept of stigma is usually central. Scholars who have studied the phenomenon have
viewed stigma as an important underlying force that helps explain the actual historical
changes that have taken place, for example in female labor force participation in the US
(Goldin, 1986). Indeed, when Mu~
                               noz Boudet et al. (2013) conducted interviews about gender
norms in communities across 20 low- and middle-income countries, the consideration of
whether a job was inappropriate for women often loomed large. In many cases, the frowned-
upon jobs involved real or perceived danger from interacting with men. For example, the
authors report that in interviews in south Sudan, respondents said that selling tea, coffee, or
food in the market was stigmatized for women because of the interactions with people who
might mistreat them (p. 130). While call centers are often cited as a source of "good" jobs
in India that have brought young women into the labor force, Mu~
                                                               noz Boudet et al. (2013)
report that some communities do not consider this a decent job for women. They quote one
respondent as saying, "Women engaged in such jobs are not considered respectable because
it has night shifts and the workplace is full of young men who have fat salaries." (p. 130).


                                              3
       The U-shape theory helps explain the evolution of female employment with economic
development, but also leaves out many phenomena influencing female employment. Heath
and Jayachandran (2017) show that over the past few decades, the U-shape curve has shifted
upwards (Figure 1, panel b): Countries move along the curve as they develop over time,
but, in addition, female employment is higher now than it was twenty or thirty years ago at
the same level of economic development. This is partly because some developing countries
are leap-frogging certain stages of industrialization, with services jobs occurring earlier in
the development trajectory. In many developing countries, fertility is falling faster than
one would predict based on income growth, which also likely contributes to rising female
employment. In addition, concerted policy efforts may have played a role in boosting female
employment. Many countries have implemented policies to increase girls' education, for
example.
       On the role of norms specifically, the U-shape theory introduces one way that stigma
matters for female employment, but it by no means fully captures the role of stigma and
norms. In the U-shape theory, underlying gender norms do not, or at least need not, vary
across cultures. The norms simply have a different influence on female employment across
stages of development.2 But norms do vary considerably across societies, and for reasons
unrelated to the current level of economic development.
       Where does the variation across societies in views about female employment come from?
Some of the cross-cultural differences in gender norms have deep historical roots. Boserup
(1970) hypothesized that in societies in which men had a particularly strong absolute ad-
vantage in agriculture, a norm that work was the purview of men took hold. Specifically,
she argued that the tools used to prepare land for cultivation in pre-industrial times af-
fected the returns to male versus female labor, and, in turn, gender norms. Men, because
of their upper body and grip strength, could operate ploughs much more productively than
women. When agricultural tilling was instead done with hand tools such as hoes, men's
advantage was smaller and women played a larger role in agriculture. Boserup's theory was
   2
     Alternatively, one could couch the U-shape theory as saying the norms evolve with economic develop-
ment, following the U-shape. This does not seem to fit the data. Jayachandran (2015) shows that stated
attitudes about female employment are quite strongly negatively correlated with a country's income. The
relationship is monotonic, not U-shaped.



                                                   4
that an economic rationale initially led to a gender division of roles in areas that relied on
the plough, but then those gender roles became a social norm, one with a life of its own
independent of its original rationale. Under this view, societies that historically relied on
the plough continue to have large gender gaps in the labor market, because the norms about
gender roles persisted even after the economic environment changed and agriculture was no
longer a major sector.
       Alesina et al. (2013) test Boserup's conjecture empirically and show that historical
plough use in a region is indeed strongly correlated with current gender attitudes about
women's employment and with women's employment outcomes. While this correlation is
consistent with the theory, one reservation about drawing too strong of conclusions from it
is that use of the plough could be the result of (historical) attitudes about gender, rather
than the cause of (current) attitudes about gender. To address this concern, Alesina et al.
(2013) also use an instrumental variables approach that predicts plough use with a region's
geographic suitability for crops that lend themselves to plough cultivation. They find similar
patterns when they take this extra step to isolate the causal effect of historical gender roles on
present-day outcomes. Note that historical plough use does not differ dramatically between
today's rich and poor countries, so this theory is not intended to explain rich-poor gaps in
female employment.
       Hansen et al. (2015) examine another way that historical experience seems to have
shaped modern gender norms. They show that in societies that transitioned from hunting-
gathering to agriculture earlier, women have a lower employment rate today.3 The conjec-
tured reason is as follows. The adoption of agriculture led to an increase in fertility and
a decrease in women's time spent in economic production. The longer that women have
specialized in child-rearing, the more entrenched is the norm that economic production is
the domain of men.4
   3
     Becker (2019) proposes another way that historical economic activity may have shaped gender norms,
but with implications for restrictions on women's sexuality rather than employment. She shows that societies
that were pastoralist restrict women's sexual freedom today. The proposed explanation is that men's long
absences from home increased uncertainty about paternity, which led to practices to constrain women's
sexual activity such as female genital mutilation.
   4
     One reason the transition to agriculture may have increased fertility is that it increased income, and
there was a positive income effect on fertility. See Hansen et al. (2015) for a discussion of other reasons.




                                                     5
        The work of Boserup (1970) and Alesina et al. (2013) show that societal norms about
women's work can sometimes have economic origins that persist long after the economic
rationale for them is obsolete. In other cases, the historical roots of norms are religious
rather than economic. Today, some of the lowest female employment rates are observed in
the Middle East, North Africa, and India. These societies place a high value on a woman's
"purity," or limited interaction with men outside her family. Under the Hindu caste system,
men outside the family are a source of "pollution" for women. Disallowing women from
working outside the home is one way of preserving their purity (Chen, 1995). Because these
restrictions apply more stringently to upper-caste women in India, lower-caste women often
have more professional flexibility and autonomy (Field et al., 2010). Islam similarly endorses
the practice of purdah, or female seclusion, which contributes to the low female employment
rate in much of the Middle East and North Africa.5


3       Overcoming cultural barriers to women's work
        This section presents examples of policy approaches that have been used (not always
successfully) to overcome a series of cultural barriers to women's participation and success
in the labor market. I discuss social norms around (1) harassment and violence toward
women in public spaces; (2) restrictions placed on women's social interactions and freedom
of movement; (3) control over household finances; (4) intimate partner violence and who
should be the family breadwinner; and (5) who bears responsibility for household chores
and child care. Most of the policy solutions I discuss try to work around and lessen the
impact of the norms. Then in the last subsection (6), I discuss solutions that aim to directly
overturn the norms.

3.1       Ensuring women's safety at work and while commuting
        One norm that differs across societies is how tolerated sexual harassment in public
spaces is. Concerns about sexual harassment and abuse while commuting or at work are
a barrier to women's employment in countries that lack a strong norm condemning such
    5
    Koomson (2017) discusses how a similar proscription against married women working with men within
the Talensi culture in Ghana limits women's access to jobs in mining, because mining pits are considered
secluded. In contrast, fields are in plain view, so gender mixing within agriculture is common and accepted.


                                                     6
behavior.
    One tricky but important aspect of this concern for women's safety is that it is often
partly real and partly the expression of a patriarchal norm. That is, women do face personal
risk of sexual harassment and abuse. At the same time, sometimes "ensuring safety" includes
restricting interactions with men that a woman herself might find no danger or discomfort
from, but that men in her family or community do not condone. I focus first on safety as
women themselves would perceive it. I then pivot to seclusion of women as a patriarchal
norm at the end of this subsection.
    One country where concern about women's safety is acute in India. In a survey con-
ducted in New Delhi, 95% of women aged 16 to 49 stated that they felt unsafe in public
spaces (UN Women and ICRW, 2013). Chakraborty et al. (2018) correlate neighborhood-
level perceptions of crime and female employment using 2005 India Human Development
Survey data and find that a higher perceived level of crime against women is associated with
lower female labor force participation. Siddique (2018) also finds a negative link between
perceived violence and female employment in India, using media reports of violence as the
measure of perceived violence and the National Sample Survey as the data source on female
employment.
    Borker (2018) demonstrates another economic consequence of the physical and verbal
abuse and harassment women face: compromising on one's choice of college. She studies
which campus students apply to within the Delhi University system. Over two thirds of
students live with their parents and commute to campus, usually by public transport. She
surveyed students about where they lived and what campus they chose, and combined this
information with a risk score for each possible commute to a campus, using transportation
maps and crowd-sourced data on safety at different locations and on different modes of
transport. She uses these data to infer the willingness to sacrifice school quality for safety:
female students will choose a lower-quality college within the Delhi University system for
safety, whereas male students put little weight on this concern. With some additional as-
sumptions, she estimates that women's concerns for safety translate into 20% lower expected
post-college earnings. Another way to see that this is a large effect is that the amount of
money that women, relative to men, are willing to spend annually to have a commute that


                                              7
is one standard deviation safer is over twice the annual university fees.
    One policy solution is women-only subway cars and buses. Through its Viajemos
Seguras (Women Traveling Safely) program, Mexico City reserves the first three cars of the
subway for women before 10 o'clock in the morning and after 2 o'clock in the afternoon.
Aguilar et al. (forthcoming) surveyed over 3000 women in Mexico City to measure self-
reported harassment of women riding the subway. By making comparisons around when
the women-only-cars hours start and end each day, they find that the program reduces
harassment. Similarly Kondylis et al. (2020) finds that a women-only space on the subway
in Rio de Janeiro led to a reduction in both verbal and physical harassment experienced by
female riders and that many women are willing to pay a substantial premium to be in the
women-only space. (In Rio, about 10% of cars are reserved for women during the morning
and evening commute hours.) Both of these studies find negative unintended consequences,
however. In the Mexico City case, some of the violence is displaced; male-on-male shoving
and violence is higher during the hours of women-only cars. In Rio, the researchers find
that there is some stigmatization of women who ride women-only cars.
    Martinez et al. (2018) find that expanding the bus rapid transit and elevated rail
system in Lima, Peru, increased female labor supply. This transport did not have a women-
only component, but even general improvements in public transportation can help female
labor supply. Seki and Yamada (2020) study the rollout of the Delhi metro system and
find a similar result that proximity to a new metro station increased female but not male
employment. The authors of both studies speculate that safety was one reason for the
effect. Of course, it is also possible that access to public transportation has a larger effect
on women than men for other reasons such as men being fully attached to the labor force,
women being more likely to work part time (so commute time is a larger share of the time
cost of working), or households choosing to live nearby the man's place of employment.
    As mentioned above, sometimes a patriarchal urge to restrict women's freedom is cast as
concern about safety. Dean and Jayachandran (2019) study a setting where family members'
concern about women interacting with men outside the family and misperceptions of safety
risk seem to stand in the way of women's work. They collaborated with an organization that
runs private kindergartens in rural Karnataka, India. Teaching young children in the village


                                              8
is considered a suitable job for young women, even among those generally unfavorable to
female employment, but social norms nonetheless present a challenge for teachers' success.
First, one role of the teachers is to market the school to families and enroll new students.
This entails visiting homes to talk to parents. This interaction with others is sometimes
worrisome to teachers' family members. Second, because there is not enough scale within
a village to offer in-person training, the ongoing trainings that refresh teachers' skills bring
together teachers from several villages and occur in one of the towns. However, families are
often hesitant to allow teachers to spend the night outside of the village, so these trainings are
usually restricted to a single day. Moreover, sometimes family members are concerned that
the teacher's manager is male; while kindergarten teachers are almost exclusively female,
managers cover multiple schools so must travel across many villages within their territory;
the job requirement to travel means that it is typically only men who accept this job.
       This setting highlights that it is often in employers' interests to shift norms that stand
in the way of women's employment. Firms value having a larger pool of applicants, a
higher retention rate among its employees, and fewer restrictions on the activities that their
employees are willing to do.
       Thus, Dean and Jayachandran (2019) evaluated a set of interventions aimed at dis-
pelling family members' undue concerns. The general approach was to familiarize family
members with the woman's job, under the hypothesis that some of the concern was due to
imagining worst-case scenarios, such as a debauchery at training sessions. The first inter-
vention entailed creating a "family-orientation" video and showing it to family members.
The video addressed common concerns around safety. It featured footage filmed at trainings
to show what they are really like ­ a room full of women doing group exercises or listening
to an instructor. The videos also featured testimonials from experienced teachers and their
family members (husbands, fathers, mothers, in-laws) aimed at dispelling some myths.6 The
second intervention led guided conversations between the teacher and her family members
about the pros and cons of her working. This strategy was inspired by the current practices
of the kindergarten provider's human resources staff. When they hear from a teacher that
   6
    A second video shown to families highlighted the non-monetary benefits of employment such as personal
growth and self-confidence for the woman.



                                                   9
her family has concerns about her work (for example about travel for training), they send
a staff member to help mediate between the teacher and the family. The hypothesis was
that helping the family have these conversations preemptively could prevent concerns from
reaching a boiling point.
      Unfortunately, these interventions had no impact on either how supportive family mem-
bers were of the woman working or whether she stayed on the job. It is possible that the
interventions were too light-touch or were deemed "cheap talk." These null results do not
mean that acclimating family members or using employer-driven approaches to shift norms
holds no promise. It is worth noting that a limitation of a single firm investing in shifting
norms is that some of the benefits are enjoyed by other firms; a woman might become so
empowered that she can move up the career ladder and quit her current job to accept a
more senior position elsewhere. This suggests scope for industry-wide efforts. For example,
in the United States, there are organizations aimed at bringing more women into STEM
fields that are funded by multiple firms. It is possible that a similar model could be effective
in shifting norms about female employment in areas where the rate is low.

3.2     Catalyzing interaction and coordination among working women
      As discussed above, the desire to seclude women from interactions with men in order to
preserve their "purity" stifles women's participation in the labor market. In this subsection,
I focus on a specific way that the norm hinders women's work: It restricts the useful inter-
actions women have with business peers and, more generally, means that working women
enjoy fewer benefits from "strength in numbers."
      One form of employment where restrictions on women's interactions affects their success
is entrepreneurship. The majority of microentrepreneurs in developing countries are women,
but female-owned businesses tend to underperform their male-owned counterparts. The
prevalence of female-owned businesses and the gender gaps in performance help explain
why many civil-society interventions aimed at helping microenterprises focus on women.
One popular type of intervention is business training. The rationale is that women have
more limited access to education and to ways to learn business skills informally. However,
the evidence on the benefits of business training is mixed, with many studies finding no


                                              10
appreciable impact on profits.
    Business know-how is one constraint women face, but it is not the only one, and it
might not be the binding constraint preventing success. Field et al. (2010) and Field et al.
(2016) study another disadvantage female entrepreneurs have: Because of norms limiting
their mobility, women have sparse networks of peer entrepreneurs. Peers can be valuable for
gaining informal skills as well as information about the market or customers. They might be
potential business partners or a support network. Especially in societies that practice female
seclusion or curtailed mobility, women have fewer interactions with other entrepreneurs from
which they can learn and benefit.
    Field et al. (2010) and Field et al. (2016) compared a standard business training pro-
gram offered to women to a variant in which the participant could name a female friend or
family member to be invited to the training too. The hypotheses were that being invited
alongside a friend might increase take-up, lead to more engagement during training, and
enable reinforcement of the learnings after the training was over.
    The two-day business training was offered to self-employed women affiliated with the
Self-Employed Women's Association Bank in Ahmedabad, India. Participants mostly ran
small home-based businesses (e.g., embroidery, rolling cigarettes), while some sold products
in the market, such as vegetables. The main findings were that women invited to training
with a friend reported having higher volume of business and higher household income four
months after the program ended, compared to the control group. They were also less likely
to report their occupation as housewife, suggestive that being a microentrepreneur became
a stronger part of their identity. Those invited to training without a friend saw no such
gains. In terms of the mechanisms, being invited with a friend did not increase attendance
or knowledge. While the study was not designed to unpack the exact mechanism, there is
suggestive evidence that attending with a friend led women to set ­ and achieve ­ more
ambitious goals. Thus, aspirations may be a key intermediate outcome that would improve
if women were granted more freedom of movement and association.
    Another finding in Field et al. (2010) -- which speaks to the important effects of the
norm of female seclusion -- is that the improvement of business outcomes was especially
large for women who belong to castes or religious groups that impose more restrictions on


                                             11
whether women can move about the community and interact with others unaccompanied.
How seclusion of women contributes to the gender gap in employment success is an area
where further research would be valuable.
    In a similar vein to Field et al., Lafortune et al. (2018) tested the impacts of two
separate add-ons to business training in Chile -- either a one-hour visit by an alumna of the
program who became successful in her business or individually-tailored consulting on how
to improve the business -- and found that the visit by a role model increased participants'
business profits. The mechanism of being energized by a role model highlights a general
point that applies to many of the examples I present: While an intervention's design might
have been inspired by a restrictive gender norm, the impacts it has might materialize for
reasons independent of or tangential to the norm. For example, exposure to a role model
could be especially valuable for female entrepreneurs because their seclusion means they
organically have less exposure to role models. But the intervention could be more valuable
for women for reasons unrelated to their limited interaction with other female entrepreneurs.
Alternatively, exposure to a role model might be equally valuable for men and women, a
hypothesis that a study of female entrepreneurs is unable to test.
    Miller et al. (2020) discuss a different way in which having a critical mass of women
in the workforce could be important. They point out that if employees or customers prefer
a gender-segregated workplace, firms might then choose to hire only men or only women.
They find evidence of exceptional gender-segregation across employers in the Middle East,
North Africa, and South Asia but not in other regions, consistent with these regions norms
about gender segregation and low female labor force participation. Moreover, they point out
that if a firm employing only male workers must pay a fixed cost to gender-integrate, it will
only choose to do so if it expects enough women to be interested in the job. This represents
a coordination problem, or negative feedback loop, through which low aggregate female
labor force participation can, in turn, cause low demand by firms for female employees.
Their study is written with Saudi Arabia in mind, where this coordination problem might
hinder efforts to bring more women into the labor force. In this sort of setting, a "big push"
campaign to bring more women into the labor force could be a useful policy strategy.



                                             12
3.3     Giving women more control over money
      An influential study by de Mel et al. (2008) evaluated the returns to giving cash grants
to microentrepreneurs in Sri Lanka and found a striking gender gap in returns to capital:
Grants given to men but not women raised profits considerably. In a follow-up study, the
authors argue that women's grants were "captured" by other household members (de Mel
et al., 2009). This is consistent with a norm that men should serve as the main financial
decision-makers in the family and, thus, women's money should be channeled to her husband
to control.
      Male family members laying claim to women's grants is an example of a broader phe-
nomenon of there being no clear division between business and family for small business
owners. This challenge might be especially large for women because they typically have low
bargaining power in the family. Friedson-Ridenour and Pierotti (2019) find that pressure
from husbands (and others) leads female entrepreneurs in urban Ghana to invest less in
their businesses and allocate more for household needs. Further evidence comes from Dupas
and Robinson (2013), who offer zero-interest bank accounts to microentrepreneurs in Kenya
and find that for women but not men, bank accounts increase savings and investment (as
well as personal expenditures). Keeping their money in a bank account rather than as cash
on hand might enable women to resist pressure to share the money with others and, thus,
to allocate it to their business or their own consumption.
      Faced with this pressure, some women hide money from their husbands to retain control
over it. Fiala (2018) finds heterogeneous impacts of giving grants or loans to women based
on whether they hide money from their spouse, a tendency that was measured using a
lab-in-the-field experiment. Only women who hide money from their husbands experience
improved economic outcomes from the capital infusions. In contrast, grants and loans to
men are more effective among those who do not hide money from their wives.
      Bernhardt et al. (2019) systematically examine whether the finding that women have a
lower return to capital than men can be explained by these intrahousehold dynamics. They
re-analyze data from previous studies in Ghana, India, and Sri Lanka that gave grants or
loans to both female and male business owners. They find that returns to capital are lower



                                              13
for women if their household includes another entrepreneur, while male entrepreneurs do
not see their returns dampened by the presence of another microenterprise in the household.
The likely interpretation is that grants given to women were being redirected and used by
their family members' business. Thus, the returns to capital were not lower in women-run
businesses; rather, the amount of the capital actually invested in their business was just
lower. Consistent with this interpretation, aggregate profits for the household do not differ
depending on the gender of the grant recipient. As further evidence, if the grant recipient is
in a single-enterprise household, then there is no gender gap in how much the grant improves
the enterprise's performance.
    These findings point to a challenge for women running businesses, which is that they
do not have full control over cash they receive. One potential solution is to provide capital
in-kind, rather than as cash. For example, de Mel et al. (2008) and Fafchamps et al. (2014)
find that in-kind grants have high returns for female entrepreneurs. However, in-kind grants
are not always possible, since each business's needs are different.
    Another solution is to make women's money less visible and accessible to family mem-
bers. Riley (2020) conducted a field experiment among female entrepreneurs in Uganda in
which loans were disbursed either as cash or as a mobile-money deposit. She finds that
receiving the loan via mobile money led to higher business profits eight months later, com-
pared to receiving the loan as cash. The largest effects are among those who felt most
pressured to share money with their family members, as measured at baseline.
    An analogous challenge faces women who are wage earners rather than self-employed.
Their personal benefit from working will be lower if their family lays claim to their earnings.
Indeed, men's control over women's earnings is a consistent pattern found by Mu~
                                                                               noz Boudet
et al. (2013) in their qualitative work on gender norms in twenty countries. They write,
"[There] is overwhelming evidence, reported by both women and by men in a number of com-
munities (showing no specific regional or country pattern), of how little autonomy women
actually exercise when it comes to their own assets and income." (p. 93).
    With this hypothesis in mind, Field et al. (2020) tested whether setting up bank ac-
counts for women would have benefits for female employment. They worked with the gov-
ernment of Madhya Pradesh, a state in India, to implement a system of setting up bank


                                              14
accounts for women and depositing their wages in their personal bank accounts. This policy
change was tested in the context of India's workfare program, the National Rural Employ-
ment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS), which offers rural households casual work on public
works programs. Under the status quo, women's wages are deposited in the male household
head's bank account. The researchers find that depositing the earnings in the woman's per-
sonal bank account increased the amount that women participated in NREGS. Even though
their wage did not change, presumably their control over their earnings did. The observed
effect is concentrated among women with low participation in the labor force at the outset
and whose husbands were more disapproving of women's employment.

3.4     Reducing backlash and violence at home
      Two other important norms, which interact in affecting female employment, relate to
whose role it is to be the primary breadwinner in the family and whether men have the right
to be violent toward their wives.
      Increasing women's participation and earnings in the labor market could either decrease
or increase their exposure to intimate-partner violence (IPV). Most models of household
bargaining would predict that greater earnings power should reduce IPV because women
have a more credible threat to leave an abusive relationship. Consistent with this channel,
Aizer (2010) finds that better earning prospects for women reduces IPV in California. Her
analysis uses variation in the gender wage gap that comes about from industry-specific
changes in wages combined with different propensities by gender to be employed in a given
industry. Anderberg et al. (2015) find evidence of a similar protective effect of working in
the UK.
      However, it is also possible that men feel threatened by their female partners' greater
economic power. This "backlash" channel means that female employment could increase
IPV. Krishnan et al. (2010) use panel data in Bangalore, India and find that, for women,
becoming employed is associated with experiencing more IPV, and ceasing employment re-
duces IPV. The patterns related to men's employment are also consistent with a backlash
effect: A husband engages in more IPV when he becomes unemployed, while IPV decreases
when he finds employment. Guarnieri and Rainer (2018) present evidence consistent with


                                             15
backlash in their analysis of Cameroon; women in the former British territories of Cameroon
are more likely to be victims of IPV and are also more likely to be engaged in paid employ-
ment compared to those in former French territories.
       Violence is an extreme outcome that can result from men feeling threatened by their
wives being breadwinners, but there may be less extreme consequences, like unhappiness in
the union. Bertrand et al. (2015), analyzing US data, find that the divorce rate is higher
among women whose earnings potential is higher than their partner's. While this could
reflect women having the ability to walk away from unhappy relationships, it might arise
because the woman being the larger breadwinner destabilizes the relationship.
       If women anticipate IPV or destabilization of their relationship, this could dampen
their employment. Strikingly, Bertrand et al. (2015) show that in US administrative data,
the distribution of women's share of a couple's income has a sharp drop above 50%; couples
apparently avoid the woman earning more than the man, or such unions dissolve at a high
rate.7
       Thus, another type of intervention that could improve women's employment prospects
is to reduce society's tolerance and practice of IPV. If IPV is viewed as unacceptable and
its prevalence drops considerably, then concern about IPV will become less of a deterrent to
women working. More generally, policies that shift views about masculinity such that men do
not feel diminished by their partners' earning power could help boost female employment.
While, to my knowledge, no study has examined the causal effect of reductions in IPV
risk on female employment, there are several potential ways to reduce violence, such as
strengthening and enforcing laws around domestic violence, conducting media campaigns
to change norms, and using behavior change communication. Some approaches, such as
certain behavior change communication programs, have shown strong impacts on violence
(Ellsberg et al., 2015; Jewkes et al., 2008; Bott et al., 2005). A conjecture ­ one that could
be tested by researchers ­ is that these successful programs have a downstream effect on
female employment. Note that a downstream effect could materialize not only because fear
of IPV deters women from working but also because the experience of IPV ­ the physical
   7
    The study also finds that, in couples where the woman's earning potential is higher than the man's,
perversely, the gender gap in time spent on home production is larger. This finding echoes the findings of
Bittman et al. (2003).


                                                   16
and psychological injuries ­ make women less able to work productively.

3.5      Making it easier to balance work and family
      One entrenched gender norm, which is not necessarily stronger in poor countries than
rich ones, is that women should do the bulk of housework and child care Bittman et al.
(2003); Sayer (2005). This norm means that women have fewer hours to work, greater need
for flexible hours, and less ability to travel for work, compared to their male counterparts,
all of which could limit career opportunities and employment success. As a stark example
of women balancing work and family, Delecourt and Fitzpatrick (2019) found that among
owner-managers of small drug stores in Uganda, 38% of women and 0% of men had their
small children with them at work at the time of unannounced visits by the research team.
Those who had brought their children to work earned lower profits, on average, which is
suggestive of the career costs of juggling multiple responsibilities.
      One way to free up women to participate more fully in the work force would be to shift
the norm about who is responsible for household work, but other types of policies could
help as well. For example, interventions that make household chores less time-consuming
disproportionately free up women's time. Dinkelman (2011) uses a post-apartheid push to
expand access to electricity in South Africa to study the effects on the labor market. She
finds that it increases female employment, with supporting evidence pointing to reduced
time spent on home production as a mechanism, for example because of a shift from wood
to electric stoves. Bharati et al. (2020) evaluates the Indonesian government's Conversion
to Liquefied Petroleum Gas program and finds that the switch to a labor-saving cooking
fuel increased female employment. In the US context, owning more household appliances is
associated with a higher female employment rate (Coen-Pirani et al., 2010).
      Policies that provide viable alternatives to mothers' care of children also could increase
female employment.8 Talamas (2020) provides compelling evidence on the effect of child
care availability on female employment in Mexico. In Mexico, like many low- and middle-
income countries, extended family members, specifically grandmothers, often provide child
   8
     I do not review the literature on family planning programs in this article, but that type of policy, by
increasing couples' ability to choose the number and timing of births, also can expand women's employment
opportunities.


                                                    17
care. Talamas (2020) uses quarterly panel labor force survey data for a sample of mothers
of young children who co-reside with the children's grandmother. He shows that if the
grandmother dies, the likelihood that the mother is employed falls sharply, both in absolute
terms and relative to fathers. The drop in employment is smaller when market child care
services are less expensive and is not seen if a co-residing grandfather dies, providing support
for child care being the main mechanism.
    Barros et al. (2011) analyze a lottery for free child care for low-income families in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, and find that winning a child care slot increases the likelihood that a mother
is employed from 36% to 46%. Mart´
                                 inez and Perticar´
                                                  a (2017) find that free after-school care
for primary-school age children increased women's employment in Chile by 3.4 percentage
points, or 5 percent. While this effect might seem small, the small magnitude is because
the free program mostly crowded out other (non-free) formal child care; the program only
increased use of formal child care by 4.2 percentage points. The results, thus, suggest that
increased access to formal child care has a quite large effect on mothers' employment. The
program also increased take-up of already-existing free child care for younger children; once
the older children's care became free, women found it worthwhile to use the available child
care services for their younger children and enter the labor market. Likewise, Hojman and
Lopez Boo (2019) finds that access to subsidized day care in Nicaragua increases mothers'
likelihood of working by 14 percentage points, or about one third. Clark et al. (2019) offer
vouchers for subsidized daycare in an informal settlement in Nairobi and find that mothers'
employment increased, concentrated among married women. Among single women, the
subsidized day care affected job choice: Women switched to jobs with more regular hours,
earning as much money while working fewer hours. Using a difference-in-differences design,
Halim et al. (2019) find that employment of women with preschool-age children increases
in Indonesia with the expansion of public preschools. Preschools operate only three to four
hours per day, likely explaining why the increase female labor supply was concentrated in
unpaid work in the family business.




                                              18
3.6     Shifting the underlying gender norms
      Many of the solutions I have discussed work around the social norms, for example
by giving women bank accounts so they have more control over their earnings in contexts
where the norm is that men control household accounts. It is quite possible that the increases
in female employment and agency brought about through such policies will, in turn, erode
restrictive gender norms. For example, an exogenous increase in the share of women working
could reduce the stigma of female employment just by making it more commonplace.
      Another tack is to pursue policies aimed directly at changing attitudes and norms. The
study by Dean and Jayachandran (2019) discussed above is an example of trying to shift
attitudes about female employment among family members. Another example is McKelway
(2019), which studied women's employment in Uttar Pradesh, India, a setting in which
families often object to female employment. This study found that showing family mem-
bers a promotional video about job opportunities for women in carpet weaving led to a
large increase in the women's employment, suggesting that it successfully reduced families'
opposition.
      Several other studies analyze attempts to change norms about women's work. Bursztyn
et al. (2018) show compelling evidence of the importance of norms in Saudi Arabia. They
elicit men's beliefs about women's work, and their "second-order beliefs," meaning their
beliefs about others' beliefs. They find that men systematically overestimate peers' disap-
proval of women's work. When the researchers provide accurate information to men about
their peers' views, men's wives are more likely to begin seeking employment. Similarly,
Aloud et al. (2020) document and correct pluralistic ignorance (the term psychologists use
to describe when people are mistaken about the prevailing attitude in their community) in
Saudi Arabia. They find that female university students underestimate their peers' aspira-
tions to work, and providing them accurate information about peers' views raises their own
intentions to work. The problem solved in these two related studies is low-hanging fruit:
People perceive women's work to be more stigmatized by the community than is actually
the case. While this overestimation of stigma might not generally be true, when it is, cor-
recting misperceptions is an inexpensive and, it appears, useful intervention. But the more



                                             19
general lesson from the studies is that, at least in some societies, the community's approval
or disapproval of female employment matters a lot for whether women work.
       Dhar et al. (2020) evaluate an effort to reshape gender attitudes, using schools as a
medium to reach adolescents. Adolescents are young enough to have malleable attitudes
but old enough to think about complex moral issues. Since attitudes are more stable post-
adolescence, the effects of an attitude change program could potentially persist and affect
participants' behaviors throughout their lifetimes. A girl who starts to believe more strongly
in gender equality might hold firm in her goal of going to college. A boy who discards his
attachment to traditional gender roles might grow up to be a husband who is supportive of
his wife's career and helps out with child care and housework, and a father who treats his
daughters and sons equally.
       The project arose out of the Government of Haryana's interest in addressing the perva-
sive gender inequality in its society. The research team proposed using government schools
-- one of the powerful ways a government has to influence values in its society -- to change
attitudes about women's and girls' roles and rights in society. This led to a collaboration
with the human rights non-profit Breakthrough. Breakthrough uses media campaigns and
other approaches to shift norms about gender-based violence, early marriage, and other
gender-related problems in India. Breakthrough designed a program called Taaron ki Toli
("League of Stars") centered around classroom discussions held during the regular school
day. The government granted Breakthrough permission to have its staff come to the schools
once every two to three weeks and conduct 45-minute long sessions. The curriculum, spread
across 27 interactive classroom sessions, covered gender roles, recognition and (in)tolerance
of gender discrimination, and interpersonal skills such as communication and social interac-
tion between the genders.9 Through these discussions, and auxiliary activities such as home-
work assignments to record observations about how males and females are treated in their
community and periodic school-wide events like street plays, students explored gender iden-
tity and stereotypes, came to better understand gender inequities and their consequences,
and were encouraged to communicate and act on what they had learned.
   9
    One norm the program aimed to shift was around the responsibility for household chores, aiming to
convince boys that they should also contribute. Arguably, this norm around household work, including child
care, is one of the most relevant for women's participation in the labor market across all societies worldwide.


                                                      20
    Dhar et al. (2020) designed a randomized controlled trial through which the program
was rolled out in 150 randomly selected government schools from a sample of 314 schools.
In its initial phase, the study assessed short-run impacts on three primary outcomes: gender
attitudes, measured as an index of responses to direct questions and vignettes on gender
roles, opportunities for education, employment outside the home, and fertility behavior;
girls' aspiration related to education and career; and gender-related behaviors, measured as
an index of responses to questions about students' interactions with the opposite gender,
engagement in traditionally gendered activities, and girls' autonomy, for example.
    The study finds that the program led to a large shift toward more gender-equitable
attitudes. The effect size on the attitudes index is 0.2 standard deviations, which corresponds
to the program successfully changing gender-biased views to become supportive of gender
equality 16% of the time. Girls started out with more support for gender equality, but both
genders experienced comparable increases in support. The program did not affect girls'
educational and career aspirations, which were high and comparable to boys' aspirations to
begin with.
    Program participants also reported more gender-equitable behavior such as increased
interaction with the opposite sex, sharing household work, and mobility for girls. The
effect on behavior was considerably larger among boys, despite the attitude change being
comparable for both genders. A likely explanation is that boys have fewer constraints on
their behavior. This highlights that although believing in gender equality is necessary for
behaving in ways that reflect gender-equal views, it is not sufficient; one also needs agency.
The gender gap in power in society means that attitude change to promote gender equality
could be more effective when aimed at men. However, another consideration for targeting is
that adults' attitudes not only guide their own behavior, they also influence their children's
attitudes. Dhar et al. (2019) examine the link between parents' gender attitudes and their
children's attitudes and find that mothers seem to exert more influence on both their sons
and their daughters, perhaps because they spend considerably more time with their children
than fathers do. For this reason, making women more supportive of gender equality is also
important.



                                              21
4    Concluding remarks
    This article summarized various ways that gender norms act as a barrier to women's full
and equal participation in the labor market in developing countries. Implementing policies
and programs that are designed to work around these norms is one way to help female
employment. For example, if social mores limit women's ability to interact with men, then
programs that enable home-based work or enable women to more easily network with other
women could be useful. By creating more equality in the labor market, this approach might,
in turn, erode the restrictive norms, creating a virtuous cycle.
    Another promising approach is to try to directly change individuals' and community's
beliefs and attitudes that privilege men in the workplace. While this type of attitude
change intervention is often used by non-governmental organizations, there is an important
opportunity for governments in developing countries to expand their use of this strategy.
Many governments want to promote gender equality, whether as an end in itself or as a way
to increase economic prosperity by putting women's talents to better use. Media campaigns
and school-based programs like the one studied by Dhar et al. (2020) could be a valuable
complement to more standard governmental strategies such as using the legal system to
promote equality. Governments are in a powerful position to inculcate their constituents
with a commitment to equality of opportunities, both in the labor market and overall.
    Shifting cultural norms will not be easy, however. One of the most challenging norms
to change will be about roles and responsibilities in the home. Certain restrictive gender
norms are particular to a few societies, such as limiting women's freedom of movement. For
many other norms, there are examples of great strides in a relatively short amount of time;
acceptability of intimate-partner violence has fallen considerably in some societies over a
relatively short period. In contrast, the norm that women are primarily responsible for
housework and child care is pervasive in essentially all societies. The dividend for women's
equality if this norm can be reshaped would be tremendous.




                                             22
Literature cited
Aguilar, A., E. Gutie´rrez, and P. Soto Villagra      ` n (forthcoming): "Benefits and
 Unintended Consequences of Gender Segregation in Public Transportation: Evidence from
 Mexico City's Subway System," Economic Development and Cultural Change.
Aizer, A. (2010): "The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence," American Economic
  Review, 100, 1847­1859.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013): "On the Origins of Gender Roles:
 Women and the Plough," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 469­530.
Aloud, M. E., S. Al-Rashood, I. Ganguli, and B. Zafar (2020): "Information
 and Social Norms: Experimental Evidence on the Labor Market Aspirations of Saudi
 Women," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.
Anderberg, D., H. Rainer, J. Wadsworth, and T. Wilson (2015): "Unemployment
 and Domestic Violence: Theory and Evidence," Economic Journal, 126, 1947­1979.
Barros, R., P. Olinto, T. Lunde, and M. Carvalho (2011): "The Impact of Access
 to Free Childcare on Women's Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence From a Randomized
 Trial in Low-Income Neighborhoods of Rio De Janeiro," in World Bank Economists'
 Forum.
Becker, A. (2019): "On the Economic Origins of Restrictions on Women's Sexuality,"
 Working paper, Harvard University.
Beneria, L. (1981): "Conceptualizing the Labor Force: The Underestimation of Women's
 Economic Activities," Journal of Development Studies, 17, 10­28.
Bernhardt, A., E. Field, R. Pande, and N. Rigol (2019): "Household Matters: Re-
 visiting the Returns to Capital Among Female Microentrepreneurs," American Economic
 Review: Insights, 1, 141­60.
Bertrand, M., E. Kamenica, and J. Pan (2015): "Gender Identity and Relative
 Income Within Households," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130, 571­614.
Bharati, T., Y. Qian, and J. Yun (2020): "Fueling the Engines of Liberation With
 Cleaner Cooking Fuel: Evidence from Indonesia," Working paper, University of Western
 Australia.
Bittman, M., P. England, L. Sayer, N. Folbre, and G. Matheson (2003): "When
  Does Gender Trump Money? Bargaining and Time in Household Work," American Jour-
  nal of Sociology, 109, 186­214.
Borker, G. (2018): "Safety First: Perceived Risk of Street Harassment and Educational
 Choices of Women," Working paper.
Boserup, E. (1970): Woman's Role in Economic Development, London: George Allen and
 Unwin Ltd.

                                         23
Bott, S., A. Morrison, and M. Ellsberg (2005): Preventing and Responding to
 Gender-Based Violence in Middle and Low-Income Countries: A Global Review and Anal-
 ysis, The World Bank.

Bursztyn, L., A. L. Gonza´ lez, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2018): "Misperceived
 Social Norms: Female Labor Force Participation in Saudi Arabia," National Bureau of
 Economic Research Working Paper.

Chakraborty, T., A. Mukherjee, S. R. Rachapalli, and S. Saha (2018): "Stigma
 of Sexual Violence and Women's Decision to Work," World Development, 103, 226­238.

Chen, M. (1995): "A Matter of Survival: Women's Right to Employment in India and
 Bangladesh," in Women, Culture and Development, ed. by M. Nussbaum and J. Glover,
 Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.

Clark, S., C. W. Kabiru, S. Laszlo, and S. Muthuri (2019): "The Impact of
 Childcare on Poor Urban Women's Economic Empowerment in Africa," Demography, 56,
 1247­1272.

Coen-Pirani, D., A. Leo ´ n, and S. Lugauer (2010): "The Effect of Household Ap-
 pliances on Female Labor Force Participation: Evidence From Microdata," Labour Eco-
 nomics, 17, 503­513.

de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2008): "Returns to Capital in Mi-
  croenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  123, 1329­1372.

------ (2009): "Are Women More Credit Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender
  and Microenterprise Returns," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 1­32.

Dean, J. T. and S. Jayachandran (2019): "Changing Family Attitudes to Promote
 Female Employment," in AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 109, 138­42.

Delecourt, S. and A. Fitzpatrick (2019): "The Baby Profit Gap: How Childcare
 Duties Impact Entrepreneurial Performance," Working paper, Stanford University.

Dhar, D., T. Jain, and S. Jayachandran (2019): "Intergenerational Transmission of
 Gender Attitudes: Evidence from India," Journal of Development Studies, 55, 2572­2592.

------ (2020): "Reshaping Adolescents' Gender Attitudes: Evidence from a School-Based
  Experiment in India," Working paper, Northwestern University.

Dinkelman, T. (2011): "The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evi-
 dence from South Africa," American Economic Review, 101, 3078­3108.

Dupas, P. and J. Robinson (2013): "Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Devel-
 opment: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya," American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics, 5, 163­192.


                                          24
Durand, J. D. (1975): The Labor Force in Economic Development: A Comparison of
 International Census Data, 1946-1966, vol. 1237, Princeton University Press.

Ellsberg, M., D. J. Arango, M. Morton, F. Gennari, S. Kiplesund, M. Con-
 treras, and C. Watts (2015): "Prevention of Violence Against Women and Girls:
 What Does the Evidence Say?" The Lancet, 385, 1555­1566.

Fafchamps, M., D. McKenzie, S. Quinn, and C. Woodruff (2014): "Microen-
  terprise Growth and the Flypaper Effect: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in
  Ghana," Journal of Development Economics, 106, 211­226.

Fiala, N. (2018): "Business Is Tough, but Family Is Worse: Household Bargaining and
  Investment Decisions in Uganda," Working paper, University of Connecticut.

Field, E., S. Jayachandran, and R. Pande (2010): "Do Traditional Institutions
  Constrain Female Entrepreneurship? A Field Experiment on Business Training in India,"
  American Economic Review, 100, 125­129.

Field, E., S. Jayachandran, R. Pande, and N. Rigol (2016): "Friendship at Work:
  Can Peer Effects Catalyze Female Entrepreneurship?" American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 8, 125­53.

Field, E., R. Pande, N. Rigol, S. Schaner, and C. T. Moore (2020): "On Her
  Own Account: How Strengthening Women's Financial Control Impacts Labor Supply and
  Gender Norms," Working paper, Yale University.

Friedson-Ridenour, S. and R. S. Pierotti (2019): "Competing Priorities: Women's
 Microenterprises and Household Relationships," World Development, 121, 53­62.

Gaddis, I. and S. Klasen (2014): "Economic Development, Structural Change, and
 Women's Labor Force Participation," Journal of Population Economics, 27, 639­681.

Goldin, C. (1986): "The Female Labor Force and American Economic Growth, 1890-
 1980," in Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, ed. by S. Engerman and
 R. Gallman, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 557­604.

------ (1995): "The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic Development
  and Economic History," in Investment in Women's Human Capital and Economic Devel-
  opment, ed. by T. P. Schultz, University of Chicago Press.

Guarnieri, E. and H. Rainer (2018): "Female Empowerment and Male Backlash,"
 Working paper, CESifo.

Halim, D., H. Johnson, and E. Perova (2019): "Could Childcare Services Improve
 Women's Labor Market Outcomes in Indonesia?" Working paper, World Bank.

Hansen, C. W., Jensen, P. Sandholt, Skovsgaard, and C. Volmar (2015): "Mod-
 ern Gender Roles and Agricultural History: The Neolithic Inheritance," Journal of Eco-
 nomic Growth, 20, 365­404.

                                          25
Heath, R. and S. Jayachandran (2017): "The Causes and Consequences of Increased
 Female Education and Labor Force Participation in Developing Countries," in The Oxford
 Handbook of Women and the Economy, Oxford University Press, 345­367.

Hojman, A. and F. Lopez Boo (2019): "Cost-Effective Public Daycare in a Low-Income
 Economy Benefits Children and Mothers," Inter-American Development Bank working
 paper.

Jayachandran, S. (2015): "The Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries,"
  Annual Review of Economics, 7.

Jewkes, R., M. Nduna, J. Levin, N. Jama, K. Dunkle, A. Puren, and
  N. Duvvury (2008): "Impact of Stepping Stones on Incidence of HIV and HSV-2 and
  Sexual Behaviour in Rural South Africa: Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial," Bmj,
  337, a506.

Kabeer, N. (2008): "Paid Work, Women's Empowerment and Gender Justice: Critical
 Pathways of Social Change," Pathways Policy Paper, Institute of Development Studies.

Kessler-Harris, A. (2003): In Pursuit of Equity: Women, Men, and the Quest for
 Economic Citizenship in 20th Century America, Oxford University Press, USA.

Klasen, S. (2019): "What Explains Uneven Female Labor Force Participation Levels and
 Trends in Developing Countries?" World Bank Research Observer, 34, 161­197.

Kondylis, F., A. Legovini, K. Vyborny, A. Zwager, and L. C. D. Andrade
 (2020): "Demand for Safe Spaces: Avoiding Harassment and Stigma," World Bank Policy
 Research Working Paper No. 9269.

Koomson, E. (2017): "Transformining Customary System in Ghana: Women's Participa-
 tion in Small-Scale Gold Mining Activities in the Talensi District," Ph.D. thesis, Univer-
 sity of Michigan.

Krishnan, S., C. H. Rocca, A. E. Hubbard, K. Subbiah, J. Edmeades, and N. S.
 Padian (2010): "Do Changes in Spousal Employment Status Lead to Domestic Violence?
 Insights From a Prospective Study in Bangalore, India," Social Science and Medicine, 70,
 136­143.

Lafortune, J., J. Riutort, and J. Tessada (2018): "Role Models or Individual Con-
 sulting: The Impact of Personalizing Micro-Entrepreneurship Training," American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 10, 222­45.

Mart´inez, C. and M. Perticara   ´ (2017): "Childcare Effects on Maternal Employment:
 Evidence from Chile," Journal of Development Economics, 126, 127­137.

Martinez, D., O. A. Mitnik, E. Salgado, L. Scholl, and P. Yan        ~ ez-Pagans
 (2018): "Connecting to Economic Opportunity? The Role of Public Transport in Pro-
 moting Women's Employment in Lima," IZA Discussion Paper.


                                            26
McKelway, M. (2019): "Vicious and Virtuous Cycles: Self-Efficacy and Employment of
 Women in India," Working paper.

Miller, C., J. Peck, and M. Seflek (2020): "Integration Costs and Missing Women
 in Firms," Working paper, Swarthmore College.
  ~ oz Boudet, A. M., P. Petesch, and C. Turk (2013): On Norms and Agency:
Mun
 Conversations About Gender Equality With Women and Men in 20 Countries, The World
 Bank.

Riley, E. (2020): "Resisting Sharing Pressure in the Household Using Mobile Money: Ex-
  perimental Evidence on Microenterprise Investment in Uganda," Working paper, Oxford
  University.

Sayer, L. C. (2005): "Gender, Time and Inequality: Trends in Women's and Men's Paid
  Work, Unpaid Work and Free Time," Social Forces, 84, 285­303.

Seki, M. and E. Yamada (2020): "Heterogeneous Effects of Urban Public Transportation
  on Employment by Gender: Evidence from the Delhi Metro," Working paper, JICA
  Research Institute.

Sen, A. (1990): "Gender and Cooperative Conflicts," in Persistent Inequalities, ed. by
  A. Sen and I. Tinker, Oxford University Press.

Siddique, Z. (2018): "Violence and Female Labor Supply," IZA Discussion Paper.

Sinha, J. N. (1965): "Dynamics of Female Participation in Economic Activity in a Devel-
  oping Economy," in Proceedings of the World Population Conference, Belgrade, vol. 4.

Talamas, M. (2020): "Grandmothers and the Gender Gap in the Mexican Labor Market,"
 Working paper, Northwestern University.

UN Women and ICRW (2013): "Unsafe: An Epidemic Of Sexual Violence In Delhi's
 Public Spaces: Baseline Findings From The Safe Cities Delhi Programme," Tech. rep.

World Bank (2020): "World Development Indicators," Available at http://data.
 worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators (accessed June 15,
 2020).




                                          27
     Figure 1: U-shape relationship between female employment and GDP per capita




                  (a) Best-fit quadratic is U-shaped, but much variation is unexplained




                       (b) Best-fit U-shape has shifted upward in recent decades

Notes: GDP per capita is the PPP-adjusted value. Female labor force participation is from the World
Development Indicators data.



                                                   28
