                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ENDOGENOUS QUALITY INVESTMENTS IN THE U.S. HOSPITAL MARKET

                                        Craig Garthwaite
                                        Christopher Ody
                                         Amanda Starc

                                       Working Paper 27440
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27440


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




This research was performed while Ody worked at Kellogg and reflects the views of the authors
and not necessarily the views of Analysis Group or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable advice, suggestion, and data assistance
provided by John Graves, Leonce Nshuti, Adam Sacarny, Matt Schmitt. We also thank Amitabh
Chandra, Stuart Craig, David Cutler, Leemore Dafny, Michael Dickstein, David Dranove,
Melissa Kearney, Kate Ho, Mike Powell, Ashley Swanson, Jeroen Swinkels, and the participants
of the Chicago Health Economics Summit for useful comments.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27440.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Craig Garthwaite, Christopher Ody, and Amanda Starc. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Endogenous Quality Investments in the U.S. Hospital Market
Craig Garthwaite, Christopher Ody, and Amanda Starc
NBER Working Paper No. 27440
June 2020
JEL No. I11

                                         ABSTRACT

High and increasing hospital prices have led to calls for price regulation. If prices are high
because of consolidation, regulating prices could enhance welfare. However, high prices could
also reflect increased willingness to pay by privately insured consumers for clinical and non-
clinical quality. If so, regulating prices could reduce quality. We present a model of strategic
quality choice where hospitals make quality investments to increase private revenue. We confirm
the model's predictions across numerous quality measures including patient satisfaction, hospital
processes, risk adjusted mortality, the revealed preferences of current Medicare patients,
technology adoption, physician quality, and ED wait times.

Craig Garthwaite                                Amanda Starc
Kellogg School of Management                    Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University                         Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive                               2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208                              Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                        and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu           amanda.starc@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Christopher Ody
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University and
Analysis Group, Inc.
180 North Stetson Avenue
Suite 2300
Chicago, IL 60601
christopher.ody@analysisgroup.com
1      Introduction

     High and increasing hospital prices have ignited a vigorous policy debate with proposed solutions ranging


from direct private price regulation to expanding social insurance programs (and their regulated prices). This


debate has largely ignored the complex relationship between price setting and strategic quality investments.


In this paper, we examine whether negotiated prices create the incentive for hospitals to invest in clinical


and non-clinical quality. Our results can inform the debate over changes to pricing mechanisms by showing


that such policies could aect equilibrium quality for all patients.


     Healthcare pricing is complex but at a high level public insurers pay xed prices to all providers and


every private insurer negotiates dierent prices with each provider. In general, hospitals generating more


unique value for patients can charge higher private prices. If this unique value simply results from hospital


consolidation reducing the set of outside options, then reimbursement cuts may not meaningfully aect


quality.
         1 However, this unique value may also reect a willingness-to-pay for quality. Across many industries,

increased quality can cause meaningfully higher prices, and this could also be true in healthcare. If current


quality levels result from the strategic eorts of rms to dierentiate, then regulating prices could reduce


quality. While a number of studies examine rising hospital prices, this literature largely does not consider


the interaction between pricing and the provider's decision to invest in quality. Similarly, healthcare policy


analyses largely ignore the possibility that prices and quality are jointly determined.
                                                                                                       2

     To help understand the relationship between prices and quality, we develop and test a simple economic


model of strategic hospital investments in costly quality.               These investments are intended to increase the


willingness to pay of privately insured patients with the goal of inuencing negotiations with commercial


insurers.    In contrast, public insurer prices are broadly similar across hospitals and are not responsive to


quality. Intuitively, if the marginal consumer is more likely to be publicly insured, then the hospital's quality


choice will depend on the incentives generated by the public insurance program. By contrast, if the marginal


consumer is more likely to be privately insured, then quality will reect the incentives generated by those


patients.

    1 Consolidation   in hospital markets causes higher private prices, but there is no consistent evidence consolidation improves
quality or reduces costs (Capps and Dranove (2004); Dafny (2009); Cooper et al. (2018)).
    2 Of the 19 papers cited in a literature review by the Kaiser Family Foundation on the determinants of healthcare pricing,   only
4 evaluated quality. Perhaps more concerning, the literature review itself does not consider quality as a potential determinant
of price. By contrast, the hospital bargaining literature generally takes hospital quality as xed and models network formation
and pricing, premium setting, and consumer demand for insurance and hospitals (Ho and Lee (2017, 2018); Gowrisankaran,
Nevo and Town (2015)).        Even those studies which document a connection between prices and quality do not examine the
underlying economic mechanism. Both White and Whaley (2019) and Cooper et al. (2018) document that high-priced hospitals
tend to be higher quality than low-priced hospitals but don't discuss why or how that relationship occurs. Wu and Shen (2014)
show that large administrative price cuts gradually lead to slower improvement in patient outcomes. Gaynor, Ho and Town
(2015) provides a review of the literature examining the eect of competition separately on prices and quality. In summarizing
the literature, the authors separate studies into markets with administered prices and markets with market determined prices.
Our study lls a void by exploring the interaction of the mechanism determining prices and quality investments.




                                                                 2
    Our model, when combined with institutional features of the U.S. healthcare system  where commercial


prices are substantially higher than public rates and can respond to hospital quality  suggests optimal quality


will be higher in markets with more private patients. In markets with a large number of private patients,


hospitals may set quality suciently high that the cost of serving public patients exceeds the associated


reimbursement.
                    3   Such a strategy is not viable for hospitals in markets with a greater share of publicly


insured patients. Those hospitals cannot persistently lose money and must instead optimize under the xed


reimbursements oered by public insurers. Such a relationship between potential market opportunities and


product quality is not unique to healthcare. Waldfogel (2003) notes that rms oer products that attract


a large base of (protable) customers. The growing literature on endogenous product design (see Crawford


(2012) for a review) shows that the welfare eects of such endogenous quality choice can be comparable to


that of pricing.


    Since publicly insured patients can receive care at eectively any hospital and public reimbursements


do not vary with quality, costly investments in quality decrease the accounting margins hospitals earn


from treating those patients.          As a result, hospitals investing in quality because their marginal expected


consumer is privately insured should have lower Medicare accounting margins, higher quality, and higher


prices from private payers. If this were true, we would predict a negative correlation between public and


private accounting margins, which is precisely what we observe in the binned scatter plot in Figure 1A.
                                                                                                                                4 If

these margins are a byproduct of costly quality investments in search of higher private prices , they imply
                                                                                                                    5

that changes to reimbursement policy would alter the optimal quality investment.
                                                                                                      6

    Other have noted a similar negative correlation  albeit driven by dierent economic mechanisms. For


example, Stensland, Gaumer and Miller (2010) posit that the increased costs for hospitals receiving higher


private prices solely result from a softening of pressure on hospital managers to control costs. Both this model


of ineciency and our model of strategic quality investments imply a negative correlation between Medicare


and non-Medicare accounting margins. Our model, however, suggests higher costs are a byproduct of the


incentive to invest in quality to increase private patient demand. The dierences between these models are


not merely semantic. If the potential to charge high prices creates an incentive to invest in quality, regulating


prices could reduce equilibrium quality.

   3 Medicare covers elderly patients and Medicaid primarily covers the indigent and disabled.     Both programs use administrative
prices; Medicare is typically more generous than Medicaid. Nearly all hospitals accept Medicare and therefore these patients
can receive services at hospitals with negative Medicare accounting margins.
   4 Figure 1B shows that for-prot hospitals,   which can return any excess surplus to investors, also exhibit a negative correlation
between Medicare and non-Medicare accounting margins.
   5 These   higher prices could either be from attracting privately insured patients with higher reimbursing insurance or by
demanding higher prices from the insurers of existing private patients.
   6 Such   a relationship is consistent with existing literature.       For example, Clemens, Gottlieb and Hicks (2020) show that
changes to reimbursement aect both short-run supply and long-run physician investments; a similar phenomenon likely applies
to hospitals.




                                                                     3
     Testing our model requires estimating a rm's belief about potential market opportunities. The actual


payer mix at a hospital is the equilibrium outcome of, among other things, investments in quality. To avoid


the endogeneity concerns that would result from using a hospital's actual payer mix as a measure of potential


market opportunities, we measure a rm's beliefs about its potential patients based on the demographics


of a hospital's close geographic region. This measure relies on the assumption that the geographic distance


is an economically meaningful component of facility selection, as has been seen across a number of studies


(McClellan, McNeil and Newhouse (1994); Kessler and McClellan (2000); Geweke, Gowrisankaran and Town


       a
(2003 )). It also leverages the fact that general acute care hospitals are long-standing institutions that face


similar local demographics over the timescale in which quality investment decisions are considered.


     In Figure 1D we demonstrate that our measure of potential private patient share is associated with lower


Medicare accounting margins, in line with our predictions. To the extent private prices are generally higher


than public reimbursements, this result is consistent with models of either inecient management or costly


quality investments.        To distinguish between these hypotheses, we examine the relationship between the


potential patient mix and a wide variety of quality measures including overall patient satisfaction, hospital


processes, risk adjusted mortality, revealed patient preferences, hospital technology adoption, physician


quality, and ED wait times.           If the connection between Medicare and non-Medicare margins comes from


waste by managers ush with resources, there should be no systematic relationship between potential private


patients and quality. Our estimates are summarized in Figure 2 and Table 1. Across these quality measures,


hospitals with a greater potential privately insured population provide higher quality. Where appropriate,


these quality measures are risk adjusted. However, some of our measures, such as the measure of optimal


hospital processes, do not require risk adjustment and therefore are immune to concerns they simply reect


some underlying characteristic of the privately insured. The consistent relationship across all of our measures


provides empirical support for a model of hospitals making quality investments to increase revenue.                        We


discuss the economic implications of this model below.



2      Data

We restrict our sample to general acute care hospitals ling Medicare's Hospital Cost Reports (henceforth,


Cost Reports) for which we can calculate a Medicare accounting margin; this restriction excludes small,


rural hospitals.
                     7   We also restrict to hospitals receiving less than a one percent increase in their overall


Medicare reimbursements as a result of providing graduate medical education; this restriction excludes

    7 Our   measure is not price less marginal cost; accounting costs can be both xed and marginal in nature. A large number of
hospitals treating a small number of patients are rural hospitals that are designated as critical access hospitals by Medicare.
Medicare pays these hospitals on a cost plus basis and therefore they face dierent incentives and reporting requirements. We
also exclude a small number of all-inclusive rate hospitals; hospitals with this designation do not report the information we
need to construct Medicare costs.




                                                                4
academic medical centers (AMCs).                The business strategy of AMCs is not well-captured by our analyses


because their quality choices (in the form of providing graduate medical education) directly aect Medicare


reimbursement. By contrast, most hospitals face rigid public prices. An advantage of limiting our sample


in this way is that we can be condent the relationship we estimate does not simply reect an idiosyncratic


feature of AMCs.
                      8 Table A.4 describes our sample restrictions in more detail.

    We collected data from a number of sources described below. Unless otherwise noted, our data are from


2012.
      9 Table A.5 presents summary statistics for these variables, as well as the number of hospitals with

non-missing values of each measure.




2.1        Potential Patient Mix


We measure potential payer mix at the hospital level by combining zipcode demographics from the American


Community Survey (ACS) and 2010 Census with data on the predicted share of a hospital's patients coming


from each zipcode. More specically, let               s
                                                      ^hz   be the predicted share of hospital          h's   patients from zipcode            z

given the distance between        h   and   z .10   Let   Sharei
                                                               z    be the share of patients in zipcode          z    with insurance type


i  {P rivate, P ublic, U ninsured}.11           The predicted share of hospital           h's   patients with insurance type         i   is:




                                               P redicted Sharei
                                                               h =                ^hz Sharei
                                                                                  s        z                                              (1)
                                                                              z

    We refer to these potential payer mix variables as                     Predicted Private Share, Predicted Public Share,              and


Predicted Uninsured Share.         Table A.6 conrms there is strong relationship between a hospital's potential


payer mix and its actual patient mix.
                                               12 For example, we estimate a hospital predicted to draw all its patients

from zipcodes that only contain publicly insured patients would have 85 percentage points more of these


patients than a hospital predicted to draw all its patients from zipcodes that did not contain publicly insured


patients.

   8 Table A.8 illustrates the relationship between potential patient mix         and our quality remains similar if we include AMCs.
   9 We choose 2012 for two reasons. First, the quality of data on care           provided to the uninsured improved after revisions to
the Cost Reports that were implemented in 2010 and 2011. Second, we selected a year that predated the Aordable Care Act's
insurance market reforms because those reforms changed the insurance composition of the population, but it may take time for
hospitals behavior to reect the new equilibrium.
  10 We   describe the Medicare data used to calculate      ^hz
                                                            s     in more detail in Section 2.3.4. We predict   ^hz
                                                                                                                s     using the choice model
in Equation 2, except we exclude the hospital-specic xed eects.
  11 We   determine the share of the zipcodes with Medicare with the 2010 decennial Census's estimate of the share that was 65+.
We approximate for the share of each hospital's patients that have Medicaid, are uninsured, and have private insurance using
the ACS's zipcode-level estimate for 2009 through 2013. We re-scale the ACS estimates so they sum to one when combined
with the decennial Census's estimate of the share of zipcode z's population that was 65+. We use this time frame to ensure
the data predates the Aordable Care Act's 2014 insurance market expansions, but to otherwise be as proximate to the 2012
time frame for our other variables as possible.
  12 The   Cost Reports report Medicare, Medicaid, and total inpatient discharges.             We calculate the actual share of patients
that are public as Medicare plus Medicaid discharges divided by total discharges.               Because Cost Reports do not distinguish
between private and uninsured discharges, we approximate for the share of patients that are uninsured by taking the share of
the hospital's charges that are for uninsured patients. We only use this variable in Table A.6.




                                                                       5
2.2        Accounting Margins


We measure accounting margins using the Cost Reports. We create two measures, one for traditional fee-


for-service Medicare (    Medicare Accounting Margin ) and one for all other business (Non-Medicare Accounting
Margin ).     To construct these measures, we determine:            fee-for-service Medicare revenues, total revenues,


estimated fee-for-service Medicare costs, and total costs. We subtract traditional fee-for-service Medicare


costs and revenue from total costs and revenues to obtain non-Medicare costs and revenues. We produce


each margin from the relevant costs and revenues. Note that              Non-Medicare Accounting Margin            includes all


costs and revenues that are not from traditional fee-for-service Medicare patients, such as privately insured


patients, Medicaid patients, uninsured patients, Medicare Advantage patients, and non-patient sources.
                                                                                                                             13

We use the terms fee-for-service Medicare and Medicare interchangeably.
                                                                                             14 More details on this process

are available in Section A.2.1.




2.3        Quality


We construct six hospital quality measures.




2.3.1 Hospital Compare Composite
Using Hospital Compare we construct an aggregate quality measure based on three domains:


    (i) Outcome measures, specically, 30-day risk adjusted patient mortality rates and 30-day risk adjusted


readmission rates for heart attack, heart failure, and pneumonia.


    (ii) Process measures, such as whether heart attack patients receive aspirin at discharge and whether


patients are given discharge instructions.
                                                 15 These process measures are collected for patients for whom the

questions are relevant and are not adjusted for patient mix.


    (iii) Patient experience scores, which are based on responses to the Hospital Consumer Assessment of


Healthcare Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) survey.
                                                                16 These measures are collected for a random sample

of a hospital's adult patients (of all insurance types) and therefore the characteristics of surveyed patients will

  13 Medicare Advantage patients' insurance is administered by a private insurer.
  14 Our separation of margins into the relatively coarse categories of Medicare and   non-Medicare accounting margins is driven
by data availability.
  15 The   complete list of measures is: 1. Heart Attack Patients Given Aspirin at Discharge Heart Failure, 2. Patients Given
Discharge Instructions, 3. Heart Failure Patients Given an Evaluation of Left Ventricular Systolic (LVS) Function, 4. Heart
Failure Patients Given ACE Inhibitor or ARB for Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction (LVSD), 5. Pneumonia Patients Given
the Most Appropriate Initial Antibiotic(s), 6.   Prophylactic antibiotic received within 1 hour prior to surgical incision, 7.
Prophylactic antibiotics discontinued within 24 hours after surgery end time.
  16 HCAHPS     includes a number of subjective measures of patient experience. We rely upon the same HCAHPS measures as
in Doyle, Graves and Gruber (2018), which are: 1. Doctors always communicated well, 2. Nurses always communicated well,
3. Pain was always well controlled, 4. Patients always received help as soon as they wanted  Patients who gave a rating of
9 or 10 (high), 5. Room was always clean, 6. Room always quiet at night, 7. Sta always explained, 8. Yes, patients would
denitely recommend the hospital, and 9. Yes, sta did give patients this information




                                                               6
vary by hospital. However, reported HCAHPS measures are patient-mix adjusted, and specically control


for respondent age and educational status.


    For simplicity, we construct a single composite quality measure from Hospital Compare.
                                                                                                                 17   First, we


standardize each quality measure, so that it has mean zero and a standard deviation of one, and sum the


quality measures in each domain. We then create a single measure by repeating this process over the three


domain specic measures.
                                 18 Measures are correlated within a domain, but there is less correlation across

domains.


    While there could be a concern that non-random patient sorting may bias measures of underlying hospital


quality in ways not captured by risk adjustment, we emphasize that recent research suggests these quality


measures are correlated with measures of quality that account for such potential selection.                     Of particular


relevance, Doyle, Graves and Gruber (2018) exploit random assignment of patients to validate this Hospital


Compare quality measure. Furthermore, process measures are not subject to bias from non-random patient


sorting.




2.3.2 Emergency Department (ED) Wait Time
ED wait time, also from Hospital Compare, is calculated for all patients who are eventually admitted to the


hospital and is not adjusted for patient mix. The lack of adjustment for patient mix creates some issues of


interpretation. For example, we expect hospitals to expedite sicker patients within the ED, and therefore


might also expect that hospitals with sicker patients would have lower ED times.




2.3.3 Technology Adoption
We create a composite measure capturing adoption of technologies related to birth, cardiology, diagnostic


imaging, radiation therapy, and transplantation from the American Hospital Association's (AHA) annual


survey. We studentize each measure, average within technological area, studentize again, and then average


across technological areas.
                                 19 This measure is not patient-mix adjusted, but should be unaected by patient

sorting.




2.3.4 Revealed Preference
We estimate a multinomial choice model to recover patient revealed preferences using Medicare's 2011 Hos-


pital Service Area File. Medicare patients are particularly useful for this quality measure since they face

  17 In   Appendix Figures A.4 and Table A.3 we provide estimates for the relationship between potential private share and each
sub-domain of this composite quality measure.
  18 Some    quality measures are missing for some hospitals; we interpolate missing quality measures from the measures that are
present.
  19 Details   are presented in Section A.2.3




                                                                7
eectively no insurance network based restrictions on which facilities they choose.                              In particular, for tra-


ditional Medicare patient          i,   visiting hospital   h,   let the distance in miles from the patient's zipcode to the


hospital's zipcode be given by            mih ,   let the geometric mean of the patient's zipcodes and hospital's density


be given by      dih ,   let mean utility for hospital h be given by        uh ,   and let   ih be drawn from the Type I extreme

value distribution. Then the utility for patient             i   from visiting hospital      h   is given by:




                                         Uih =  1 uh +  2 dih +  3 mih +  4 dih mih +              ih                              (2)



    We normalize utility so that the average of                  uh   is zero and so the average patient would be willing to


travel one mile in exchange for visiting a hospital that increased                   uh   by one.
                                                                                                    20



2.3.5 Cardiologist Education
We measure physician quality for cardiology, a large sub-specialty practiced at most hospitals. While car-


diologists are likely an important quality feature for patients when picking hospitals, they are typically not


hospital employees. That said, Cutler, Huckman and Kolstad (2010) describe the variety of costly but non-


pecuniary benets hospitals provide to attract protable physicians.                            Thus they represent an investment


in hospital quality.
                           21 We calculate the percentage of a hospital's cardiologists from Medicare's Physician

Compare that graduated from a medical school ranked in the top 25 of the 2018 U.S. News and World


Report.
            22



2.3.6 Productivity
Our nal measure, AMI survival per real resource, was developed in Chandra et al. (2016) and is described


in greater detail there. It measures health outputs (i.e., survival) divided by resource inputs, and therefore


serves as a measure of productivity. The numerator is a 30-day risk-adjusted acute myocardial infarction


(AMI) survival rate, post-empirical Bayes shrinkage adjustment. The denominator is CMS's DRG weights


for these same patients, which measure the expected resources to treat the patient based on the patient's


medical condition and procedures received.

  20 Our   approach is computationally tractable, robust to zero market shares, and uses a consistent outside good for comparison.
See Section A.2.2 for additional details.
  21 It   could be that physicians are attracted to high quality hospitals, perhaps because patients with well-reimbursing plans
desire physicians with admitting privileges at such hospitals. To the extent there is correlation in preferences for high quality
physicians and hospitals, this would still mean physician quality provides a measure (albeit a potentially attenuated one) of
hospital quality.
  22 We    use Medicare Compare data from 2014. For each physician, we select the rst hospital at which the physician is recorded
providing services.




                                                                       8
3         Conceptual Framework and Empirical Approach

3.1        Model


In this section, we outline a model in which rms (hospitals) endogenously choose product quality.                         This


classic question has been studied extensively. For example, Spence (1975) illustrates that the level of quality


provided by a monopolist may deviate from the social optimum because the monopolist cannot extract the


social benets of higher quality that are obtained by infra-marginal consumers. More generally, Dorfman


and Steiner (1954) illustrate that rms will jointly optimize over prices and quality such that the increase in


demand from spending one more dollar to increase quality is equal to the increase in demand from cutting


prices by a dollar.


    In Section A.1, we extend this canonical model to consider the interaction between three economic actors:


hospitals, public payers paying regulated prices, and private payers negotiating prices with hospitals. We


assume market demographics are xed and determined before hospitals choose a quality level. Hospitals rst


choose a level of quality and then compete in both market segments.
                                                                                23 In the publicly insured segment, prices

are exogenously determined by the government. In the privately insured segment, hospitals bargain with


prot-maximizing insurers. Because bargaining occurs after quality is determined, prices for the privately


insured may reect higher quality.
                                         24 Crucially, hospitals set a single level of quality for both segments. This

assumption is broadly reasonable given the diculty (both practical and political) of tailoring the quality of


medical services within a hospital by payer (Grabowski, Gruber and Angelelli (2008)). This is particularly


true if increasing quality requires large, xed cost investments.                 Intuitively, hospitals with an expected


marginal consumer that is privately insured will make investments in quality that reect the preferences of


these patients. In contrast, those with an expected marginal consumer that is publicly insured will invest in


a quality level dictated by the incentives of the public program.


    The model also implies a corollary: accounting margins on public patients will be lower in markets with


more private patients. To see why, note that because public prices are xed and quality is costly, higher


quality leads to lower accounting margins on public patients. In turn, because optimal quality is higher in


markets with more private patients, accounting margins on public patients will be declining in the number of


private patients in the market. As we note above, both our model and one in which hospitals operate at an


overall zero prot constraint and waste additional funds from private insurers generate the same prediction:


Medicare and non-Medicare accounting margins are negatively correlated.                     However, this corollary means

  23 In   the framework of Gaynor, Ho and Town (2015), we are modeling the rst stage of a multi-stage process, taking
bargaining, premium setting, consumer plan choice, and utilization as given. While we do not specify and estimate a full model
of all of these stages, our results inform such a model.
  24 While   we model quality investments as increasing marginal costs, the logic is easily extended for xed cost investments in
quality.




                                                                9
our model diers in whether more potential private patients increase hospital quality. Such a relationship


will not be present in a model that connects high private prices and costs through ineciency. Therefore,


we test the validity of our model, compared to these alternatives, by examining the relationship between a


hospital's exposure to public payers and observable measures of clinical and non-clinical quality. The analysis


is positive, not normative, i.e. it does not comment on the optimal or ecient quality level. Given both


theoretical ambiguity and market frictions, it is impossible to say whether quality is over- or under-provided


in equilibrium.
                    25   We do, however, note that factors beyond pure clinical quality likely drive consumer


willingness-to-pay and providing higher levels of that type of quality is not evidence of overprovision.




3.2     Estimation


Since investments in quality do not pay o instantaneously, we would ideally test our model using data


on hospital quality and market demographics over long periods of time.
                                                                                       26 Lacking such data, our empirical

approach leverages dierent demographics in the area around the hospitals. Such demographics evolve slowly,


so hospitals face a relatively consistent potential patient population. We compare hospitals in areas with


more publicly insured patients to hospitals in areas with more privately insured patients. By doing so, we


leverage relatively exogenous determinants of hospital choice such as travel distances, which is similar to the


approach of Kessler and McClellan (2000) and Geweke, Gowrisankaran and Town (2003 ).                      b
    Our analysis faces four main identication threats. First, patients may sort based on insurance type to


live near certain hospitals or hospitals may locate based on expected patient types. The former is unlikely;


whether the latter is a concern depends on whether hospitals are dierentiated prior to choosing their


location.
             27   This could be be problematic if, for example, certain hospital systems intrinsically provided


better quality and sought out acquisition targets based on demographics.                      To address this concern, we


replicate our results using only hospitals without ownership changes in the past decade and nd the same


basic relationship.
                         28

    Second, insurance status may be endogenous to hospital quality; i.e., if high quality hospitals have high


prices, and high prices reduce private insurance take-up. In this (unlikely) case, our estimates of the eect


of private insurance on quality would be biased downward.

  25 See Spence (1975) or Crawford, Shcherbakov     and Shum (2019) for a recent empirical example.
  26 Unfortunately, such data are lacking. The      ACS zipcode estimates were rst produced in 2009, and are based on an
aggregation of 5 years of data, meaning it is impossible to obtain yearly changes. Similarly, the Cost Reports have only included
accurate information on the uninsured since 2010/2011.
  27 More    specically, if some hospitals would be high quality in any location but the returns to being high quality are higher
in markets with more private patients, then our analyses would produce biased counterfactuals of the eect of changing the
private patient share on outcomes.
  28 These   results (presented in Figure A.6 and Figure A.7) are for a sample that excludes any hospital that underwent an
ownership change between 2003 and 2012.         We also note there is little evidence that quality is transferred across merging
hospitals.




                                                                10
   Third, local insurance types may be spuriously correlated with hospital quality.                   For example, states


vary in Medicaid eligibility rules; states with broader Medicaid eligibility rules could also have lower quality


hospitals for non-causally related reasons. To address these issues, we control for state xed eects. To rule


out concerns that our estimated relationship reects broader cross-market dierences, we conrm our results


are robust to including market (HRR) xed eects. This within-market analysis rules out the concern that


certain markets have characteristics that lead to high quality that are unrelated to the market opportunities


arising from varying patient demographics.              As Figure A.8 shows, our empirical approach leverages the


meaningful local geographic variation          within   HRRs.      While data limitations prevent us from leveraging


variation over time, we show that the variation across space does not predict potentially concerning time


invariant features of hospitals within markets. For example, Appendix Table A.7 shows that predicted payer


mix is not associated with the probability of being a Catholic-aliated hospital.


   Finally, risk adjustment for some of the quality measures may be imperfect. This nal threat to iden-


tication is most substantive. Tautologically, the hospitals we study vary in payer mix in ways that may


be correlated with underlying health. For this reason, we use risk-adjusted measures of quality where ap-


propriate.     That said, if risk adjustment were incomplete and privately insured patients would otherwise


fare better, then some of our quality measures could directly reect the health or other characteristics of


privately insured patients rather than costly investments by hospitals. Even within patients with the same


insurance status, patients could dier across markets in ways that may not be perfectly captured by various


adjustments.
                29 However, many of our quality measures are hospital features requiring no risk adjustment

and thus are not susceptible to this concern. Perhaps most apparent are hospital process measures such as


the appropriate use of aspirin for cardiology patients or antibiotics for those having surgery. As seen in Fig-


ure A.4, these process measures are strongly and positively related to the share of potential private patients.


Similarly, our hospital technology and revealed preference measures require no risk adjustment and show a


strong relationship with the potential private patient share. The consistency across these outcomes limits


concerns our results simply reect patient health or other non-market characteristics of privately insured


patients.


   There is a more subtle point related to this nal identication concern. The privately insured may dier


from the publicly insured in terms of their preferences. Whether this is problematic depends upon the desired


interpretation of our results. Our model allows for the possibility that privately insured patient demand is


more quality sensitive than publicly insured patient demand (though we have no evidence this is the case).


If private patient demand would be more quality sensitive even if private patients were being reimbursed at

 29 For   example, a Medicare patient in a market with an entirely uninsured under 65 population is likely to be very dierent
from a Medicare patient in a market with a privately insured under 65 population.




                                                              11
public prices, then quality incentives under regulated prices might dier from the quality incentives hospitals


currently face when treating the publicly insured. However, even if this was the case, the presence of negative


Medicare margins for high private share hospitals suggests current quality levels could not be sustained. Said


dierently, identication concerns about imperfect risk-adjustment or dierent patient preferences for quality


across insurance types could generate the prediction that markets with a higher private share would have


higher quality, but would not generate the prediction that these market would also have lower Medicare


margins (which we observe).




4      Analysis and Results

Figure 1D presents a binned scatterplot that conrms our prediction of a negative relationship between


Predicted Private Share       and   Medicare Accounting Margin.         This relationship is large in magnitude with a


one percentage point increase in        Predicted Private Share       associated with a 0.66 percentage point decrease


in   Medicare Accounting Margin.30

            Figure 1: Relationship Between       Medicare Accounting Margin         and Other Market Features




      Notes: The dots are a binned scatterplot based of ventiles of the independent variable. The red line and shaded

      region are the least squares line and 95 percent condence interval of the relationship between the variables.

      Analyses are weighted by costs.

 30 Table   A.2 presents the relationship between potential payer mix and   M edicare Accounting M argin.




                                                               12
   Figure 2 presents a binned scatter plot of the relationship between our six quality measures and            Predicted
Private Share.     Across all measures, a greater share of potential private patients is associated with higher


quality. Table 1 contains regression estimates for the relationship between the potential patient mix and our


various quality measures. We rst report the coecient on              Predicted Non-Private Share      (the inverse of the


gures) and nd consistent evidence that hospitals with a greater share of potential patients who are not


privately insured have lower quality.


   To address a possible concern that the relationship between potential private patients and various mea-


sures of quality simply reect unobservable market characteristics, our specications in the third and fourth


columns in each panel include hospital referral region (HRR) xed eects. These specications are similar


to those without these eects.          These within-market estimates only leverage local geographic variation in


potential patients while controlling for market wide features that may aect quality. To demonstrate this


level of variation, Appendix Figure A.8 contains a histogram of our original          Predicted Private Share    variable


as well as a demeaned version. Even after demeaning there is still meaningful variation.


   With the exception of ED wait time, all specications are robust to the inclusion of HRR xed eects. A


higher predicted non-private share is associated with less technology adoption, lower consumer surplus (as


measured by our revealed preference metric), and lower quality in Hospital Compare. Crucially, the Hospital


Compare Composite contains process measures unlikely to be contaminated by potentially unobserved patient


selection.
           31 A higher predicted non-private share is also associated with lower shares of top cardiologists and

lower survival conditional on real resources. This demonstrates our estimates are robust to concerns we are


simply picking up cross-market dierences in quality provision. We next decompose the non-private share


into   Predicted Public Share    and   Predicted Uninsured Share.     For all quality measures except ED wait time,


we see that hospitals with a higher       Predicted Public Share    have lower quality. For all measures except AHA


technology adoption, we see that hospitals with higher           Predicted Uninsured Share      have lower quality.


   Across a range of quality measures, we show that predicted payer mix is associated with quality. Combined


with the model, the patterns in the data suggest that hospitals who can attract well-reimbursed privately


insured patients invest in quality to do so. Our quality estimates provide strong support for the predictions


of our model and are inconsistent with a model of managerial ineciency such as that proposed by Stensland,


Gaumer and Miller (2010). Each quality measure has dierent strengths and limitations. Yet alternative


stories, such as incomplete adjustment for patient selection, cannot explain the totality of our results: many


of our measures are not directly aected by patient characteristics.


   To understand the magnitude of our estimates, consider that the standard deviation of                 Predicted Non-
Private Share is 9 percentage points.      Recall that the technology adoption and the Hospital Compare measure

 31 We   further decompose this measure into its component parts in Figure A.4 and Table A.3.




                                                            13
                                                                       Table 1: Main regression table

                    (1)           (2)               (3)        (4)            (5)           (6)              (7)         (8)           (9)         (10)              (11)        (12)

     Predicted               AHA technology adoption                                        Hospital Utility                                      Hospital Compare
     Share:                             (Overall)                                                                                                    (Composite)

     Non-        -1.474***                   -2.794***                    -5.858***                    -8.125***                   -2.595***                    -4.197***
     Private      [0.267]                         [0.410]                   [0.374]                         [0.428]                  [0.236]                        [0.354]
     Public                    -3.139***                    -4.374***                   -7.427***                     -9.775***                 -3.525***                     -4.110***
                                [0.353]                      [0.539]                      [0.500]                      [0.559]                   [0.316]                       [0.464]
     Uninsured                 1.312***                      2.056*                     -3.221***                     -3.120***                  -1.024**                     -4.462***
                                [0.472]                      [1.156]                      [0.673]                      [1.177]                   [0.426]                       [0.977]
     HRR FEs                                        X           X                                             X          X                                            X           X
     N                                    1,808                                                     2,255                                                   2,218




14
     Predicted                      Time in ED                                          Share of Cardiologists                                      AMI Survival
     Share:               (Patients eventually admitted)                              from top medical schools                                    Per Real Resource

     Non-        69.14***                         9.161                   -0.220***                     -0.172*                    -0.0673***                  -0.0507***
     Private      [16.90]                         [20.51]                  [0.0519]                     [0.0828]                    [0.00668]                   [0.00933]
     Public                      20.90                      -59.37**                    -0.320***                      -0.228                   -0.0597***                    -0.0471***
                                [22.61]                      [26.62]                     [0.0699]                      [0.108]                  [0.00899]                      [0.0121]
     Uninsured                 150.7***                     220.8***                     -0.0544                      -0.00341                  -0.0799***                    -0.0623**
                                [30.56]                      [56.54]                     [0.0931]                      [0.225]                   [0.0121]                      [0.0263]
     HRR FEs                                        X           X                                             X          X                                            X           X
     N                                    2,068                                                     1,535                                                   1,744

                             Notes: Unit of observation is the hospital. Observations are weighted by hospital costs. Standard errors are

                             presented in brackets. Signicance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.
                       Figure 2: Relationship between       Predicted Private Share      and quality




    Notes: The dots are a binned scatterplot based of ventiles of the independent variable. The red line and shaded

    region are the least squares line and 95 percent condence interval of the relationship between the variables.

    Analyses are weighted by hospital costs.




are standardized and the coecient can be interpreted in standard deviation units. A standard deviation in


Predicted Non-Private Share       is associated with a 0.13 and 0.23 standard deviation decrease in technology


adoption and Hospital Compare measures, respectively. Share cardiologists and AMI survival range from


0 to 1. A standard deviation increase in         Predicted Non-Private Share        is associated with a 0.6 percentage


point reduction in AMI survival and a 2.1 percentage point in the share of cardiologists from a top medical


school. ED wait time is measured in minutes while the hospital utility metric is miles traveled. A standard


deviation in   Predicted Non-Private Share is equivalent to an additional 0.53 miles of travel to the hospital.32


5    Discussion and Conclusion

Our estimates demonstrate that changes to reimbursement policy are likely to aect strategic decisions by


hospitals. While we do not fully model this strategic behavior, we note that only 20 percent of hospitals


in our sample have positive Medicare accounting margins. These are not a random subset of hospitals. By


construction, the average hospital in our sample has a Hospital Compare score of 0. However, the average


hospital with a positive Medicare accounting margin has a score of -0.28, a quarter of a standard deviation


lower in the distribution of hospitals.        Table 2 shows the average Hospital Compare scores for various

 32 While   this number may seem small, consumers are extremely sensitive to distance.    A 5 minute increase in travel time
reduces hospital market share by 17-41% (Gowrisankaran, Nevo and Town (2015)).




                                                             15
categories of hospitals.      Column 1 contains the average score, Column 2 contains the share of hospitals


with a positive Medicare accounting margin, and Column 3 combines these facts and provides the Hospital


Compare composite score for hospitals with a positive Medicare accounting margin. As shown in Column 4,


across all hospital categories quality scores are consistently and meaningfully lower for hospitals with a cost


structure that results in a positive Medicare margin.



                         Table 2: Quality of Hospitals Conditional on Accounting Margins

                                                         Hospital Compare Composite
                                     Share with              Mean | Positive  Dierence
           Characteristic         Positive Medicare Mean         Medicare      (3)-(2)
                                  Accounting Margin        Accounting Margin
                                          (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)
           For prot                          0.42              -0.20                 -0.45     -0.25
           Nonprot                           0.14                 0.12               -0.03     -0.15
           Government                        0.17              -0.30                 -0.64     -0.35
           Small Hospital                    0.21              -0.09                 -0.40     -0.31
           Large Hospital                    0.20                 0.14               -0.09     -0.23
           Low private share                 0.31              -0.16                 -0.36     -0.20
           High private share                0.11                 0.14               -0.09     -0.24

           Overall                           0.20                 0.00               -0.28     -0.28

       Notes: Restricted to hospitals with non-missing Hospital Compare Composite.




       Table 2 depicts the types of trade-os that might be necessary in a market that relies more heavily on the


Medicare fee schedule, as has been proposed across numerous policy reforms. It is unclear how the 80 percent


of hospitals with negative Medicare accounting margins would modify their strategies under Medicare for


all.    Similarly, it is unclear how hospitals would react to a large public option insurer that exploits the


Medicare fee schedule  and therefore increased the share of patients covered by rates that are unresponsive


to quality. However, the status quo of making costly investments in quality to attract higher reimbursements


from private payers would not be economically sustainable for them. Finally, our results demonstrate that


using Medicare rates as a measure of eciency or as the correct price for bench marking provider costs


ignores quality investments hospitals make in a market based system. Our results demonstrate a relationship


between these costs (and the incentives to make the underlying investments) and a wide range of patient


quality. At a minimum, this relationship should be considered in discussions of a greater use of direct price


regulation or monopsony in the hospital market.




                                                             16
References

Capps, Cory and David Dranove. 2004. Hospital consolidation and negotiated PPO prices.       Health Aairs
  23(2):175181.



Chandra, Amitabh, Amy Finkelstein, Adam Sacarny and Chad Syverson. 2016. Health Care Exceptionalism?


  Performance and Allocation in the US Health Care Sector.     American Economic Review 106(8):211044.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20151080

Clemens, J., J. D. Gottlieb and J. Hicks. 2020. How Would Medicare for All Aect Health System Capacity?


  Evidence from Medicare for Some. National Bureau of Economic Research.



Cooper, Zack, Stuart V Craig, Martin Gaynor and John Van Reenen. 2018. The price ain't right? Hospital


  prices and health spending on the privately insured.   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1):51107.

Crawford, Gregory S. 2012.    Endogenous product choice:      A progress report.   International Journal of
  Industrial Organization 30(3):315320.

Crawford, Gregory S, Oleksandr Shcherbakov and Matthew Shum. 2019.         Quality overprovision in cable


  television markets.   American Economic Review 109(3):95695.

Cutler, David M., Robert S. Huckman and Jonathan T. Kolstad. 2010. Input Constraints and the Eciency


  of Entry: Lessons from Cardiac Surgery.   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2(1):5176.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.2.1.51

Dafny, Leemore. 2009. Estimation and identication of merger eects: An application to hospital mergers.


  The Journal of Law and Economics 52(3):523550.

Dorfman, Robert and Peter O Steiner. 1954.     Optimal advertising and optimal quality.     The American
  Economic Review 44(5):826836.

Doyle, Joseph, John Graves and Jonathan Gruber. 2018. Evaluating Measures of Hospital Quality: Evidence


  from Ambulance Referral Patterns.   Review of Economics and Statistics (0).

Gaynor, M., K. Ho and R.J. Town. 2015. The Industrial Organization of Health Care Markets.       Journal of
  Economic Literature 53(2):235284.

                                                   a
Geweke, J., G. Gowrisankaran and R. J. Town. 2003 . Bayesian inference for hospital quality in a selection


  model.   Econometrica 71(4):12151238.



                                                   17
                                                                  b
Geweke, John, Gautam Gowrisankaran and Robert J. Town. 2003 . Bayesian Inference for Hospital Quality


  in a Selection Model.    Econometrica 71(4):12151238.
  URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/1468-0262.00444

Gowrisankaran, G., A. Nevo and R.J. Town. 2015. Mergers When Prices Are Negotiated: Evidence from


  the Hospital Industry.   American Economic Review 175:172203.

Grabowski, David C, Jonathan Gruber and Joseph J Angelelli. 2008. Nursing home quality as a common


  good.   The review of economics and statistics 90(4):754764.

Ho, Katherine and Robin S. Lee. 2017.      Insurer Competition in Health Care Markets.        Econometrica
  85(2):379417.



Ho, Katherine and Robin S. Lee. 2018. Equilibrium Provider Networks: Bargaining and Exclusion in Health


  Care Markets.   American Economic Review 109(2):473522.

Kessler, Daniel P. and Mark B. McClellan. 2000. Is Hospital Competition Socially Wasteful?   The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 115(2):577615.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2587004

McClellan, Mark, Barbara J. McNeil and Joseph P. Newhouse. 1994.  Does More Intensive Treatment of


  Acute Myocardial Infarction in the Elderly Reduce Mortality?: Analysis Using Instrumental Variables.


  JAMA 272(11):859866.

Newhouse, Joseph P and Gail R Wilensky. 2001. Paying for graduate medical education: the debate goes


  on.   Health Aairs 20(2):136147.

Spence, A. Michael. 1975. Monopoly, Quality, and Regulation.     The Bell Journal of Economics 6(2):417429.

Stensland, Jerey, Zachary R Gaumer and Mark E Miller. 2010. Private-payer prots can induce negative


  Medicare margins.   Health Aairs 29(5):10451051.

Waldfogel, J. 2003. Preference Externalities: An Empirical Study of Who Benets Whom in Dierentiated-


  Product Markets.    The RAND Journal of Economics 34(3):557568.

White, Chapin and Christopher Whaley. 2019. Prices Paid to Hospitals by Private Health Plans Are High


  Relative to Medicare and Vary Widely: Findings from an Employer-Led Transparency Initiative. Technical


  report RAND Corporation. Santa Monica, CA: .


  URL: https://www.rand.org/pubs/researchr eports/RR3033.html


                                                   18
Wu, V.Y. and Y. Shen. 2014. Long Term Impact of Medicare Payment Reductions on Patient Outcomes.


  Health Services Research 49(5):15961615.




                                               19
A        Appendices (For Online Publication Only)

A.1      Model


We extend Dorfman and Steiner (1954)'s model of price and quality setting to include two distinct segments


of patients: one with market determined prices, and one with administratively determined prices.


    Suppose that a monopolist hospital chooses one common quality level for both the public and private


patients, and that quality aects marginal cost and demand.                   We can treat the hospital as choosing an


optimal cost, rather than an optimal quality; we let c to denote marginal costs, and implicitly quality. Let


Dc (pc , c)   be the commercial demand curve, which is a function of commercial prices,pc , and costs/quality,


c. Let   Dp (c)   be the demand curve for public patients. Prices for these patients are administratively set to


a constant price of    pp ,   and demand does not depend on prices, but does depend on quality. Let the share of


patients that are private in the market be given by          .     Thus, the prot function is given by:




                          =  c + (1 - ) p = Dc (pc , c)(pc - c) + (1 - )Dp (c)(pp - c)                               (3)



    Dierentiating with respect to commercial prices and solving the rst order condition leads to optimal


commercial prices of:



                                                                    Dc -1
                                                      p      c
                                                       c =c-D [        ] ,                                           (4)
                                                                    pc

    which can also be expressed in terms of the standard Lerner Index condition.


    Dierentiating with respect to costs/quality and solving for the optimum leads to:



                                                                   ¯
                                                       c = p  ¯ [  D ]-1
                                                           ¯- D                                                      (5)
                                                                  c
              ¯
              D          c                p
                                                  ¯ = Dc + (1 - )Dp , p                                      c   ¯
                                                                                                              D -1
    where
              c   =  D         D
                     c + (1 - ) c             ,   D                   ¯ = pc + (1 -  )pp ,      and    =  D
                                                                                                          c [ c ]  .


This expression is an analog to the single patient-type optimum, except that prices, demand, and demand


elasticities with respect to cost are weighted averages of those objects for the commercial and public sectors.


    Note that one can also obtain intuition about the spillover eects that public patients have on private


patients by substituting optimal private prices into the rst order condition with respect to quality and


rearranging:



                                              Dc    Dc      1 -  1  p
                                                 =-    (1 +           )                                              (6)
                                              c     pc         Dc c




                                                              20
                                                   D c             c
   When       = 1    , then this reduces to:
                                                   c     = - D
                                                             pc .      i.e., the hospital is indierent between lowering


prices and increasing costs/quality by a dollar to stimulate demand. More broadly, at equilibrium prices and

            D c         c
                                              p
qualities
            c     > - D
                      pc    if and only if
                                             c    > 0.   i.e., the hospital will attract private patients on the margin


by more aggressively cutting prices than increasing quality if quality is above the level that would be prot


maximizing if treating only public patients.


   To understand how patient mix aects quality choice, we can take the derivative of              c   with respect to   .

Simplifying, we nd that more private patients increase quality if and only if:



                                                      Dc -1           Dp -1
                                         pc - D c [     ] > pp - Dp [   ]                                           (7)
                                                      c               c

   Thus, if private prices are weakly higher than public prices and private demand at equilibrium prices is


weakly more quality elastic than public demand, then more private patients leads to weakly higher quality.


Empirically, both of these conditions are thought to be true. Intuitively, this is likely to be true if public


prices are set to be near costs, and if at the optimal quality level for public patients given those prices,
     c
            D c
- D
  pc <      c . i.e., private demand is more sensitive to changes in quality than changes in prices. It is also

straightforward to show that if equation 7 holds, then public margins are decreasing in commercial share. By


contrast, if costs are increasing in commercial share, then the eect of commercial share of private patient


margins is ambiguous, and depends on the rates at which commercial prices and costs increase. Furthermore,


when treating only private patients the hospital will set prices too high and quality too low; public patients


worsen the distortion to private patients on quality, but alleviate it on price.




A.2      Data Appendix


A.2.1 Creating Accounting Margins
This Appendix details the construction of both Medicare and non-Medicare accounting margins. We collect


data on costs, revenues, and margins from the Cost Reports for Medicare and non-Medicare sources sep-


arately. We are able to calculate Medicare costs and Medicare revenues from the Cost Reports. We also


calculate total costs and revenues from the Cost Reports. Non-Medicare revenues and costs are calculated as


total revenues and costs minus Medicare revenues and costs. The remainder of this section details the con-


struction of Medicare revenues and costs, and then presents some additional information on the limitations


of these measures, as well as some robustness checks.




Calculating Medicare Revenues                We calculate revenue from traditional fee-for-service Medicare patients


to be the sum of Medicare reimbursements and patient cost sharing over a number of sub-facilities that may




                                                              21
be located within a hospital.
                                   33 Note that Medicare patients can receive insurance either through traditional

fee-for-service Medicare or through a Medicare Advantage plan, which is administered by a private insurer.


In the Cost Reports, care provided to Medicare Advantage enrollees will not be included with fee-for-service


Medicare. When we do not specify, Medicare refers solely to fee-for-service Medicare, and excludes Medicare


Advantage.
                34 We exclude Medicare Electronic Health Record Incentive payments from Medicare revenues

because these payments were made to hospitals on only a short term basis. Other than that exception, we


include all other sources of Medicare revenue as Medicare revenues, such as Medicare pass-through costs,


Medicare disproportionate share payments, and Medicare graduate medical expense payments because these


are revenue sources that hospitals consistently receive from Medicare.




Calculating Medicare Costs               We use a straightforward procedure to separate hospital costs into Medicare


and non-Medicare costs. The Cost Reports include accounting costs, charges, and Medicare charges for


each of a number of cost centers.              Charges are a measure of what is billed for that is meant to be


correlated with costs, but that is distinct from Medicare or non-Medicare prices.
                                                                                                      35   Cost centers can be


divided into three types. First, some are patient revenue producing cost centers, such as intensive care units


and operating rooms (i.e., the charges on patient bills can be assigned back to these revenue centers). Second


general service cost centers, such as laundry are essential for caring for patients, but do not directly accrue


charges. Finally, non-reimbursable cost centers, such as gift shops have costs and revenues that are unrelated


to patient care and therefore the Cost Reports exclude these costs when calculating the costs of treating


Medicare patients.        The Cost Reports reallocate general service costs to patient revenue producing cost


centers. We allocate a share of each cost center's charges to Medicare based on Medicare's share of charges


for the cost center. We sum Medicare costs across cost centers to obtain total Medicare costs. Medicare also


uses the Cost Reports to produce estimates of Medicare Costs, but follows a more complex methodology.


Following Medicare's methodology, but making some basic adjustments leads to a measure of Medicare Costs


that has a correlation of 0.9989 with the measure that we use. Given this very high level of correlation, we


only perform analyses using our preferred, more transparently produced measure.
                                                                                                    36

  33 We    calculate these based on Worksheet E of the Cost Reports.     Medicare reconciles reimbursements to hospitals based
upon submitted claims against hospital records of revenue from Cost Reports.          As a result, the information on traditional
fee-for-service Medicare reimbursements to hospitals as reported in Worksheet E of the Cost Reports should be very accurate.
  34 We    follow MedPAC's example. MedPAC describes their margin as: Overall Medicare margin covers acute inpatient, outpa-
tient, hospital-based home health and skilled nursing facility (including swing bed), and inpatient psychiatric and rehabilitation
services, plus graduate medical education.      We aggregate over inpatient and outpatient reimbursements for the 4 types of
subfacilities (Hospital, Psychiatric Facilities, Skilled Nursing Facilities, and Home Health Agencies), and any swing beds.
  35 For   some cost centers, Medicare patient days and overall patient days are reported instead of charges. In such instances,
we calculate Medicare's share using patient days.
  36 Specically,   we produce a version of Medicare costs that adds together the Cost Reports various headline cost estimates
(i.e., a single number for the costs of hospital inpatient care, a single number for the costs of hospital outpatient care, etc...).
We make a small number of alterations to these headline cost estimates to better accord with our framework. Specically, we
include costs that Medicare disallows, such as high physician salaries. These costs contribute to the cost of treating Medicare
patients, even if Medicare does not recognize them for accounting purposes. Furthermore, Medicare has a complex methodology




                                                                22
Limitations and robustness              This method of calculating margins has some limitations. First, we abstract


away from the distinction between non-Medicare patient costs and revenues and non-patient costs and


revenues. Non-patient costs are small on average, accounting for roughly 8 percent of total costs.
                                                                                                                    37 Second,

there is likely some measurement error in the cost allocation process.                   We believe that these limitations


primarily aect interpretation of the relative levels of and correlations between               Medicare Accounting Margin
and   Non-Medicare Accounting Margin.            By contrast, there are no obvious reasons that this measurement


error would introduce mechanical correlations elsewhere in our analyses.


     We note that the details of this process do not appear to substantively aect whether hospitals are


classied as having high or low margins on Medicare patients.                     As a robustness check, we calculated an


alternative measure of Medicare margin that has been used in a number of past studies and reports by


MedPAC. In particular, the alternative measure is a Medicare margin on inpatient care, and is calculated by


rst producing an estimate of the inpatient costs of treating Medicare patients by taking inpatient hospital


charges for traditional Medicare patients and multiplying them by Medicare's inpatient cost to charges


ratio.     In combination with allowed Medicare payments for these patients, one can produce an inpatient


Medicare margin for each hospital.           Figure A.1 illustrates that the two Medicare accounting margins are


highly correlated.




A.2.2 Estimating patient utility
It is computationally intractable to directly estimate            uh   for the 4,700 acute care and critical access hospitals


in the US. Therefore, we instead recover these xed eects by running a conditional logit excluding                         uh .   Let


sh   be the number of discharges to hospital h and               s
                                                                 ^h be   the hospital's predict number of discharges based


on the choice model. Then we can approximate the utility of hospital h by:                    uh = ln(sh /s
                                                                                                          ^h ).   We produce


an updated estimate of the utility of hospital h by inserting this estimate of               uh   into (1), re-estimating the


model, and recalculating what         ^h would
                                      s          be if   uh   is zero. Iterating this process leads to estimates of       uh     that


converge to a xed point. While critical access hospitals are included in the multinomial choice model, they


are not included in the paper's central analyses.

for accounting for the costs of graduate medical education, which involves disallowing these costs and then recalculating them
using a separate methodology. Because Medicare's calculations are designed to determine reimbursements for medical education,
rather than to estimate costs, we do not follow this methodology. Instead, our treatment is consistent with the fact that if
a hospital was not paying salaries for residents, it would have to hire other medical sta to provide the same patient care.
Economic theory suggests that these costs of training physicians or residents should be borne by those parties, rather than by
the hospitals.(Newhouse and Wilensky, 2001).
  37 The   main non-patient costs are: (i) miscellaneous, (ii) private physician oces, and (iii) research. According to the Cost
Reports, research costs at hospitals are small. Medical schools, rather than hospitals, incur most of the costs of research, and
receive a supermajority of research grant funding. A small number of hospitals in Massachusetts account for over one third of
research costs and research revenues that are received by hospitals. By contrast, seven universities (University of Pennsylvania,
Stanford, Johns Hopkins, University of Michigan, UPMC, and Yale) that collectively obtain over four times as much in NIH
funding own hospitals that collectively account for under ten percent of research costs that are received by hospitals.




                                                                  23
    Figure A.1: Inpatient     Medicare Accounting Margin         vs overall   Medicare Accounting Margin




Notes: The dots are a binned scatterplot based of ventiles of the independent variable. The red line and shaded

region are the least squares line and 95 percent condence interval of the relationship between the variables.

Analyses are weighted by hospital costs.




                                                         24
A.2.3 Technology adoption from the American Hospital Association
Our measure of technology adoption is based on the presence of a number of types of services in the American


Hospital Association data. In particular, we study the presence of 5 categories of service oerings: transplant


services, cardiology services, childbirth services, imaging services, and therapeutic radiology services. For


each service category, we examine the presence of a number of specic services. The specic services that


we consider for each service category are listed in Table A.1.     We studentize the binary variable for each


specic service, and then average over the specic services to create a service category measure of adoption.


We then average over the ve service categories to create an overall measure of adoption.



                               Table A.1: AHA technology adoption variables

                  Service Category Examples of Specic Services
                  births                 Neonatal intermediate care
                                         Neonatal intensive care
                                         Birthing room/LDR room/LDRP room
                                         Obstetrics care
                  cardiology             Cardiac intensive care
                                         Cardiac Rehabilitation
                                         Adult cardiac electrophysiology
                                         Adult cardiac surgery
                                         Adult diagnostic catheterization
                  diagnostic imaging     Positron emission tomography (PET)
                                         Computed-tomography (CT) scanner
                                         Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
                                         Positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT)
                                         Full-eld digital mammography
                                         Ultrasound
                  radiation therapy      Proton beam therapy
                                         Shaped beam Radiation System
                                         Image-guided radiation therapy
                                         Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT)
                  transplant             Lung transplant
                                         Bone Marrow transplant
                                         Tissue transplant
                                         Heart transplant
                                         Kidney transplant
                                         Liver transplant




A.3     Robustness checks by dependent variable


A.3.1 Potential patient mix and Accounting Margins
This Appendix presents additional details on the relationship between potential payer mix and       Medicare
Accounting Margin.    Figure A.2 shows the distribution of   Medicare Accounting Margin.     Consistent with




                                                      25
MedPAC and AHA reports,            Medicare Accounting Margin        is negative on average.      The mean of    Medicare
Accounting Margin       is -0.142 , the 10th percentile is -0.372, and the 90th percentile is 0.059.
                                                                                                          38 We also nd

substantial dispersion across hospitals: the standard deviation is 0.173.



                               Figure A.2: Histogram of      Medicare Accounting Margin




    Notes: Margins are weighted by hospital costs.




   Figure A.3 illustrates that in hospitals with higher values of         Medicare Accounting Margin, have a higher
Predicted Private Share and a lower Predicted Public Share ; Predicted Uninsured Share is relatively constant
across the deciles of    Medicare Accounting Margin.
   Table A.2 presents the relationship between predicated patient mix and three dierent margins.                          It


conrms that       Medicare Accounting Margin         is higher when there is a higher       Predicted Public Share     and


Predicted Uninsured Share.        It also illustrates that higher   Predicted Public Shar e    and   Predicted Uninsured
Share    lead to lower non-Medicare accounting margins and overall margins.




A.3.2 Potential patient mix and Hospital Compare
This section explores the relationship between potential payer mix and other measures from Hospital Com-


pare. Figure A.4 presents the relationship between           Predicted Private Share     and each of the three Hospital

 38 In   recent years, MedPAC calculates that Medicare accounting margins for hospitals average roughly -0.14. Our estimates
dier because MedPAC treats graduate medical expenses as a cost, whereas we do not. Furthermore, our sampling restrictions
dier from MedPAC's.




                                                             26
            Table A.2: Relationship between potential payer mix and Accounting Margins

                                   Panel A: Medicare Accounting Margin

                                                        (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
           P redicted N on - P rivate Share          0.697***                    0.656***
                                                     [0.0388]                    [0.0562]
           P redicted U ninsured Share                               0.775***                 0.481***
                                                                     [0.0521]                  [0.0734]
           P redicted P ublic Share                                  0.567***                 1.185***
                                                                     [0.0701]                  [0.155]
           HRR Fixed Eects                                                          Y             Y
           Observations                                2,255          2,255        2,255        2,255

                                 Panel B: non-Medicare Accounting Margin

                                                        (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
           P redicted N on - P rivate Share          -0.280***                   -0.442***
                                                     [0.0277]                    [0.0422]
           P redicted U ninsured Share                               -0.403***                -0.421***
                                                                     [0.0370]                  [0.0554]
           P redicted P ublic Share                                  -0.0730                  -0.506***
                                                                     [0.0499]                  [0.117]
           HRR Fixed Eects                                                          Y             Y
           Observations                                2,255          2,255        2,255        2,255

                                      Panel C: Total Accounting Margin

                                                        (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)
           P redicted N on - P rivate Share          -0.110***                   -0.263***
                                                     [0.0215]                    [0.0337]
           P redicted U ninsured Share                               -0.245***                -0.323***
                                                                     [0.0286]                  [0.0442]
           P redicted P ublic Share                                  0.118***                  -0.0822
                                                                     [0.0385]                  [0.0930]
           HRR Fixed Eects                                                          Y             Y

           Observations                                2,255          2,255        2,255        2,255

Notes: Unit of observation is the hospital. Observations are weighted by hospital costs. Standard errors are

presented in brackets. Signicance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.




                                                         27
    Figure A.3: Relationship between potential payer mix and deciles of                 Medicare Accounting Margin




    Notes:   M edicare Accounting M argins   is from the Cost Reports. Section 2.1 describes the construct of hospital-level

    market characteristics.




Compare sub-measures. There remains a strong and positive relationship between                      Predicted Private Share
and quality across these measures. Table A.3 presents corresponding regression results.




A.3.3 Potential patient mix and technology adoption
Figure A.5 presents the relationship between        Predicted Private Share and each of the ve technology adoption
sub-measures. There remains a strong an positive relationship between                Predicted Private Share       and quality


across these measures.




B     Additional Tables and Figures




                                                              28
    Figure A.4: Relationship between         Predicted Private Share      and Hospital Compare measures




Notes: The dots are a binned scatterplot based of ventiles of the independent variable. The red line and shaded

region are the least squares line and 95 percent condence interval of the relationship between the variables.

Analyses are weighted by hospital costs.




                                                         29
        Table A.3: Relationship between potential payer mix and Hospital Compare quality

                                        Panel A: Outcomes Composite

                                                        (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)
           P redicted N on - P rivate Share         -1.724***                      -2.705***
                                                      [0.247]                       [0.363]
           P redicted U ninsured Share                               -2.829***                 -2.783***
                                                                      [0.331]                   [0.473]
           P redicted P ublic Share                                    0.141                   -2.465**
                                                                      [0.447]                   [1.002]
           HRR Fixed Eects                                                             Y           Y
           Observations                               2,082            2,082         2,082       2,082

                                         Panel B: Process Composite

                                                        (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)
           P redicted N on - P rivate Share         -1.702***                      -3.284***
                                                      [0.240]                       [0.373]
           P redicted U ninsured Share                               -2.202***                 -3.276***
                                                                      [0.322]                   [0.489]
           P redicted P ublic Share                                  -0.856**                  -3.309***
                                                                      [0.435]                   [1.030]
           HRR Fixed Eects                                                             Y           Y
           Observations                               2,212            2,212         2,212       2,212

                                        Panel C: HCAHPS Composite

                                                        (1)             (2)           (3)         (4)
           P redicted N on - P rivate Share         -1.691***                      -2.637***
                                                      [0.242]                       [0.331]
           P redicted U ninsured Share                               -1.606***                 -2.197***
                                                                      [0.325]                   [0.432]
           P redicted P ublic Share                                  -1.835***                 -3.984***
                                                                      [0.438]                   [0.912]
           HRR Fixed Eects                                                             Y           Y

           Observations                               2,189            2,189         2,189       2,189

Notes: Unit of observation is the hospital. Observations are weighted by hospital costs. Standard errors are

presented in brackets. Signicance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.




                          Table A.4: Eect of sample restrictions on sample size
                                                                                Number of Hospitals

                Initial Sample of Hospital in Cost Reports                             6,227
                Restrict to:
                   49 states+DC (no MD)                                                6,161
                   General acute care hospitals                                        3,499
                   non-all inclusive rate providers                                    3,432
                   One observation per hospital                                        3,373
                   Has key variables                                                   3,112
                   GME+IME < 1 percent of Medicare allowed                             2,255




                                                         30
         Figure A.5: Relationship between        Predicted Private Share       and technology adoption




Notes: The dots are a binned scatterplot based of ventiles of the independent variable. The red line and shaded

region are the least squares line and 95 percent condence interval of the relationship between the variables.

Analyses are weighted by hospital costs.




                            Table A.5: Dependent variable summary statistics


  Variable                                                                Standard Non-missing
                                                                     Mean Deviation Observations
  Medicare Accounting Margin                                          -0.142        0.173             2,255
  Non-Medicare Accounting Margin                                      0.121         0.118             2,255
  AHA technology adoption (overall)                                   0.000           1               1,808
  Hospital Utility                                                    0.313         1.64              2,255
  Hospital Compare Composite                                          0.000           1               2,218
  Time in ED for patients eventually admitted                          282          67.7              2,068
  Share cardiologists from top Med schools                            0.128         0.179             1,535
  Chandra et al. (2016) AMI survival per real resources               0.887         0.025             1,744



  Observations                                                        2,255

Notes: Means and standard deviations are weighted by each hospital's costs.




                                                         31
             Table A.6: Relationship between potential payer mix and actual patient mix

                                                           (1)                          (2)

                                                 Actual Public Share        Actual Uninsured Share
            P redicted P ublic Share                    0.857***                      0.0105
                                                        [0.0315]                     [0.00931]
            P redicted U ninsured Share                -0.332***                     0.192***
                                                        [0.0424]                      [0.0125]
            Observations                                  2,255                        2,255

Notes: Unit of observation is the hospital. Observations are weighted by hospital costs. Standard errors are

presented in brackets. Signicance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.




    Figure A.6: Relationship Between         Medicare Accounting Margin        and Other Market Features
                     (Robustness to Excluding Hospitals Acquired in Past Decade)




Notes: The dots are a binned scatterplot based of ventiles of the independent variable. The red line and shaded

region are the least squares line and 95 percent condence interval of the relationship between the variables.

Analyses are weighted by costs.




                                                         32
                 Figure A.7: Relationship between        Predicted Private Share      and quality
                     (Robustness to Excluding Hospitals Acquired in Past Decade)




Notes: The dots are a binned scatterplot based of ventiles of the independent variable. The red line and shaded

region are the least squares line and 95 percent condence interval of the relationship between the variables.

Analyses are weighted by hospital costs.




          Table A.7: Relationship between potential payer mix and Catholic hospital status

                                                           (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)

              P redicted N on - P rivate Share          -0.307***                   -0.109
                                                        [0.0909]                    [0.139]
              P redicted U ninsured Share                               -0.159                 -0.282
                                                                       [0.122]                 [0.182]
              P redicted P ublic Share                               -0.555***                 0.418
                                                                       [0.164]                 [0.383]
              HRR Fixed Eects                                                         Y          Y

              Observations                                2,218         2,218       2,218      2,218

Notes: Unit of observation is the hospital. Observations are weighted by hospital costs. Standard errors are

presented in brackets. Signicance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.




                                                         33
                                                                     Table A.8: Main regression table
                                                  (Robustness to include hospitals with graduate medical education)

                    (1)           (2)             (3)         (4)            (5)           (6)              (7)         (8)           (9)         (10)             (11)        (12)

     Predicted               AHA technology adoption                                       Hospital Utility                                      Hospital Compare
     Share:                           (Overall)                                                                                                     (Composite)

     Non-        -0.865***                       -0.232                  -5.959***                    -6.318***                   -2.520***                   -3.998***
     Private      [0.242]                        [0.380]                  [0.338]                          [0.369]                  [0.214]                       [0.298]
     Public                    -1.845***                   -3.524***                   -6.293***                     -10.34***                 -3.999***                    -3.802***
                                [0.335]                     [0.542]                      [0.472]                      [0.516]                   [0.296]                      [0.426]
     Uninsured                   0.467                     8.841***                    -5.496***                     4.846***                    -0.469                     -4.544***
                                [0.397]                     [1.142]                      [0.568]                      [1.085]                   [0.357]                      [0.897]
     HRR FEs                                       X           X                                             X          X                                           X           X




34
     N                                   2,538                                                     3,069                                                  3,032

     Predicted                      Time in ED                                         Share of Cardiologists                                      AMI Survival
     Share:               (Patients eventually admitted)                             from top medical schools                                    Per Real Resource

     Non-        197.0***                    171.4***                    -0.312***                     -0.139*                    -0.0800***                 -0.0653***
     Private      [21.41]                        [24.96]                  [0.0440]                     [0.0655]                    [0.00589]                  [0.00799]
     Public                    211.7***                      24.83                     -0.388***                     -0.366***                 -0.0598***                   -0.0730***
                                [29.78]                     [35.19]                     [0.0616]                     [0.0939]                  [0.00819]                     [0.0114]
     Uninsured                 176.4***                    585.3***                    -0.209***                     0.480**                   -0.108***                     -0.0434*
                                [35.97]                     [74.71]                     [0.0731]                      [0.195]                  [0.00983]                     [0.0244]
     HRR FEs                                       X           X                                             X          X                                           X           X
     N                                   2,860                                                     2,302                                                  2,522

                             Notes: Unit of observation is the hospital. Observations are weighted by hospital costs. Standard errors are

                             presented in brackets. Signicance levels: * 0.10 ** 0.05 *** 0.01.
                              Figure A.8: Density of   Predicted Private Share




Notes: Densities are weighted by hospital costs.




                                                       35
