                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             POLLUTION AND LABOR MARKET SEARCH EXTERNALITIES
                         OVER THE BUSINESS CYCLE

                                         John Gibson
                                         Garth Heutel

                                     Working Paper 27445
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27445


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




Thanks to Yin Germaschewski, Marc Hafstead, Jay Harvoth, Milton Marquis, and seminar
participants at the ASSA, Econometric Society, AERE, Midwest Macro, and SEA conferences
for comments, and to Ken Castellanos and Wenwen Li for valuable research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by John Gibson and Garth Heutel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Pollution and Labor Market Search Externalities Over the Business Cycle
John Gibson and Garth Heutel
NBER Working Paper No. 27445
June 2020
JEL No. E24,E32,Q58

                                          ABSTRACT

We study the relationship between unemployment, environmental policy, and business cycles.
We develop a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium real business cycle model that includes
both a pollution externality and congestion externalities from labor market search frictions, which
generate unemployment. We consider two policies to address the market failures: an emissions
tax and a tax or subsidy on job creation. With both policies present, the efficient outcome can be
achieved. When one policy is constrained or absent, we solve for the second best. The absence
of a vacancy policy to address the congestion externalities substantially affects the value of the
emissions tax, both in steady state and over the business cycle.


John Gibson
COBA Office 226
University of Texas at El Paso
El Paso, TX 79902
USA
jdgibson@utep.edu

Garth Heutel
436 Andrew Young School
Department of Economics
Georgia State University
PO Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
gheutel@gsu.edu
1     Introduction

The effects of environmental policy on unemployment are at the center of the public debate
on environmental policy ­ many argue that these policies are "job-killing regulations." Since
the Great Recession, the importance of business cycles has come to the forefront, highlighting
the impact of cycles on unemployment and the environment. Standard neoclassical economic
theory dictates that the inefficiencies caused by externalities can be eliminated through
Pigouvian pricing, e.g. pollution taxes. Search-and-matching theories of unemployment
involve externalities too, where both workers looking for jobs and employers looking to hire
create congestion in the labor market. The interaction between multiple market failures ­
the congestion externalities from labor market search and the production externalities from
pollution ­ can have important policy implications. The efficient Pigouvian response to a
negative pollution externality may change when labor market congestion externalities are
present. Furthermore, the efficient level of these policies may vary over the business cycle.
    The purpose of this paper is to study the efficiency effects of policy in an economy with
unemployment, pollution, and business cycles. We begin with an analytical model of policy
in the presence of pollution externalities and labor market search frictions. We then develop
a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model where fluctuations are driven by
productivity shocks, as in the real business cycle (RBC) model. We add two features to the
standard RBC model: a pollution externality and labor market search frictions that create
unemployment. We allow for two policy options: an emissions tax and a tax or subsidy
on job vacancy creation. We calibrate the model to the U.S. economy and carbon dioxide
emissions and numerically solve it. We simulate both the first-best policy responses, where
the government dynamically optimizes both policy tools, and second-best policies, where one
policy is constrained.
    A growing literature incorporates environmental policy in RBC models by modeling pol-



                                              2
lution as a byproduct of production that negatively affects productivity.1 While labor is
included as an input in most of these models, none include labor market search frictions
or involuntary unemployment. A second literature incorporates involuntary unemployment
via Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides (DMP) labor market search frictions into RBC models.2
3
    This literature does not consider pollution or pollution policy. A third literature studies
the unemployment effects of environmental policy using DMP labor market search frictions,
though without RBC fluctuations.4 Our model combines all three of these literatures. Our
RBC model merges the pollution-generating production process of Heutel (2012) with the
DMP search model of Atolia et al. (2018), thus adding cyclical fluctuations to a pollution
and labor market search model like Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline (2019).
        Fewer papers consider the policy implications of the externalities generated by the DMP
search model. Shi and Wen (1999) and Lu (2019) both consider various policies in addressing
these externalities, including the minimum wage, unemployment insurance, and vacancy
subsidies. In our paper, we focus on vacancy taxes or subsidies. Shi and Wen (1999) find that
this is the most efficient policy, and we also find that this policy can bring about the first best.
We consider dynamically-optimal policies, where the policies can vary with the business cycle;
this is modeled in neither Shi and Wen (1999) nor Lu (2019).5 An enormous literature studies
optimal environmental policy, and some of that literature considers the interactions between
pollution externalities and other market failures. For example, Jaffe et al. (2005) model the
    1
     For example, Fischer and Springborn (2011), Heutel (2012), Annicchiarico and Di Dio (2015), and Dissou
and Karnizova (2016). See Fischer and Heutel (2013) for a literature review.
   2
     This literature dates back to Andolfatto (1996) and Merz (1995), though we follow the more recent
works of Atolia et al. (2018) and Atolia et al. (2019) and adapt a calibration strategy similar to Hagedorn
and Manovskii (2008).
   3
     For a discussion of the basic DMP search and matching model, see Diamond (1982), Pissarides et al.
(1985), Mortensen and Pissarides (1994), and Pissarides (2000). Rogerson et al. (2005) provides a literature
review.
   4
     Hafstead and Williams (2018) and Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline (2019) do so in analytical general
equilibrium models, and Hafstead et al. (2018) does so in a computable general equilibrium model.
   5
     Blanchard and Gal´ i (2010) consider a New Keynesian DMP model that includes monetary policy tools,
which we do not include.




                                                     3
interaction between pollution externalities and innovation externalities, and Kennedy (1994)
models the interaction between pollution externalities and market power. We know of no
other paper that considers the policy implications of the interaction between a pollution
externality and congestion externalities arising from labor market search frictions.6
      Our analytical model provides intuitions on the relationship between these multiple mar-
ket failures and efficient Pigouvian pricing, which aids the interpretation of the simulation
results from our numerical model. The pollution externality is a standard negative ex-
ternality, internalized by a Pigouvian tax on the source of the externality (in the model,
production). Labor search creates two offsetting congestion externalities. Each unemployed
worker searching for employment reduces the probability of a match for all other unemployed
workers but increases the probability of a match for all hiring firms. Each firm posting a
job vacancy reduces the probability of a match for all other hiring firms but increases the
probability of a match for all unemployed workers. Neither the worker nor the firm con-
siders its impact on others' matching probabilities. The congestion externality caused by
the unemployed worker leads to an inefficiently low level of employment, and the congestion
externality caused by the hiring firm leads to an inefficiently high level of employment.
      These two congestion externalities perfectly offset each other under a certain condition,
the well-known "Hosios condition" (Hosios, 1990). If this condition is not met, then the
inefficiency from the congestion externalities can be eliminated through a Pigouvian price
on hiring. The efficient price instrument is either a subsidy to hiring or a tax on hiring,
depending on whether equilibrium employment is inefficiently high or inefficiently low. We
present closed-form expressions for the pair of policy instruments (production tax and hiring
tax or subsidy) that induces efficiency. We also demonstrate the interaction between the
two sets of externalities and the two policy instruments. For example, the magnitude of
  6
     Both Hafstead and Williams (2018) and Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline (2019) model DMP search
frictions and environmental policy, but neither solves for optimal policy `
                                                                          a la Pigou or Ramsey.




                                                4
the pollution externality affects the level of the hiring tax or subsidy (which targets the
congestion externalities).
   Our calibrated DSGE model finds that the unregulated decentralized equilibrium has
higher pollution and higher employment than the efficient outcome. Employment is higher
in the decentralized equilibrium because the calibrated parameters in the wage-setting mech-
anism favor firms, resulting in a greater congestion externality from the firms than from the
workers. Unemployment in the decentralized equilibrium is too low relative to the efficient
outcome, and thus a tax on vacancy creation (rather than a subsidy to it) increases efficiency.
This direction of the inefficiency (too little unemployment rather than too much) depends
on the values of the two parameters crucial to the Hosios condition ­ the wage bargaining
parameter and the matching function elasticity ­ which we demonstrate in sensitivity anal-
ysis. Unemployment is too low only on grounds of efficiency, not equity, and we show that
moving to the efficient outcome disproportionately burdens workers relative to firms.
   When both policy instruments ­ a vacancy tax and an emissions tax ­ are present, the
efficient outcome can be achieved. When one of the taxes is unavailable, we solve for the
second-best value of the remaining tax, which must be adjusted to "pick up the slack" and
address both sets of externalities. Most importantly, when the vacancy tax is unavailable,
the second-best level of the emissions tax is 33 times greater than its first-best value at
steady state. Furthermore, the cyclical properties of the two taxes differ, with the second-
best emissions tax only half as volatile as the first-best emissions tax. Given that vacancy
taxes are rarely if ever implemented, these results point to a potentially enormous policy
implication for the design of emissions taxes.
   The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we present a simple analytical model in
which we do not consider business cycles but show through analysis of the steady-state
equilibrium the main intuitive findings. Then in Section 3 we present the full DSGE model.
In Section 4 we provide a discussion of our calibration strategy. In Section 5 we present our


                                                 5
results, and in Section 6 we conclude.



2         Analytical Model

In this section, we present steady-state results and policy responses for the canonical DMP
labor search model that has been to expanded to include a pollution externality.7 We include
two possible policy instruments: a hiring tax or subsidy to internalize the search congestion
externalities and a production tax or subsidy to internalize the pollution externality. In
this section, we briefly describe the results and the intuitions; details and derivations are
relegated to the appendix section A.
        The economy consists of a continuum of homogeneous firms and a continuum of homo-
geneous workers. Time is continuous, and the size of the labor force is fixed at L. The
unemployment rate, or the fraction of workers who are unemployed, is u. The vacancy rate,
or the ratio of job vacancy postings to the total labor force, is v . Define labor market tight-
ness   v/u. The number of job matches m in a time period is a function of labor market
tightness. The vacancy-filling rate, or the probability of a given job vacancy being filled,
is defined as m/v = q (). Let q ()  0, so that a higher labor market tightness (higher
ratio of job vacancies to unemployed workers) leads to a lower probability of a vacancy be-
ing filled. Let the elasticity of q be between -1 and 0 and its absolute value be  () (i.e.
 ()  - qq()
          ()
             ). The value of  () is thus the negative of the elasticity of the vacancy-filling
rate with respect to labor market tightness. The job-finding rate, or the probability of a
given unemployed worker finding a job is m/u = f () = q (), which is increasing in , so
that a higher labor market tightness leads to a higher probability of a worker finding a job.
All workers and firms treat the labor market tightness variable  as exogenous.
        Each period an exogenous fraction of jobs, s, is destroyed (Shimer, 2005). In a given
    7
    Specifically, we combine a pollution externality with the basic model of sections 1.1-1.5 of Pissarides
(2000), the efficiency analysis of section 8.1 and the introduction of policy instruments in section 9.1-9.3.


                                                     6
small time interval t, the number of workers who enter unemployment is s(1 - u)Lt, and
the number of workers who leave unemployment is uq ()Lt. Thus the change in the
                      = s(1 - u) - q ()u, and the steady-state unemployment rate is
unemployment rate is u

                                                           s
                                                  u=            .                                          (1)
                                                       s + q ()

       The value of a job's output is p(1 - d), where p is the baseline exogenous productivity
level, and 1 - d represents a pollution externality. All workers and firms treat the externality
as exogenous. The hiring cost is p(1 - d)c, where c is also exogenous. The discount rate is
r, the workers' bargaining power (or their share of the match surplus) is b, and the return
to unemployment (or the value of leisure) is z .8
       There are two policy variables. First, firms receive a one-time hiring subsidy when a
match is created. The value of the subsidy is proportional to net productivity and equals
Hp(1 - d), where H is the policy variable. Second, firms receive an employment subsidy a
for each filled job. The distinction is that the hiring subsidy H is a one-time payment, while
the employment subsidy a occurs each period the match is operational. Both the hiring and
employment subsidies may be negative, in which case they are a tax rather than a subsidy.
       In the appendix, we show how in the steady state, the model's equilibrium is characterized
by three equations (equations 1, A.1, and A.2). The core endogenous variables are the wage
w, the unemployment rate u, and labor market tightness . The solution depends on the
values of the policy parameters H and a. To get an equation that will be more useful for
policy analysis, substitute the wage from equation A.2 into equation A.1 to get

                                      s + r + bq ()
           (p(1 - d) - z )(1 - b) -                 pc(1 - d) + (1 - b)(r + s)pH (1 - d) + (1 - b)a = 0.   (2)
                                            q ()



   8
    As in Pissarides (2000), we assume that productivity (here p(1 - d)) is greater than or equal to the
return to unemployment z , which ensures that the wage is greater than or equal to z , ensuring that workers
stay in their jobs.



                                                          7
   Finally, consider the efficient allocation in this model, which in general will not coincide
with the decentralized equilibrium because of the pollution and congestion externalities. The
social planner maximizes a social welfare function that includes the value of output produced
by the employed, the leisure value of the unemployed, and the cost of job search. Unlike
the workers or the firms, the social planner recognizes that the pollution externality d is not
exogenous but rather a function of total production. In particular, it is a function of the
unemployment rate, d(u), where d (u) < 0, indicating that higher employment (i.e. lower
unemployment) leads to higher damages d. Also, unlike the workers or firms, the social
planner recognizes the congestion externalities from labor search by treating labor market
tightness  as endogenous rather than fixed.
   The appendix shows that the solution to the planner's problem can be expressed as:

                                                                 s + r +  ()q ()
 (p(1 - d(u)) - z )(1 -  ()) + d (u)p((1 - u) + cu)(1 -  ()) -                   pc(1 - d(u)) = 0 (3)
                                                                        q ()


Equation 3 is the key equation describing the efficient levels of employment and vacancies.
   We can now compare equation 2, which describes the decentralized equilibrium, to equa-
tion 3, which describes the efficient allocation. Begin by making two simplifying assumptions.
First, assume that d (u) = 0, which is to say that the pollution "externality" d is in fact not
an externality but merely an exogenous shift in productivity. Second, assume that  () = b,
i.e. that the absolute value of the elasticity of the matching function equals the worker's
bargaining power. This is the Hosios condition (Hosios, 1990). When both assumptions
hold, equation 2 coincides with equation 3 without any policy intervention (i.e. the hiring
and employment subsidies, H and a, are both zero). The unregulated equilibrium is efficient.
   The first assumption amounts to eliminating the pollution externality. The second as-
sumption (the Hosios condition) amounts to setting the parameters such that the two op-
posing congestion externalities exactly offset each other. The intuition is explored in Hosios
(1990) and Pissarides (2000, p. 185-187). Roughly, when the surplus is divided according to


                                                 8
b =  (), each side (workers and firms) is rewarded in accordance with its social contribution.
       When either of these two assumptions is not met, then the unregulated equilibrium is
not efficient. But, with policy instruments H and a, the equilibrium can be made efficient.
Dropping the two assumptions from the previous paragraphs, the equilibrium outcome is
identical to the efficient outcome under the following two policy values:

                                                   p(1 - d(u))(1 + c) - z
                            Hef f = (b -  ())                                                           (4)
                                                  (1 - b)(r + s)p(1 - d(u))

                                                                 1 -  ()
                               aef f = d (u)p((1 - u) + cu)                                             (5)
                                                                   1-b

These two equations describe the values of the policy variables that induce the efficient
levels of employment and vacancies. Both of them are Pigouvian prices, internalizing the
externalities. It is clearest to see this in equation 5, where the employment subsidy is
proportional to the marginal pollution externality d (u). In fact, since d (u) < 0, the efficient
employment subsidy aef f is negative, i.e. it is an employment tax. This Pigouvian tax
internalizes the negative externality from each additional employed worker.9
       The Pigouvian nature of the efficient hiring subsidy Hef f is also evident. The efficient
hiring subsidy has the same sign as b -  ().10 If this expression is positive, then worker
bargaining power is higher than the matching function elasticity, which leads to inefficiently
high unemployment in the unregulated equilibrium. Thus, a hiring subsidy (Hef f > 0)
remedies the inefficiency. If b -  () is negative, so that the workers' bargaining power is
lower than the matching function elasticity, then unemployment is inefficiently low in the
unregulated equilibrium. Thus, a hiring tax (Hef f < 0) remedies the inefficiency.
       Equations 4 and 5 also demonstrate the interaction between the two sets of externalities
   9
     This analysis is similar to that done by Mortensen and Pissarides (2001) when solving for policy com-
binations that induce the first best; see their equations 30 and 31 and tables 2 and 3. But, they impose the
Hosios condition and do not include a pollution externality, and so they are not addressing the same sources
of market failure as we are.
  10
     This relies on the assumption stated earlier that p(1 - d)  z .


                                                     9
and the two policies. The magnitude of the efficient hiring subsidy Hef f depends on the
level of the production externality d(u). Specifically, the derivative of Hef f with respect to
d(u) is the opposite sign as b -  ().11 Suppose b -  () > 0, implying that equilibrium
unemployment is too high and the efficient hiring policy is a subsidy (Hef f > 0). All else
equal, a higher level of the externality d(u) implies a lower magnitude of the hiring subsidy
        Hef f
(i.e.   d(u)
                < 0). This is intuitive ­ the higher externality means there is less justification for
subsidizing hiring (which increases the externality).
                                                                     1- ()
       From equation 5, the efficient employment tax is scaled by     1-b
                                                                           .   When b -  () > 0, this
fraction is greater than one. The inequality b -  () > 0 implies that the equilibrium level of
unemployment is too high, and the efficient hiring policy Hef f is a subsidy. Thus, when hiring
is subsidized, the efficient employment tax aef f is greater than marginal external damages.
The subsidy to hiring, which addresses the search congestion externality, exacerbates the
pollution externality. So, the employment tax, which addresses the pollution externality,
must increase to compensate.
       The analytical model provides intuition about the relationship between the two sets
of externalities and the policy responses.12 But it does so through several simplifying as-
sumptions, like excluding capital, not explicitly modeling pollution or abatement, and not
modeling productivity shocks. Furthermore, our analysis of this model concerns only the
steady state and not any dynamic features. To address these other issues, we turn next
to a DSGE model. The DSGE model will not provide closed-form analytical solutions like
equations 4 and 5, so instead we will calibrate and numerically simulate the model.
  11 Hef f         -z (b- ())
     d(u)   = (1-b)( r +s)p(1-d(u))2
  12
     In appendix section A, we discuss how this model compares to other analytical models from the recent
literature.




                                                    10
3     Numerical Model

In this section, we build a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model that incor-
porates both labor search frictions and a production process that generates harmful emissions
into a real business cycle (RBC) model. Just as in the analytical model presented above, the
search frictions and emissions result in a decentralized equilibrium with both congestion and
pollution externalities. In the next two subsections, we detail the core elements of our model:
the labor market and the production process. Then, in the following three subsections, we
characterize the equilibrium behavior across the following three model environments: (i) the
decentralized competitive equilibrium, (ii) the social planner's problem, and (iii) the Ramsey
optimal dynamic equilibrium. We compare all model specifications to see how inefficiencies
in the labor market impact model variables, with a specific focus on the level and cyclicality
of the policy response.


3.1    Labor Market

Time is discrete, and the economy is populated by a representative household that con-
tains employed and unemployed agents. Employed agents supply labor inelastically to the
representative firm, while unemployed agents search for work. While our analytical model
differs from our DSGE model in terms of timing, household structure, and the presence of a
representative firm, many elements of the labor market are very similar across both models.
The number of new employment matches mt formed in period t is given by:


                                                      1-2
                                   mt = 1 (1 - nt )2 vt                                    (6)

where vt and 1 - nt denote vacancies and unemployment in time t, respectively. Given the
matching function in equation 6, labor market tightness, t , the vacancy-filling rate, qt , and
the job-finding rate, ft , can be defined as in the analytical model. We also retain exogenous

                                              11
separations s and the evolution of employment is:


                                    nt+1 = (1 - s)nt + mt                                   (7)



3.2    Production and Pollution

The representative firm produces potential output using the following production technology:


                                                 1-
                                        yt = t kt nt                                        (8)


where kt and nt denote aggregate capital and employment, which are rented or hired from
households, and t is an exogenous total factor productivity shock, which follows:


                             ln t+1 =  ln t +       t+1 ,    N (0,  )                       (9)


The total output produced in a given period, Yt , depends positively on the level of potential
output, yt , and negatively on the stock of pollution present at the end of the period, xt+1 ,


                                    Yt = [1 - d(xt+1 )] · yt                               (10)


where d(·) is a monotonically increasing damage function with values between 0 and 1 that
measures the output loss from pollution. Producing output generates emissions, et :


                                     et = (1 - µt ) · h(Yt )                               (11)




                                               12
where h(·) determines the relationship between output and unabated emissions, and µt is
the fraction of emissions that are abated. Abating the fraction µt costs zt units of output:


                                             zt = g (µt ) · Yt                                       (12)


where g (·) relates µt to the fraction of output spent on abatement. Unabated emissions feeds
back on output through its effect on the stock of pollution xt , which evolves according to


                                        xt+1 = xt + et + erow
                                                          t                                          (13)


where  is pollution's decay rate and erow
                                      t   represents emissions from the rest of the world.


3.3     Decentralized Problem

In this subsection, we specify the problems faced by the representative household and firm
and characterize the decentralized competitive equilibrium. We allow for two policy variables:
(i) an emissions tax, et , paid by the firm on each unit of current emissions and (ii) a tax
on vacancy creation, vt , paid by the firm as a fraction of their total vacancy positing costs
vt G. Either of these taxes could be negative, in which case they would be a subsidy. These
two policies are analogous to the two policies introduced in the analytical model and they
are intended to address the pollution and congestion externalities, respectively.13 We refer
to the case with et = vt = 0 t as the unregulated equilibrium.


3.3.1    Household

The representative household chooses current consumption and next period's capital in order
to maximize its present discounted value of expected lifetime utility, treating the wage, wt ,
  13
    The tax on vacancy creation is analogous to the hiring tax H , while the emissions tax is analogous to
the employment tax a.


                                                    13
rental rate on capital, rt , and the job-finding rate, ft as exogenous.


                V (kt , nt ) = max [ln ct - nt + E {V (kt+1 , nt+1 )}]
                               ct ,kt+1

                  s.t.

                         ct + kt+1 - (1 -  )kt  rt kt + wt nt + et et + vt vt G + t      (14)

                         nt+1 = (1 - s)nt + ft (1 - nt )                                 (15)


 denotes the subjective discount factor and  denotes disutility from work. Equation 14 is
the household's budget constraint. The left-hand side denotes expenditures on consumption
and capital investment, while the right-hand side denotes the sources of income. Equation
15 is the evolution of employment from the perspective of the household and it reflects the
fact that the household does not internalize how their search activity impacts the job-finding
rate, ft . The first-order and envelop conditions can be manipulated to yield:

                                          1                        1
                               Et             [rt+1 + 1 -  ]   =                         (16)
                                       ct+1                        ct
                                       wt
                               Vnt   =     -  + (1 - s - ft )Et {Vnt+1 }                 (17)
                                        ct

3.3.2   Firm

The representative firm maximizes the present discount value of expected lifetime profits,
treating factor and output prices and the TFP shock as exogenous. The firm also faces the
exogenous policy variablies et and vt . The firm's profit function is


             t = (1 - g (µt )) Yt - et (1 - µt )h(Yt ) - rt kt - wt nt - (1 + vt )vt G   (18)

The first term on the right-hand side of equation 18 is the firm's output net of abatement
expenditure, and the second term is the firm's tax bill on unabated emissions. The re-


                                                      14
maining three terms are the firm's capital rental bill, wage bill, and tax-inclusive vacancy
expenditures.
       The firm's problem can be written as the following dynamic program.

                                                                  c
                            J (nt , t ) = max t + E                 J (nt+1 ; t+1 )
                                         kt ,µt ,vt               c
                              s.t.

                              nt+1 = (1 - s)nt + qt vt                                                      (19)

                              and equations 8 through 12 and 18 from above


Though there is just one representative firm, we model pollution's effect on output as an
externality by assuming that the firm treats xt as exogenous. The firm chooses how much
capital to rent, what fraction of emissions to abate, and how many vacancies to post, taking
the wage, wt , rental rate, rt , and vacancy-filling rate, qt , as exogenous.14 Equation 19 is
the evolution of labor from the perspective of the firm, and shows that the firm does not
internalize how their choices affect the vacancy-filling rate qt .
       The firm's problem yields the following important equations:

                                                                   -1
                                                             kt
  rt = [1 - g (µt ) - et (1 - µt )h (Yt )] (1 - d(xt+1 ))t                                                   (20)
                                                             nt

  et h(Yt ) = g (µt )Yt                                                                                      (21)
             ct
  qt Et         Jn        = (1 + vt )G                                                                       (22)
            ct+1 t+1
                                                                           
                                                                      kt                          ct
  Jnt = [1 - g (µt ) - et (1 - µt )h (Yt )] (1 - d(xt+1 ))(1 - )t             - wt + (1 - s)Et       Jn      (23)
                                                                      nt                         ct+1 t+1


 where equation 20 states that the rental rate on capital equals the marginal product of
capital less the costs imposed by the need for additional abatement or through the tax on
unabated emissions. Similarly, equations 21 and 22 are marginal conditions on abatement
  14                                                                                      c
    The firm discounts future periods using the stochastic discount factor, E             c   . As such, the firm
discounts future values in a way that is consistent with household preferences.


                                                        15
expenditures and vacancy creation respectively, while equation 23 is the marginal value of
an additional worker to the firm.


3.3.3       Wage Bargaining

Wages are set through repeated Nash bargaining over the marginal surplus generated by a
match. The solution to this problem is the following surplus sharing rule:

                                                    1
                                                b     Jn = (1 - b)Vnt                                        (24)
                                                    ct t

 where b is workers' bargaining power.15 Combining equations 17 and 22-24 yields:

                                                                             
                                                                        kt
   wt = b [1 - g (µt ) - et (1 - µt )h (Yt )] (1 - d(xt+1 ))(1 - )t             + t (1 + vt )G + (1 - b)ct   (25)
                                                                        nt


 where the first term in parentheses is the marginal product of a new worker less the costs
imposed by additional abatement or the emissions tax, and the second term is the asset
value of an employment match reflecting the vacancy costs saved by having an additional
employed worker. The last term reflects the worker's disutility from work express in goods.
       The decentralized equilibrium is fully characterized by the following set of equations: 10,
13, 16, 19-22, 25, the definitions of qt and t , and the goods market clearing condition:


                                   ct + kt+1 - (1 -  )kt + vt G = (1 - g (µt ))Yt                            (26)


These equations determine the 11 core endogenous variables of our model: ct , kt , nt , Yt , vt ,
q t ,  t , rt , w t , xt , µ t .
  15
     To ensure that the terms from the household's and firm's problems are measured in consistent units
(utils), we weight Jn by the marginal utility of consumption, 1
                                                              c.




                                                          16
3.4       Planner's Problem

Due to the presence of the pollution and congestion externalities, the solution to the decen-
tralized problem presented above will not in general coincide with the efficient solution of
the planner's problem where all externalities have been internalized.16 Comparisons of the
unregulated decentralized equilibrium and the planner's allocation highlight the inefficiencies
arising from both externalities.
       The social planner chooses consumption, abatement, employment, and vacancies to max-
imize the discounted present value of household utility, internalizing all externalities. For
example, the planner's problem recognizes how emissions from production affects future out-
put, and how vacancies affect the number of job matches. See appendix section B for the
equations describing the planner's problem.


3.5       Ramsey Efficient Dynamic Tax Problem

In section 3.3, we treat the emissions tax et and the vacancy creation tax vt as exogenous.
However, we are interested in how the government could use these taxes to correct the market
failures and reach the efficient allocation. To this end, we specify the government's problem
as the Ramsey efficient dynamic tax problem. This problem is identical to the decentralized
equilibrium described in section 3.3, but with the additional choice over et and vt , subject
to all of the constraints from the firm's and the household's optimization problems. Details
of this optimization problem are in appendix section C.
       If the government can choose both taxes, then it can correct both market failures and
reach the efficient allocation from the planner's problem (as we will show in the simulations
below). By solving this problem, we see the level and dynamics of the emissions tax and
the vacancy creation tax needed to internalize both externalities. We refer to the taxes
  16
    In the main paper, we only consider efficiency as our optimization criteria. However, in the appendix
we present results highlighting the equity implications across policies.


                                                   17
recovered this way as the "first-best" taxes. However, we are also interested in cases where
one tax is fixed, while the other tax is optimized. Taxes recovered this way are referred to as
"second-best" taxes. That is, the second-best emissions tax is found when the government
sets {et }t=0 to maximize welfare given that vt is fixed at some value (perhaps 0), and

vice-versa for the second-best vacancy creation tax.



4       Calibration

We calibrate our decentralized model to replicate key features of the U.S. economy using
both data and values reported in the existing literature. Each specification of our model is
solved using standard linearization techniques17 and as we move across model specifications,
say from the decentralized problem to the planner's problem, we keep all parameter values
fixed at their calibrated levels. The next several subsections describe our calibration strategy;
more details are in appendix section D. The calibrated parameter values and their sources
are summarized in Table 1.


4.1       RBC Parameters

We set our model's period length to one quarter, and we follow the RBC literature and set
the agent's subjective quarterly discount factor,  , equal to 0.983, matching the real interest
rate from U.S. data. Also following convention, we set the quarterly depreciation rate of
private capital,  , to 0.025, thereby targeting an annual depreciation rate of approximately
10 percent. We set capital's share of income, , equal to 0.36, following the RBC literature.
The persistence in the productivity shock process,  , and the standard deviation of the
innovation in the shock process,  are set to 0.933 and 0.015, respectively. These values
were set so that our model generates a series for average labor productivity (output per
 17
      Christiano (2002) discusses the linear methods used to approximate our model.


                                                    18
worker) that matches the first-order autocorrelation and volatility of the series observed in
the quarterly data (0.70 and 2.00 respectively). Lastly, the policy variables, e and v are
both set to 0 in the baseline decentralized economy.


4.2       Environmental Parameters

The pollution stock decay rate  is calibrated based on the estimated half-life of atmospheric
carbon dioxide. The Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC, Working Group 1, provides a
calculation that about 50% of a pulse of anthropogenic CO2 leaves the atmosphere after 50
years.18 Given our quarterly time scale, this implies a decay rate  = 0.9965.19 Carbon
emissions from the rest of the world (erow
                                       t ) are assumed to be exogenous and constant. Since

the United States emits about one-sixth of global carbon dioxide,20 we set erow
                                                                            t   = erow to
equal five times the steady-state value of domestic emissions et .
                                                                                    1-
       The relationship between baseline pollution and output is given by h(yt ) = yt  , where
1 -  is the short-run elasticity of emissions with respect to output. In appendix section
D.1, we describe a calibration strategy for this elasticity. We collect monthly data and run
a simple set of regressions of the log of emissions on the log of output. We find a range
of point estimates from about 0.4 to 0.9 (see Table D.1), and we use a value of 0.6 in the
simulations. This is the value reported for the short-run (cyclical) greenhouse gas emissions
elasticity with respect to output in the United States, from Cohen et al. (2018).21
  18
      See Box 6.1 in Ciais et al. (2014).
  19
      This exponential decay rate specification simplifies a much more complicated set of processes that govern
the movement of CO2 in the atmosphere, including its interaction with the land and the ocean. Though
about 50% leaves the atmosphere within 50 years, up to 15 to 40% can remain after 1,000 years. "This
is why the concept of a single, characteristic atmospheric lifetime is not applicable to CO2 ." (Ciais et al.
(2014), p. 473)
   20
      https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/global-greenhouse-gas-emissions-dataCountry
   21
      This is comparable to the value of 0.696 used in Heutel (2012), which was based on regressions using
older data. The Heutel (2012) value was based on data on just CO2 emissions, rather than all greenhouse
gases, and it used data from 1981 to 2003, rather than 1990 through 2014 as in Cohen et al. (2018). The
data used in Heutel (2012) are monthly, while the data in Cohen et al. (2018) are annual. Doda (2014) finds
a higher elasticity, 1.01, using annual data on CO2 emissions from 1950 - 2011.



                                                      19
       The emissions abatement cost and pollution damage functions are calibrated from the
DICE model (Nordhaus, 2018). The most recent version of DICE available on William
Nordhaus's website is the DICE 2016R2 version.22 The emissions abatement cost function
g is taken directly from DICE. The functional form is: g (µt ) = 1 µt . The exponent 2
                                                                     2



is 2.6, and the coefficient 1 is 0.074.23 These values imply that the cost to abate 50% of
gross emissions equals 1.22% of gross output, while the cost to abate 100% of gross emissions
equals 7.4% of gross output.
       In DICE, damages are a function of temperature rather than of atmospheric carbon
concentrations. A dynamic climate model describes how carbon concentrations affect tem-
perature over time. Our model does not include temperature or a carbon cycle model, so
we approximate DICE's damage function by setting damages to be a function of the pol-
lution stock x. Details of the calibration strategy are in appendix section D.2. We use
the same functional form and calibration strategy as in Heutel (2012), though based now
on the most recent version of DICE (2016R2). The damage function d(x) is quadratic:
d(x) = d2 x2 + d1 x + d0 , where d2 = 1.05e - 8, d1 = 8.10e - 6, and d0 = -0.0076, and the
units of the pollution stock x are gigatons of carbon (GtC). These parameters imply that at
the current level of atmospheric carbon stock (851 GtC, from DICE 2016R2), the damages
from climate change amount to 0.69% of gross output. A doubling of the current carbon
stock (to 1702 GtC) would increase that to 3.66% of gross output.
  22
    Details available at https://sites.google.com/site/williamdnordhaus/dice-rice
  23
    The DICE model allows for the coefficient 1 to decrease over time to capture growth in abatement
technology. We abstract from growth and thus keep 1 constant at its initial value.




                                                20
4.3       Labor Market Parameters

We follow Shimer (2005) and set the exponent in the matching function, 2 , to 0.72.24 We
follow Christiano et al. (2016) and Atolia et al. (2019) and set vacancy posting costs, G, to
a low value so that total spending on vacancy creation averages between 1 and 2 percent of
total output. Next, we simultaneously set the coefficient in the matching function, 1 , the
agent's disutility of work,  , and the separation rate, s, to match the following targets from
Atolia et al. (2019): a mean job-finding rate of 0.59, a mean labor market tightness of 0.72,
and a steady-state unemployment rate of 7.8 percent. This strategy yields the following
parameter values: 1 = 0.6425;  = 0.8565; x = 0.05. Finally, in the spirit of Hagedorn and
Manovskii (2008), we set workers' bargaining power, b, to a low value to target the elasticity
of wages with respect to average labor productivity, yielding b = 0.05.
       Because our calibrated workers' bargaining power (b = 0.05) is significantly lower than
the coefficient on unemployment in the matching function (2 = 0.72), the analytical model
tells us that the Hosios condition is not satisfied and that the equilibrium number of job
vacancies will be higher than the efficient level. We explore the policy implications of this
in the simulations below, and we also conduct sensitivity analysis over bargaining power.



5        Results

First, we compare the unregulated decentralized equilibrium to the planner's solution to show
how the pollution and congestion externalities distort the equilibrium allocation. Next, we
consider the first-best policy response of the government, using both the emissions tax and
the vacancy creation tax to internalize all externalities and bring the decentralized economy
  24
    This value was originally derived by estimating the matching function (equation 6) using data on the
number of unemployed individuals reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the number of active vacancies
reported in the Conference Board Help Wanted Index, and estimates of the job-finding rate from the sample
period 1951-2003.




                                                    21
in-line with the planner's solution. Lastly, we model the second-best tax problem, where the
government is allowed to optimize one tax instrument while the other is fixed at zero.


5.1       Decentralized Versus Planner's Problem

Before we compare the unregulated decentralized equilibrium and the planner's solution,
we verify that our decentralized model generates moments consistent with those from the
existing literature. The first panel of Table 2 shows that the mean and volatility of output
are 3.04 and 2.25 under the unregulated decentralized equilibrium. The mean and volatility
of consumption are 2.36 and 0.88, and the mean and volatility of investment are 0.64 and
6.99. These moments reflect realistic shares of consumption and investment in output and
are consistent with consumption smoothing and investment that is significantly more volatile
than output. The second panel of Table 2 provides the means of unemployment, vacancies,
and labor market tightness, which are targets in our calibration strategy, and shows that
each of these labor market variables are more volatile than output is in the decentralized
economy. High labor market volatility is consistent with U.S. data, though we are unable
to match the exact level of volatility with our baseline model.25 The third panel of Table
2 shows that the volatility of emissions is 1.35, while the fraction of emissions abated and
abatement spending are both equal to 0 in the unregulated decentralized economy.
       Figure 1 presents time paths for key model variables recovered from both the decentral-
ized and planner's problems. The simulations are for 100 periods under a random draw of
innovations (an identical draw for both the planner's and the decentralized model). The
first four panels of Figure 1 show how the time paths of output, consumption, vacancies, and
unemployment deviate between the decentralized and planner's problems. The congestion
externality results in an oversupply of vacancies, which in turn results in additional output.
  25
    See Atolia et al. (2018) and Atolia et al. (2019) for more details on the difficulties matching labor market
volatility using RBC search models.



                                                      22
The pollution externality also results in a higher level of output than is efficient. Thus, the
two market failures reinforce each other. This point will be revisited when we consider the
government's first- and second-best policy options in the next few subsections. The bottom
two panels of Figure 1 demonstrate the gaps that exist in emissions and abatement across the
two model environments. In the unregulated decentralized model, firms have no incentive
to abate, so abatement is constant at zero.
   We compare the first and second moments of key outcome variables in Table 2. In-
spection of this table reveals the differences in the mean and volatility of our key variables
across the decentralized and planner's problems. While the traditional RBC variables are
only moderately impacted by the change in model specification, we find significant differ-
ences in labor market variables. These large differences in means come from the congestion
externality, which causes firms to create more vacancies than is efficient. Because the Ho-
sios condition is not met, and in fact the bargaining parameter b is so much lower than
the match function elasticity 2 , the net congestion externality results in a vast oversupply
of employment; the efficient unemployment rate (13.73%) is nearly double the unregulated
decentralized unemployment rate (7.87%).
   As for environmental variables, the third panel of Table 2 shows that mean emissions
falls from 1.9470 to 1.8266 as we move from the decentralized problem to the planner's
problem. This follows from the negative externality of pollution. While the volatility of
emissions and pollution is similar across specifications, the fraction of emissions abated and
total spending are volatile under the planner's problem. More simulation results under both
the decentralized and planner's models are provided in appendix section E.
   We measure the welfare effect of the market failures by calculating the compensating
variation for the unregulated decentralized economy, that is, the amount of additional con-
sumption the representative household must be given in the unregulated decentralized equi-
librium to make her as well off (equal lifetime utility) as the representative household under


                                              23
the planner's allocation. In doing this calculation, we initialize all state variables to their
unregulated decentralized steady-state values and subject both systems to the same sequence
of productivity shocks. As such, this welfare measure accounts for both business cycle fluctu-
ations and the transition from the unregulated decentralized equilibrium to the equilibrium
of the planner's problem.26 The compensating variation of the decentralized equilibrium is
1.177%; that is, agents in the decentralized economy would have to be given 1.177% more
consumption each period in order to be made indifferent between the decentralized economy
and the planner's economy that corrects the externalities.


5.2     First-Best Tax Problem

We now consider the solution under the efficient Ramsey tax, where the government sets
an emissions tax and a vacancy tax or subsidy to internalize both externalities. Under the
first-best taxes, the equilibrium coincides with that of the planner (and thus all outcomes
under the first-best taxes are identical to those under the planner's problem reported in
Table 2). Because vacancies in the unregulated equilibrium are higher than in the efficient
planner's problem, a tax (not a subsidy) on vacancies is efficient. The steady-state value
of the efficient vacancy creation tax is v = 10.96. This corresponds to about a 1, 100% ad
valorem tax rate on vacancies; for every dollar that the firm spends on vacancy posting costs,
it pays 11 dollars in the tax. This enormous tax rate reflects the large difference between the
efficient and the decentralized unemployment rates.27 The steady-state value of the efficient
emissions tax is e = 8.6136e-4 , which is in arbitrary units of the DSGE model. When we
  26
      Initializing all state variables to the same level when computing welfare effects is necessary in our model
since the change in specifications has a dramatic effect on the steady-state level of some variables (namely
pollution and unemployment). Steady-state utility under the second-best emissions tax is actually higher
than the steady-state utility under the first-best taxes. This surprising result is explored in appendix section
F, where we present transition dynamics across policies.
   27
      The impact of the vacancy creation tax on the share of output directed to vacancy creation is not as
extreme. Specifically, after-tax spending on vacancy creation rises from approximately 1.4% of GDP in the
baseline decentralized equilibrium to approximately 3.6% in the efficient tax equilibrium.



                                                       24
convert this to dollars per metric ton of carbon dioxide via a back-of-the-envelope technique,
it is equal to 2.21 dollars per ton of CO2 .28 This is more than an order of magnitude lower
than most estimates of the efficient carbon tax (the social cost of carbon) that come from
models like DICE. This is because of the large congestion externalities from the labor market
exacerbating the pollution externality; the resulting first-best vacancy tax also substantially
reduces emissions, leaving less lifting needed to be done by the emissions tax.
       Figure 2 presents impulse response functions (IRFs) for each of the two first-best taxes
in response to a one-standard-deviation productivity shock. The emissions tax increases
by nearly 1.5% at maximum, but this effect is delayed over a period of about 10 quarters.
The unregulated contemporaneous increase in emissions from a positive productivity shock
is muted under efficient dynamic taxes, a result that is also found in Heutel (2012). The
vacancy tax rate decreases by about 2%, indicating that the increase in vacancies posted after
the productivity shock is muted. These properties of the two taxes are also demonstrated
in the appendix in Figure E.5, which simulates them under a business cycle. The emissions
tax is procyclical, and the vacancy creation tax is countercyclical.
       When productivity increases, the negative pollution externality is exacerbated, so the ef-
ficient emissions tax rises to overcome this. However, when productivity increases, the labor
search congestion externality is lessened; the efficient vacancy tax is reduced to accommo-
date this. It is not obvious ex ante that the congestion externality decreases after a positive
productivity shock. The congestion externality is actually the net externality of the pair of
congestion externalities ­ one caused by the firm and one by the workers. Both of these con-
gestion externalities increase following a positive productivity shock, but the one that leads
to too little employment increases by more than the one that leads to too much employment.
That scenario yields the observed countercyclical behavior of the efficient vacancy tax.
  28
    To convert, we equilibrate the steady-state level of output in our model to U.S. GDP ($20 trillion) and
we equilibrate steady-state (unregulated) emissions to total U.S. emissions (5 million tons CO2 ).




                                                    25
5.3    Second-Best Tax Problem

Table 3 presents the mean and volatility of several variables under the solutions with the
second-best emissions tax and the second-best vacancy tax. Focusing on the RBC variables,
the second-best emissions tax results in mean values that are very close to that found in
the unregulated decentralized economy, while the second-best vacancy tax results in mean
values that are almost identical to the mean values recovered from the planner's problem.
From looking at the RBC variables alone, it appears that the second-best vacancy tax is
more efficient than the second-best emissions tax.
   The next two panels of Table 3 show that the two second-best taxes have different effects
on different parts of the economy. The second-best vacancy tax, which targets the labor
market, results in mean labor market variables that are almost identical to the planner's
problem values. The second-best emissions tax brings the unemployment and vacancy rates
somewhat closer to their efficient values, but not all the way there. For the environmental
variables, the second-best emissions tax actually results in an overshoot ­ lower emissions
and higher abatement than the efficient level. The fraction of emissions abated under the
second-best emissions tax is an order of magnitude higher than the efficient fraction abated
(23% vs. 2.6%). Because the second-best emissions tax is also being asked to address
the large congestion externalities, it must overshoot in addressing the pollution externality.
The second-best vacancy tax reduces emissions by only a very small amount because of the
reduction in employment; there is still no abatement spending without an emissions tax.
   In Figures 3 and 4, we explore how the steady-state levels of the second-best taxes respond
to the level of the constrained tax. While in Table 3, the constrained tax is constrained at
zero, these figures consider other non-zero values of the constrained tax. Figure 3 presents
the results when the vacancy creation tax is constrained, and the emissions tax responds
optimally. The x-axis of Figure 3 is the constrained level of the vacancy creation tax. It is
centered at about 10.96, which is its first-best steady-state level (a 1, 096% tax rate). At that

                                               26
level, the optimized emissions tax is about 2.21 dollars per ton, its first-best steady-state
level. However, when the vacancy creation tax is constrained to be higher, the second-best
emissions tax is somewhat lower. This reflects the fact that both taxes are addressing market
failures that go in the same direction (too much production). When one tax is higher than
first-best, the other tax is lower. When the vacancy tax approaches zero (i.e., when this
policy is absent), the second-best emissions tax is much higher than its first-best level. In
fact, it is about 33 times greater than its first-best level when the vacancy tax is zero, or
about 73.41 dollars per ton.
   Figure 4 repeats this exercise, but it considers the second-best vacancy creation tax in
response to a constrained emissions tax. Again, when one tax is higher than its first-best level
(here the emissions tax), the second-best level of the other tax (here the vacancy creation
tax) is lower than its first-best level. In contrast to the results in Figure 3, the second-
best steady-state level of the vacancy creation tax does not vary by all that much as the
constrained level of the emissions tax varies. Even with an emissions tax constrained at zero,
the second-best vacancy creation tax is less than 1% greater than its first-best level. Thus,
while second-best considerations affect the values of both taxes, the second-best adjustment
to the emissions tax is much greater than the second-best adjustment to the vacancy tax.
   Next, we consider the dynamic properties of the second-best taxes and how they compare
to those of the first-best taxes. The right side of Table 3 shows the volatilities for various
variables under the second-best taxes. There is not much difference in the RBC variables'
volatilities. The vacancy tax yields much lower volatility for the labor market variables than
does the emissions tax, and the volatilities match those of the planner's problem. There is
not much difference in volatilities across the taxes for the environmental variables, except
that there is no abatement without an emissions tax and thus no volatility in abatement.
   Figure 5 presents IRFs for both taxes' first-best values and second-best values when
the other tax is constrained to zero. The top panel shows that both the first-best and the


                                              27
second-best emissions taxes are procyclical, but the second-best emissions tax is less so.
This reflects the fact that the second-best emissions tax must account for both the pollution
externality and the labor search congestion externalities. Because the first-best vacancy tax
is countercyclical (from Figure 2), when the emissions tax is second-best and has to "pick
up the slack" for the missing vacancy tax, it trades off between the procyclicality desired
from the emissions tax and the countercyclicality desired from the vacancy tax.
   The bottom panel shows that the second-best vacancy creation tax (when the emissions
tax is zero) is almost exactly as countercyclical as the first-best vacancy creation tax. This
again reflects the fact that the second-best vacancy tax brings the equilibrium closer to the
planner's problem solution than does the second-best emissions tax. The large difference in
the dynamic properties of the first-best and second-best emissions taxes can also be seen in
Figure E.6 in the appendix, which simulates business cycle properties of the taxes.
   The welfare implications of the second-best taxes are calculated using the same method-
ology as we used for welfare implications of the decentralized economy: we calculate the
compensating variation for each policy relative to the planner's problem. For the second-
best emissions tax, this compensating variation is 0.945%, and for the second-best vacancy
tax, it is 0.010%. While implementing either of the second-best taxes improves welfare rela-
tive to the unregulated decentralized equilibrium, the second-best vacancy tax is much more
efficient than the second-best emissions tax. This reinforces our findings that the second-
best vacancy tax comes closer to matching the planner's solution than does the second-best
emissions tax.


5.4    Additional Analyses

In the appendix, we present results from additional analyses. First, appendix section G
presents results from sensitivity analyses. We vary the values of two parameters that deter-
mine the magnitude of the externalities: the worker's bargaining power b and the damage

                                             28
from pollution d(x). With a higher value of worker bargaining power b, the labor search
congestion externalities created by the worker become larger while the externalities created
by the firm become smaller. As a result, the magnitude of the efficient vacancy tax be-
comes smaller. When the worker bargaining power b exceeds the match function elasticity
2 , the analytical model tells us that the efficient vacancy tax becomes a vacancy subsidy;
we demonstrate this in appendix section G. Finally, appendix section G also explores how
the magnitude of the pollution externality affects both tax rates. A higher magnitude of the
pollution externality of course implies a higher efficient emissions tax, but it can also affect
the vacancy tax.
    Second, appendix section H presents results from simulations that explore the equity
implications of our model. Up to this point, the only social optimization criterion considered
is efficiency, and the calibrated parameters imply that the efficient allocation involves a
much higher unemployment rate than the unregulated equilibrium. Appendix section H
shows that the efficient allocation disproportionately benefits firms relative to workers. In
that section we also perform an analysis where we add a parameter representing disutility
from unemployment, which creates a social cost to unemployment beyond merely foregone
production. With that disutility, the efficient level of unemployment is much lower.



6     Conclusion

We develop a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model that includes autocorrelated
productivity shocks, congestion externalities arising from labor market search frictions, and
a pollution externality to examine the relationship between environmental policy and un-
employment over the business cycle. In our benchmark calibrated model, the level of em-
ployment is inefficiently high both because of labor search congestion externalities and the
pollution externality. When the government sets both an emissions tax and a vacancy cre-


                                              29
ation tax, the efficient allocation is achieved. We also consider second-best taxes, where only
one of those two policies is available. This second-best emissions tax is 33 times larger than
the first-best emissions tax and responds to productivity shocks in a different way.
   Like other DSGE models, ours uses many simplifying assumptions to yield our main
results. The model could be extended in many ways by exploring the importance of these
assumptions. For example, one extension to this paper would be to incorporate multiple
sectors rather than just a representative firm, as in Dissou and Karnizova (2016). Specifically,
understanding the connection between environmental policies, the development of abatement
technology, and the allocation of labor across output and "green technology" sectors is
of interest. This concept of multiple productive sectors could also be extended to allow
for a segmented labor market, at which point the model would be capable of addressing
the reallocation of workers following a large policy shock. The optimal policies that we
model only address total social efficiency and ignore distributional or equity issues. We find
that the efficient equilibrium features a higher level of unemployment than the unregulated
equilibrium; thus increasing efficiency likely comes at the cost of reducing equity. A social
welfare function that includes equity objectives would likely yield a different set of first-best
policies.
   Our research has important policy implications. Policy makers are concerned over both
efficiency and equity, and many models of optimal environmental policy ignore distributional
concerns like the effects of policies on unemployment. Furthermore, even absent any concerns
about equity and distributional outcomes, we show how the incorporation of labor frictions
and unemployment into a model of optimal environmental policy can affect efficiency, given
that the labor frictions create distortions. The Great Recession has made clear the fact that
policy makers care about the cyclical effects of policies, and it is important to consider how
various policies, like environmental and labor policies, interact over the business cycle.




                                               30
References
Andolfatto, D. (1996). Business cycles and labor-market search. The american economic
 review, pages 112­132.

Annicchiarico, B. and Di Dio, F. (2015). Environmental policy and macroeconomic dynamics
 in a new keynesian model. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 69:1­
 21.

Atolia, M., Gibson, J., and Marquis, M. (2018). Labor market volatility in the rbc search
  model: A look at hagedorn and manovskiis calibration. Computational Economics, pages
  1­20.

Atolia, M., Gibson, J., and Marquis, M. (2019). Moral hazard in lending and labor market
  volatility. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 51(1):79­109.

Aubert, D. and Chiroleu-Assouline, M. (2019). Environmental tax reform and income dis-
 tribution with imperfect heterogeneous labour markets. European Economic Review.

Barrage, L. (2020). Optimal dynamic carbon taxes in a climate­economy model with dis-
  tortionary fiscal policy. The Review of Economic Studies, 87(1):1­39.

Blanchard, O. and Gal´
                     i, J. (2010). Labor markets and monetary policy: A new keynesian
  model with unemployment. American economic journal: macroeconomics, 2(2):1­30.

Christiano, L., Eichenbaum, M., and Trabandt, M. (2016). Unemployment and business
 cycles. Econometrica, 84(4):1523­1569.

Christiano, L. J. (2002). Solving dynamic equilibrium models by a method of undetermined
 coefficients. Computationa Economics, 20(1):21­55.

Ciais, P., Sabine, C., Bala, G., Bopp, L., Brovkin, V., Canadell, J., Chhabra, A., DeFries,
  R., Galloway, J., Heimann, M., et al. (2014). Carbon and other biogeochemical cycles.
  In Climate change 2013: the physical science basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
  the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, pages
  465­570. Cambridge University Press.

Classen, T. J. and Dunn, R. A. (2012). The effect of job loss and unemployment duration
  on suicide risk in the united states: A new look using mass-layoffs and unemployment
  duration. Health economics, 21(3):338­350.

Cohen, G., Jalles, J. T., Loungani, P., and Marto, R. (2018). The long-run decoupling of
  emissions and output: Evidence from the largest emitters. Energy Policy, 118:58­68.

Diamond, P. A. (1982). Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium. Journal of
  political Economy, 90(5):881­894.


                                            31
Dissou, Y. and Karnizova, L. (2016). Emissions cap or emissions tax? a multi-sector business
  cycle analysis. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 79:169­188.
Doda, B. (2014). Evidence on business cycles and co2 emissions. Journal of Macroeconomics,
 40:214­227.
Fischer, C. and Heutel, G. (2013). Environmental macroeconomics: Environmental policy,
  business cycles, and directed technical change. Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ., 5(1):197­210.
Fischer, C. and Springborn, M. (2011). Emissions targets and the real business cycle: Inten-
  sity targets versus caps or taxes. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
  62(3):352­366.
Hafstead, M. A. and Williams, R. C. (2018). Unemployment and environmental regulation
  in general equilibrium. Journal of Public Economics, 160:50­65.
Hafstead, M. A., Williams, R. C., and Chen, Y. (2018). Environmental policy, full-
  employment models, and employment: A critical analysis. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Hagedorn, M. and Manovskii, I. (2008). The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment
  and vacancies revisited. American Economic Review, 98(4):1692­1706.
Heutel, G. (2012). How should environmental policy respond to business cycles? optimal
  policy under persistent productivity shocks. Review of Economic Dynamics, 15(2):244­
  264.
Hohberger, S., Priftis, R., and Vogel, L. (2020). The distributional effects of conventional
  monetary policy and quantitative easing: Evidence from an estimated dsge model. Journal
  of Banking & Finance, 113:105483.
Hosios, A. J. (1990). On the efficiency of matching and related models of search and unem-
  ployment. The Review of Economic Studies, 57(2):279­298.
Iacoviello, M. (2005). House prices, borrowing constraints, and monetary policy in the
  business cycle. American economic review, 95(3):739­764.
Jaffe, A. B., Newell, R. G., and Stavins, R. N. (2005). A tale of two market failures:
  Technology and environmental policy. Ecological economics, 54(2-3):164­174.
Jaroci´
      nski, M. and Karadi, P. (2020). Deconstructing monetary policy surprisesthe role of
  information shocks. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 12(2):1­43.
Kahneman, D. and Sugden, R. (2005). Experienced utility as a standard of policy evaluation.
 Environmental and resource economics, 32(1):161­181.
Kaplan, G., Moll, B., and Violante, G. L. (2018). Monetary policy according to hank.
 American Economic Review, 108(3):697­743.

                                            32
Kassenboehmer, S. C. and Haisken-DeNew, J. P. (2009). Youre fired! the causal negative
 effect of entry unemployment on life satisfaction. The Economic Journal, 119(536):448­
 462.

Kennedy, P. W. (1994). Equilibrium pollution taxes in open economies with imperfect
  competition. Journal of environmental economics and management, 27(1):49­63.

Kunze, L. and Suppa, N. (2017). Bowling alone or bowling at all? the effect of unemployment
 on social participation. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 133:213­235.

Lu, C.-H. (2019). Optimal government policies related to unemployment. Public Finance
  Review, 47(1):87­111.

Marcus, J. (2013). The effect of unemployment on the mental health of spouses­evidence
 from plant closures in germany. Journal of health economics, 32(3):546­558.

Merz, M. (1995). Search in the labor market and the real business cycle. Journal of monetary
 Economics, 36(2):269­300.

Milner, A., Page, A., and LaMontagne, A. D. (2013). Long-term unemployment and suicide:
 a systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS one, 8(1).

Mortensen, D. T. and Pissarides, C. A. (1994). Job creation and job destruction in the
 theory of unemployment. The review of economic studies, 61(3):397­415.

Mortensen, D. T. and Pissarides, C. A. (2001). Taxes, subsidies and equilibrium labour
 market outcomes.

Nordhaus, W. (2018). Evolution of modeling of the economics of global warming: Changes
  in the dice model, 1992­2017. Climatic change, 148(4):623­640.

Pissarides, C. A. (2000). Equilibrium unemployment theory. MIT press.

Pissarides, C. A. et al. (1985). Short-run equilibrium dynamics of unemployment vacancies,
  and real wages. American Economic Review, 75(4):676­690.

Rogerson, R., Shimer, R., and Wright, R. (2005). Search-theoretic models of the labor
  market: A survey. Journal of economic literature, 43(4):959­988.

Shi, S. and Wen, Q. (1999). Labor market search and the dynamic effects of taxes and
  subsidies. Journal of Monetary Economics, 43(2):457­495.

Shimer, R. (2005). The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. Amer-
  ican economic review, 95(1):25­49.

Stock, J. and Watson, M. (2000). Distribution of quarterly values of gdp/gdi across months
  within the quarter. Accessed: 7 April 2020.


                                            33
                                                 Table 1: Parameter Values
     Parameter                   Description                      Value                            Source
                               Discount factor                    0.983
                          Capital depreciation rate               0.025                       RBC literature
                          Capital's share of income                0.36
                           Productivity persistence               0.933
                                                                                       Match labor productivity data
                 Standard deviation of productivity innovation    0.015
                           Pollution decay rate                   0.9965                IPCC reported CO2 half-life
       1-                   Emissions elasticity                    0.6                  Regressions (see appendix)
        1            Abatement cost function coefficient           0.074




34
                                                                                               DICE 2016R2
        2            Abatement cost function exponent               2.6
        d0              Damage function constant                 -0.0076
        d1           Damage function linear coefficient          8.10e - 6     Calibrated from DICE 2016R2 (see appendix)
        d2          Damage function quadratic coefficient        1.05e - 8
        2              Exponent in matching function               0.72                        Shimer (2005)
        G                    Vacancy posting costs                 0.75             Target spending on vacancy creation
        1              Coefficient in matching function           0.6425
                               Disutility of work                 0.8565              Targets from Atolia et al. (2019)
        s                       Separation rate                    0.05
        b                 Labor bargaining power                   0.05      Target wage elasticity with respect to productivity
             Figure 1: Business Cycle Simulations - Decentralized Vs. Planner




Notes: All simulations are from randomly generated draws of productivity innovations for 100 periods.




                                                  35
                 Table 2: Decentralized vs Planner Outcomes

                                      Mean                     %-Volatility

                           Decentralized     Planner     Decentralized   Planner

                                RBC Variables

Output                         3.04            2.85          2.25          2.22
Consumption                    2.36            2.24          0.88          0.94
Investment                     0.64            0.60          6.99          7.41

                           Labor Market Variables

Unemployment                  0.0787          0.1373         4.07          1.95
Vacancies                     0.0565          0.0107        18.65         10.76
Labor Market Tightness        0.7385          0.0786        20.82         11.65

                           Environmental Variables

Emissions                     1.9470          1.8266          1.35          1.32
Pollution                     3333.23         3123.78      2.98e-003     2.97e-003
Fraction Abated                  0             0.0263           0           0.19
Abatement Spending               0           1.64e-005          0           2.67

  Notes: This table presents the mean and volatility for the given variables under
  both the decentralized model with no policy variables and the planner's first-
  best problem. Units of all variables are arbitrary, except unemployment is a
  rate and abatement is a fraction. Percent volatility is measured as the percent
  standard deviation of the cyclical component of the log of x, where the cyclical
  component is found by hp-filtering with a shading parameter of 1,600.




                                        36
                           Table 3: Second-Best Outcomes

                                        Mean                       %-Volatility

                          Emissions Tax    Vacancy Tax    Emissions Tax    Vacancy Tax

                                      RBC Variables

Output                         3.03              2.85           2.27              2.22
Consumption                    2.36              2.24           0.90              0.94
Investment                     0.63              0.60           7.14              7.41

                                Labor Market Variables

Unemployment                  0.0839            0.1373          4.33            1.95
Vacancies                     0.0469            0.0107         22.15           10.76
Labor Market Tightness        0.5778            0.0785         24.29           11.65

                               Environmental Variables

Emissions                      1.4947           1.8731          1.34            1.33
Pollution                     2558.76           3206.62      3.02e-003       2.98e-003
Fraction Abated                0.2305              0            0.18              0
Abatement Spending             0.0049              0            2.51              0

  Notes: This table presents the mean and volatility for the given variables under the
  second-best emissions tax and the second-best vacancy tax. Units of all variables are
  arbitrary, except unemployment is a rate and abatement is a fraction. Percent volatility
  is measured as the percent standard deviation of the cyclical component of the log of
  x, where the cyclical component is found by hp-filtering with a shading parameter of
  1,600.




                                           37
                  Figure 2: Impulse Response Functions - First-Best Taxes




Notes: All simulations are from a one-unit one-time productivity innovation.




                                                  38
                             Figure 3: Second-Best Emissions Tax




Notes: This figure is generated by solving for the (second-best) optimal emissions tax while varying the
vacancy creation tax from 0 to twice its (first-best) optimal level.




                                                 39
                               Figure 4: Second-Best Vacancy Tax




Notes: This figure is generated by solving for the (second-best) optimal vacancy creation tax while varying
the emissions tax from 0 to twice its (first-best) optimal level.




                                                  40
           Figure 5: Impulse Response Functions - First- vs Second-Best Taxes




Notes: All simulations are from a one-unit one-time productivity innovation.




                                                  41
      Technical Appendix: Pollution and Labor Market Search
               Externalities Over the Business Cycle
                                 John Gibson and Garth Heutel


   In this appendix we provide additional details of the analytical model and planner's
and Ramsey tax sub-problems from our DSGE model. We also provide additional details
regarding our calibration, and we highlight additional results, including discussions regarding
transitional dynamics, sensitivity analysis, and alternative welfare criteria.


A      More Details of Analytical Model
Let J equal the present discounted value of expected profit from an occupied job, and V
equal the present discounted value of expected profit from a vacant job. In equilibrium the
Bellman equation for the asset value of a vacancy is rV = -p(1 - d)c + q ((J + p(1 - d)H - V ),
where the left-hand-side is the capital cost (with exogenous discount rate r) and the right-
hand-side is the rate of return on the vacancy. In equilibrium, there are no rents from vacant
jobs so V = 0. The asset value of an occupied job is rJ = p(1 - d) + a - w - sJ , where w is
the wage. Solving these yields the job creation condition:

                                                                   c
                    p(1 - d) - w + a + p(1 - d)(r + s) H -           =0                  (A.1)
                                                                q ()

    Let U equal the present discounted value of expected income of an unemployed worker,
and W equal the present discounted value of expected income of an employed worker. The
asset value of being unemployed is given by rU = z + q ()(W - U ), where z is the return
to the worker during job search, for example the value of leisure. The asset value of a job
for a worker is given by rW = w + s(U - W ).
    The equilibrium wage is determined through Nash bargaining, where b is the bargaining
power of the worker. The wage maximizes (W - U )b (J + p(1 - d)H - V )1-b , since W - U
is the surplus from a match going to the worker and J + p(1 - d)H - V is the surplus going
to the firm. Substituting in and solving yields the wage equation:

                     w = (1 - b)z + b[(1 + c + (r + s)H )p(1 - d) + a]                   (A.2)

    The social welfare function that the social planner seeks to maximize is
                           
                 =            e-rt [p(1 - d(u))(1 - u) + zu - p(1 - d(u))cu]dt           (A.3)
                       0

                                                                              = s(1 -
and the social planner is constrained by the unemployment evolution equation u
u) - q ()u. The social planner's choice variables are unemployment u and labor market


                                                42
tightness , and let the co-state variable be µ. The Euler conditions are

 - e-rt [p(1 - d(u)) - z + p(1 - d(u))c + d (u)(p(1 - u) + pcu)] + [s + q ()]µ - µ
                                                                                  = 0 (A.4)

                             - e-rt pcu(1 - d(u)) + µuq ()[1 -  ()] = 0                                     (A.5)
Use equation A.5 to solve for µ, take its time derivative µ , and substitute both into equation
A.4. This yields equation 3 in the text.
    Our model is similar to the models in Hafstead and Williams (2018) and Aubert and
Chiroleu-Assouline (2019), both of which model labor market search frictions alongside a
pollution externality. Like this model, neither of those papers' models consider productivity
shocks or business cycles, though our paper's DSGE model considers them. More impor-
tantly, neither Hafstead and Williams (2018) nor Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline (2019)
consider Pigouvian pricing policies to minimize the inefficiencies from the two sources of
market failure. Instead, both study the effect of exogenous (not optimized) pollution policy
on labor markets, and neither consider policies to target the labor search externalities. How-
ever, these other papers include features absent from our paper, including two productive
sectors (one polluting and one non-polluting) in Hafstead and Williams (2018), and hetero-
geneous workers (low-skill and high-skill) in Aubert and Chiroleu-Assouline (2019). Aubert
and Chiroleu-Assouline (2019) demonstrate the importance of the Hosios condition on the
distributional effects of a pollution tax; see their equation 17.


B     Planner's Problem
The social planner chooses consumption, capital investment, vacancy creation, and the
amount of emissions to abate, in order to maximize the representative household's present
discounted value of expected life-time utility. The planner enters each period with a pre-
determined quantity of employed workers, capital, pollution, and knowledge of the current
aggregate productivity in the economy. The optimization problem is constrained by an ag-
gregate resource constraint and the aggregate evolution of employment in the economy and
can be written as the following dynamic program:


          V (kt , nt , xt ; t ) =        max             [ln ct - nt + E {V (kt+1 , nt+1 , xt+1 ; t+1 )}]
                                    ct ,vt ,kt+1 ,xt+1

            s.t.
                                                                                  1-
                   ct + kt+1 - (1 -  )kt + vt G  (1 - g (µt )) [1 - d(xt+1 )] t kt nt                       (B.1)
                                              1-2
              nt+1 = (1 - s)nt +  (1 - nt )2 vt                                                             (B.2)
            where, from equations (9) and (11):
                                                                    1-
                   µt = 1 - [xt+1 - xt - erow
                                          t ] · h (1 - d(xt+1 ))t kt nt                                     (B.3)




                                                               43
Equation (B.1) denotes the economy's aggregate resource constraint. The first two terms
on the left-hand side denote consumption expenditures and the capital investment. The
third term on the left-hand side is the economy's expenditures on vacancy creation, with
G denoting per-vacancy posting cost, and the right-hand side denotes the total output less
abatement.
    Solving this problem yields the following three dynamic Euler equations:

                 1
 E Vkt+1 =                                                                                                         (B.4)
                 ct
                 1                                                                        n1-
                                                            h(Yt ) + et h (Yt )d (xt )t kt
                                           1-                                              t
 E Vxt+1       =    -(1 - g (µt ))d (xt )kt nt + Yt g (µt )                                                        (B.5)
                 ct                                                       h(Yt )2
                     1           G
 E Vnt+1 =                                                                                                         (B.6)
                     ct    1 (1 - 2 )-
                                     t
                                       2


where,
                                                    -1
               1                            kt+1                                            1 - µt+1
    Vkt+1 =          (1 - d(xt+1 ))t+1                     1 - g (µt+1 ) - Yt+1 g (µt+1 )              h (Yt+1 )
              ct+1                          nt+1                                            h(Yt+1 )
                     1
              +       (1 -  )
                 ct+1
                1                   
    Vxt+1 =        g (µt+1 )Yt+1
              ct+1               h(Yt+1 )
                                                           
                1                                   kt+1                                      1 - µt+1
    Vnt+1   =      (1 - d(xt+1 ))t+1 (1 - )                   1 - g (µt+1 ) - g (µt+1 )Yt+1            h (Yt+1 )
              ct+1                                  nt+1                                      h(Yt+1 )
                                               -2
                           1     1 - s - 1 2 1
                                             t+1
              -+                                     G
                          ct+1    1 (1 - 2 )- 2
                                            t+1


 Equation B.4 is the dynamic Euler on capital accumulation, while equation B.5 is the
dynamic Euler on emissions and pollution. Equations similar to (B.4) and (B.5) appear
in Heutel (2012); here they depend on the current and future levels of employment in the
economy. Equation B.6 is unique to our model and defines the planner's vacancy creation
condition. Inspection of equations B.4-B.6 and the corresponding envelope conditions show
that there is a feedback relationship between emissions and employment, with the current and
future emissions impacting vacancy creation and current and future employment impacting
the emissions decision.


C     Ramsey Efficient Dynamic Tax Problem
The Ramsey optimal dynamic tax problem for a model economy can be written as the
following constrained optimization:




                                                            44
                                                                                 
                                    max                                                 t [ln ct - nt ]
  {ct ,kt+1 ,nt+1 ,xt+1 ,vt ,rt ,wt ,µt ,qt ,Yt , and et or vt (or   both)}t=0
                                                                                 t=0
      s.t., for all t
              1                                         1
     Et             [rt+1 + 1 -  ]                  =                                                                    (C.1)
            ct+1                                        ct
                                                 -1
                                          kt
     rt = (1 - d(xt+1 ))t                              [1 - g (µt ) - et (1 - µt )h (Yt )]                               (C.2)
                                          nt
                ct  1-            kt+1                     (1 + vt+1 )G                                       (1 + vt )G
     Et                     rt+1         - wt+1 + (1 - s)                                                 =              (C.3)
            ct+1                  nt+1                         qt+1                                               qt
     et h(Yt ) = g (µt )Yt                                                                                               (C.4)
     Nt+1 = (1 - s)Nt + vt qt                                                                                            (C.5)
                             1-          kt           vt
     wt = (1 - b)ct + b              rt        +           (1 + vt )G                                                    (C.6)
                                        nt          1 - nt
     ct + kt+1 - (1 -  )kt + vt G = (1 - g (µt ))Yt                                                                      (C.7)
                                                     ROW
     xt+1 = xt + (1 - µt )h(Yt ) + e                                                                                     (C.8)
                            1-
     Yt = (1 - d(xt+1 ))t kt nt                                                                                          (C.9)
                        -2
     qt = 1 (1 - nt )2 vt                                                                                               (C.10)

    This system has been simplified using equations 11 and 12 from the main paper to rewrite
et and zt as functions of µt and Yt . All remaining endogenous variables are chosen by the
government in order to maximize the representative household's present discounted value of
expected life-time utility, taking as constraints the equations from the decentralized problem.
Notice that when we specify the government's choice variables we list {et }                    
                                                                                 t=0 or {vt }t=0
(or both), indicating that we will consider the following three scenarios: (i) the government
recovers the first-best allocation by optimally choosing both {et }                 
                                                                      t=0 and {vt }t=0 ; (ii) the
                                                                              
government recovers a second-best allocation by optimally choosing {et }t=0 , with vt held
fixed; (iii) the government recovers a second best allocation by optimally choosing {vt }     t=0 ,
with et held fixed.


D       Additional Calibration Details
D.1        Emissions Elasticity Calibration
                                                                            1-
We calibrate the relationship between emissions and output, et = h(yt ) = yt   , using
monthly data on U.S. carbon dioxide emissions and GDP. The monthly emissions data
come from the Energy Information Administration, and they include carbon dioxide emis-



                                                                       45
sions from all sources of energy consumption from January 1981 through October 2019.29
For most specifications, we use data that are first seasonally adjusted, using the Census
Bureau's X-13ARIMA-SEATS seasonal adjustment program.30 Monthly estimates of GDP
are from the dataset provided by Jaroci´   nski and Karadi (2020).31
    Figure D.1 plots the monthly emissions data alongside the monthly GDP estimates.
Business cycles are apparent in the GDP series, including the Great Recession starting in
2007. The seasonally-adjusted emissions data are noisier, but it appears to be the case that
when GDP falls, so do emissions. The long-run trend of the carbon intensity of the economy
decreasing is apparent, especially starting after the Great Recession.
    Figure D.2 plots the cyclical components of the GDP and emissions series. The data
are detrended using the Hodrick-Prescott filter after being aggregated to the quarterly level.
The smoothness parameter used in the filtering is  = 1600. As with the plot of the levels
in Figure D.1, the cyclical components plotted in Figure D.2 demonstrate the correlation
between output and emissions. During recessions, emissions fall, and during expansions,
emissions rise.
    We turn to regression analysis to quantify the cyclical correlation between emissions and
GDP. Table D.1 presents the regression results. Each column is a different specification,
though all columns represent regressions where the dependent variable is the natural log of
the cyclical component of emissions and the independent variable of interest is the natural
log of the cyclical component of GDP. Thus the reported coefficients are estimates of the
elasticity parameter 1 -  . The first two columns are ARIMA regressions, while the remaining
four columns are least squares regressions of data that have been detrended.
    Column 1 presents a seasonal ARIMA(1, 1, 1) × (0, 1, 1)12 regression, where the left-hand-
side emissions data have not been seasonally adjusted outside of the regression. Column 2
presents an ARIMA(1, 1, 2) regression, where the left-hand-side emissions data are seasonally
adjusted using the Census X-13 program before the regressions. In all subsequent columns,
the emissions data are seasonally adjusted this way before running the regressions. Columns 3
through 6 present regressions using different detrending algorithms. Column 3's regressions
use the Hodrick-Prescott filter, column 4's use Baxter-King, column 5's use Christiano-
Fitzgerald, and column 6's use Butterworth.32
    In all regressions, we see a positive coefficient on emissions, indicating a procyclical
relationship between emissions and output. This verifies what we can see in Figures D.1 and
D.2. The value of the coefficient ranges between 0.48 and 0.93, less than 1, indicating that
emissions are relatively inelastic to output. Because of the range of estimated parameters,
we choose an intermediate value of 0.6 to use in the simulations, consistent with the result
found in Cohen et al. (2018).


  29
     Data are available here: https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/monthly/#environment.
  30
     Details of this program are available here: https://www.census.gov/srd/www/x13as/. The seasonal
adjustment is performed using the EViews software.
  31
     These data are available here: https://www.aeaweb.org/doi/10.1257/mac.20180090.data. Interpo-
lating GDP to a monthly frequency is based on the methodology described in Stock and Watson (2000).
  32
     These specifications parallel those reported in Heutel (2012), though here we use more recent data.


                                                  46
Figure D.1: Carbon Dioxide Emissions and GDP




                    47
Figure D.2: Carbon Dioxide Emissions and GDP, Cyclical Components




                               48
                                         Table D.1: Emissions Elasticity Regressions

                    Seasonal ARIMA Seasonally Adjusted       HP Detrended    BK Detrended     CF Detrended    BW Detrended

      Ln(GDP)          0.0641                0.482              0.830            0.933           0.686            0.589
                        (0.129)              (0.158)            (0.111)          (0.114)         (0.006)          (0.195)
     Observations         416                  428                429              333             429              429




49
       Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. The dependent variable in each regression is the log of carbon dioxide emissions,
       adjusted or detrended as labeled. Column 1 presents results from a seasonal ARIMA(1, 1, 1) (0, 1, 1)12 regression of
       log of CO2 (not seasonally adjusted) on log of GDP. Column 2 presents results from an ARIMA(1, 1, 2) regression of
       log of CO2 (seasonally adjusted) on log of GDP. AR, MA, and cointegrating equation terms are not reported for either
       regression. Columns 36 present results from least squares regression of detrended emissions on detrended output allowing
       for NeweyWest standard errors, where the series are detrended by either HodrickPrescott (column 3), BaxterKing (column
       4), ChristianoFitzgerald (column 5), or Butterworth (column 6) filters. Constant term is omitted from regressions using
       detrended series. *** p¡0.01, ** p¡0.05, * p¡0.1
D.2     Damage Function Calibration
We calibrate the damage function d(x), where x is the stock of carbon pollution in the
atmosphere, and d is damages expressed as a fraction of gross output (so that net output
equals gross output times 1 - d). The calibration methodology is identical to that of Heutel
(2012), though here we use the most updated version of the DICE model.
    The calibration is as follows. We begin with a fixed, exogenous level of the atmospheric
carbon stock, in GtC. For that fixed level, we run the climate model portion of DICE, in
which the atmospheric carbon stock interacts over time with the ocean carbon stock, affects
radiative forcing, and ultimately affects temperature. For a given temperature, the DICE
model provides parameters for a damage function (which is quadratic in temperature). For
the fixed, exogenous level of the atmospheric carbon stock, we run the climate model for 20
periods (100 years), and calculate temperature and thus climate damages in each period. We
take a simple average of the climate damages over those 20 periods, and assign that damage
fraction to be the damage associated with the given fixed, exogenous level of atmospheric
carbon stock.
    We perform this simulation for 100 different values of this fixed, exogenous level of atmo-
spheric carbon stock, ranging from 800 to 1600 GtC. The relationship between the carbon
stock and damages is presented in Figure D.3. We fit these points to a quadratic function of
the carbon stock, yielding the damage function d(x) = d2 x2 + d1 x + d0 , where d2 = 1.05e - 8,
d1 = 8.10e - 6, and d0 = -0.0076. The units of the carbon stock x in this calibrated func-
tion are GtC, while the units of the variable in our DSGE model are arbitrary. Therefore,
in our code we re-scale our carbon stock variable to be consistent with the calibration. We
set the steady-state-level of the carbon stock x to equal the current (as of DICE 2016R2)
atmospheric carbon stock, 851 GtC.

D.3     Labor Market Parameters
Several calibration strategies exist for models with DMP search frictions, with the primary
difference being how vacancy postings costs, G, the disutility of work,  , and worker's bar-
gaining power, b, are determined. Shimer (2005) presents a calibration strategy where  is
set to target the replacement rate of unemployment insurance for the U.S. (approximately
40%) and worker's bargaining power is set equal to the elasticity of matches with respect
to unemployment following Hosios (1990), the so-called Hosios condition. The flow cost of
vacancy creation, G, is not explicitly targeted under this strategy, but is instead left free
to adjust so the model can reach other desired targets. Such a calibration strategy is not
suitable for our purposes as it implicitly shuts down one of our primary channels of interest,
the inefficient level of vacancy creation by firms in the decentralized economy. Specifically,
adopting the Hosios condition in calibration is a well-known strategy for internalizing conges-
tion externalities and achieving the first-best allocation within a decentralized labor market
search model. As such, under this calibration firms in the decentralized economy will create
the socially efficient level of vacancies.
    Fortunately, another popular calibration scheme proposed by Hagedorn and Manovskii


                                              50
                          Figure D.3: Damage Function Calibration




(2008) does not impose the Hosios condition. Instead of determining vacancy costs as a
residual of the calibration exercise, the authors target this value directly. The authors state
that vacancy costs are significantly lower in the data and, as such, they set G to match
their empirical target. Furthermore, workers' bargaining power is set to target the elasticity
of wages with respect to average labor productivity observed in the data. This alternative
calibration strategy results in a small match surplus that varies significantly at business cycle
frequencies and has been shown to generate empirically realistic volatility in labor market
variables.
    Setting b = 0.05 results in an elasticity of wages with respect to average labor productivity
of 0.546. While this is larger than the target of 0.449 reported in Hagedorn and Manovskii
(2008), this outcome is not unexpected. One reason for this difference is that we are working
with an RBC search model which adopts a more conventional utility function that assumes
agents are risk averse. In contrast, Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) present their results
using a traditional DMP search model with risk neutral agents. See Atolia et al. (2018) for


                                               51
a more thorough discussion on this issue.


E     Additional Results
E.1    Decentralized Problem
Figure E.1 presents three panels of impulse response functions recovered from the unregulated
decentralized economy. The first panel shows the response of output, consumption, and
investment to a one-time, one-standard deviation innovation in total factor productivity.
For scale, the impulse response function for productivity is also included. The second and
third panels of Figure E.1 show the response for labor market and environmental variables,
respectively. As described in the main text, the response of these variables is consistent
with existing literature and serve to highlight the relatively high volatility of labor market
variables in the decentralized economy and the fact that firms do not abate emissions in
absence of corrective policies (e.g., an emissions tax).
    Figure E.2 presents the 100-period stochastic time paths recovered from the baseline
decentralized economy. Just as before, the top panel present the time paths for traditional
real business cycle variables along with total factor productivity, and the second and third
panels present the time paths for labor market and environmental variables.

E.2    Planner's Problem
Figures E.3 and E.4 present impulse response functions and time paths for the planner's
problem. These figures are ordered in the same way as Figures E.1 and E.2 described above.
The primary difference is the volatility in the fraction of emissions abated and the amount of
resources (output) devoted to abatement spending in the planner's problem. Comparsions
of the labor market plots also reveal differences in the volatiity of labor market variables
across model specifications.

E.3    Ramsey Efficient Dynamic Tax Problem
Figures E.5 and E.6 present time paths of the first-best and second-best Ramsey taxes,
respectively.


F     Transition Dynamics
Here we present simulations of the transitions from one steady-state equilibrium to another.
In particular, we run several simulations that all start at the steady state under the unreg-
ulated decentralized economy and have no TFP shocks. One simulation is the decentralized
model without policy; under this simulation all variables simply remain at their steady-state
values for all periods. Three other simulations employ the first-best emissions and vacancy


                                             52
taxes, the second-best emissions tax, and the second-best vacancy tax, respectively. In Fig-
ure F.1, we present the levels of consumption, employment, and utility for each of the first
100 periods under each simulation.
    As described in the text, when conducting welfare analysis by calculating compensating
variation, rather than just comparing steady states across policies, we start all simulations
at the same initial state and simulate the transition to the new steady state. If we just
compared steady state welfare, we find that the steady-state welfare under the second-best
vacancy tax is actually slightly higher than the steady-state welfare under the first-best
taxes. The difference is so slight that it is difficult to see in the bottom panel of Figure F.1
towards the end of the simulation as the steady state is approached. However, it is clear to
see that through most periods of the transition, the first-best utility is higher than that of
the second-best emissions tax, which is higher than that of the decentralized equilibrium. If
instead we conducted welfare analysis by merely comparing welfare under the different steady
states, this would not be an apples-to-apples comparison. The state variables, in particular
pollution and employment, are drastically different across policies, so just comparing steady
states amounts to unfairly starting the simulations at different points.
    Figure F.1 also clearly demonstrates that the second-best vacancy tax brings about an
outcome much closer to the first best than does the second-best emissions tax. In Figure
F.1, the curves for the first best and the second-best vacancy tax are almost coincidental,
while the second-best emissions tax is noticeably different. Under the second-best emissions
tax, consumption is substantially higher than in the first best (which increases utility), but
employment is also substantially higher (which reduces utility).


G      Sensitivity Analysis
We consider how sensitive the results are to our calibrated parameter values. In particular,
we focus on the set of parameters that lead to the externalities. The magnitude of the labor
market search externalities are governed by the parameters from the Hosios condition ­ the
worker's bargaining power b and the elasticity of the matching function 2 . The magnitude
of the pollution externality is governed by the damage function d(x). We vary bargaining
power b, because that is a parameter that is known with much less confidence than many of
the others, while we keep the matching elasticity 2 fixed at its base-case level. We also vary
the damage function by adding a scale parameter in front of d(x) that increases or decreases
it by a fixed fraction.
    The sensitivity analysis results are presented in Figures G.1 and G.2. In Figure G.1,
we present results for the first-best emissions and vacancy taxes under different parameter
values. The left two panels show how the two taxes vary with the bargaining parameter
b, and the right two panels show how they vary with pollution damages d(x). As we vary
bargaining power from 0, where workers receive none of the match surplus, to 1, where
workers receive all of it, the first-best emissions tax barely changes (it only changes at the
13th decimal place). The vacancy tax decreases as b increases, reflecting the fact from the
efficient tax expression in equation 4 that the magnitude of the net congestion externality

                                              53
is proportional to b - 2 , as in the Hosios condition. When b just equals 2 , which is 0.72,
then the efficient vacancy tax is zero. When b is greater than 2 , then the efficient vacancy
tax becomes negative, i.e. a vacancy subsidy, since the direction of the externality flips. The
upper-right panel shows that as the damages from pollution increase, the efficient emissions
tax increases also. This reflects the efficient Pigouvian tax in equation 5. The lower-right
panel shows that the vacancy tax slightly decreases as the damages from pollution increases,
again reflecting the interaction between the two policies discussed in the analytical model
and reflected in equation 4. Even when varying these parameters, the scale of the first-best
emissions tax stays quite low, never going higher than $7 per ton, much lower than standard
estimates of the social cost of carbon. In part this may be due to the calibration technique
for the damage function (described in the appendix). But it also arises because of the labor
market search costs reducing employment, and thus reducing output and emissions. Part of
the work of the emissions tax is already being done by these search frictions.
    In Figure G.2, we present results for the second-best emissions and vacancy taxes under
different parameter values. As worker bargaining power increases from 0 to 1, both the
second-best emissions tax and the second-best vacancy tax decrease by a large amount. The
second-best emissions tax decreases from over $100 per ton to just single digits as b increases
from 0 to about 0.5. The second-best vacancy tax becomes a subsidy when b falls below
2 (0.72). When we vary emissions damages in the right-side panels, both the second-best
emissions tax and the second-best vacancy tax vary, though they vary by a smaller amount.
The scale of the second-best emissions tax is much higher than the first-best emissions tax,
and in fact is higher than common estimates of the social cost of carbon. In the second best,
the emissions tax must address both sets of externalities, so it is higher than in models with
only the pollution externality.33


H      Equity Concerns and Alternate Welfare Criteria
The welfare analyses of the preceding sections assume that the welfare criterion defining the
first best considers only efficiency. Equity or distributional concerns are ignored. Also, in
the preceding analyses the only cost of unemployment is the foregone production of the idle
workforce. The analyses ignore the substantial psychological costs to the unemployed, costs
to society that exceed the opportunity cost of idleness.
    We consider two extensions to the numerical model that address these issues. First, we
address equity concerns. Our model has one representative household and one representative
firm, so the only distributional outcome we can examine is the differential outcomes between
these two representatives (i.e. we cannot look at distributional outcomes across income
or race).34 Furthermore, because the representative firm is owned by the representative
  33
     This result is similar to the second-best emissions tax found in Barrage (2020), where distortions from
pre-existing taxes, rather than another market failure, make the efficient tax differ from marginal external
damages.
  34
     Other DSGE models do incorporate heterogeneous agents, including Iacoviello (2005), Kaplan et al.
(2018), and Hohberger et al. (2020).


                                                    54
household, the delineation between these two agents is muddled. Nevertheless, we proceed
by analyzing the difference in outcomes for the firm and for the worker to provide an initial
assessment of distributional outcomes of our policies.
    In Table H.1, we present the steady-state values of the household's utility, the firm's profit,
and the unemployment rate, under several equilibrium outcomes. The first row presents these
three values under the decentralized equilibrium with no policies (e = v = 0). The second
row is from the planner's problem, which maximizes total welfare. The last three rows are
from decentralized equilibria with non-zero policy values. The third row is with the first-best
emissions and vacancy taxes; this row is equivalent to the planner's problem. The fourth and
fifth rows are with the second-best emissions and vacancy taxes, respectively. The utility
and profit values are in arbitrary units, so we also present these values as percentages of the
first-best values (0.0642 for utility and 0.1220 for profit). Profit is undefined in the planner's
problem since input prices are undefined. These calculations are based on just the steady-
state equilibria under each of the policies and do not include the transition paths (which are
explored in appendix section F).
    Moving from the unregulated decentralized equilibrium to the first best only slightly
increases household utility but increases firm profit by almost an order of magnitude. The
unemployment rate nearly doubles. While total efficiency increases, the benefits accrue
mainly to the firm. Though the household has slightly higher utility in the first best than
in the unregulated equilibrium, the doubling of unemployment should not be ignored. In
the model, holding consumption constant an increase in unemployment actually benefits the
household since leisure increases. In the real world, this unemployment increase is bad for
workers. Comparing the second-best emissions tax with the second-best vacancy tax shows
that the latter is more efficient overall (both utility and profit nearly as high as their first-best
levels), but the former is better for the household (higher utility and lower unemployment).
This very back-of-the-envelope decomposition thus suggests a trade-off between efficiency
and equity in policy design, pitting the more efficient policy (the vacancy tax) against the
more equitable policy (the emissions tax).
    Second, we consider the excess psychological costs of unemployment by employing alter-
nate welfare criteria. A large literature documents the negative effect of unemployment on
people, including reductions in self-reported life satisfaction (Kassenboehmer and Haisken-
DeNew, 2009), decreases in mental health (Marcus, 2013), decreases in social participation
(Kunze and Suppa, 2017), and increases in suicides (Classen and Dunn, 2012; Milner et al.,
2013). The worker's single-period utility equals ln ct - nt , where  represents the disutility
of work. To capture the psychological costs, or disutility, from unemployment, we introduce
an additional component to the utility function, (1 - nt ). The single-period utility is now
ln ct - nt - (1 - nt ). In order to keep the equilibrium outcomes the same as their cali-
brated values in the decentralized case, we assume that the households behave according to
the original utility function ln ct - nt . But the government sets policy so as to maximize
utility inclusive of the unemployment disutility, ln ct - nt - (1 - nt ). This distinction
between the utility function that describes the agent's behavior and the utility function
that describes optimal or efficient outcomes is analogous to the distinction between decision


                                                 55
                            Table H.1: Distributional Outcomes
                                  Household Utility    Firm Profit   Unemployment Rate
    Unregulated Decentralized          0.0634            0.0149           7.87%
                                       (99%)              (12%)
        Planner's Problem              0.0642              N/A              13.74%
                                      (100%)
         First-Best Taxes              0.0642            0.1220             13.74%
                                      (100%)             (100%)
   Second-Best Emissions Tax           0.0675            0.0380              8.39%
                                      (105%)              (31%)
    Second-Best Vacancy Tax            0.0635            0.1216             13.74%
                                       (99%)             (100%)
      Notes: This table presents steady-state values for household utility, firm profit, and
      unemployment under five equilibrium scenarios under base-case parameter values.
      Household utility and firm profit are in arbitrary units; the percents in parentheses
      below these values are the percentage relative to the first best. Firm profit is unde-
      fined in the planner's problem since input prices are undefined. The representative
      household owns the representative firm and receives its profits as income.

utility and experienced utility often used in behavioral welfare economics (Kahneman and
Sugden, 2005).
    In Figure H.1, we present values for the first- and second-best steady-state emissions and
vacancy taxes for different values of the unemployment disutility parameter , ranging from
0 to 0.6. For comparison, the disutility of work parameter  is 0.85, so when  = 0.425, the
unemployment disutility is half as high as the disutility of work. The first row shows that as
unemployment disutility  gets higher, the first-best vacancy tax decreases by a lot and the
first-best emissions tax increases by a little. When  = 0.425, the first-best vacancy tax is
about an order of magnitude smaller than its base-case value when  = 0, while the first-best
emissions tax is only about 10% greater than its base-case value. Even including disutility
of unemployment with just a modest magnitude greatly reduces the tax on vacancies. The
bottom row of Figure H.1 shows how the second-best taxes respond to . The second-best
vacancy tax is almost identical to the first-best vacancy tax. But, the second-best emissions
tax is much more responsive to  than is the first-best emissions tax. Increasing  from 0 to
0.425 decreases the second-best emissions tax by more than 50%. This panel demonstrates
an important trade-off between reducing emissions and avoiding adverse effects on workers.




                                              56
             Figure E.1: Impulse Response Functions - Decentralized Problem




Notes: All simulations are from a one-unit one-time productivity innovation.




                                                  57
              Figure E.2: Business Cycle Simulations - Decentralized Problem




Notes: All simulations are from randomly generated draws of productivity innovations for 100 periods.




                                                  58
                Figure E.3: Impulse Response Functions - Planner's Problem




Notes: All simulations are from a one-unit one-time productivity innovation.



                                                  59
                Figure E.4: Business Cycle Simulations - Planner's Problem




Notes: All simulations are from randomly generated draws of productivity innovations for 100 periods.




                                                  60
                 Figure E.5: Business Cycle Simulations - First-Best Taxes




Notes: All simulations are from randomly generated draws of productivity innovations for 100 periods.




                                                  61
           Figure E.6: Business Cycle Simulations - First vs Second Best Taxes




Notes: All simulations are from randomly generated draws of productivity innovations for 100 periods.




                                                  62
                                Figure F.1: Transition Dynamics




Notes: All simulations begin at the decentralized (no policy) equilibrium steady state and feature no TFP
shocks.




                                                 63
                      Figure G.1: Sensitivity Analysis - First-Best Taxes




Notes: Simulations of the first-best emissions and vacancy creation taxes for different values of bargaining
parameter b and pollution externality.




                                                   64
                    Figure G.2: Sensitivity Analysis - Second-Best Taxes




Notes: Simulations of the second-best emissions and vacancy creation taxes (when the other tax is fixed at
zero) for different values of bargaining parameter b and pollution externality.




                                                  65
                              Figure H.1: Unemployment Disutility




Notes: Simulations of the first- and second-best emissions and vacancy creation taxes for different values of
the unemployment disutility parameter .




                                                   66
