                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         LONG-RUN EFFECTS OF INCENTIVIZING WORK AFTER CHILDBIRTH

                                             Elira Kuka
                                           Na'ama Shenhav

                                        Working Paper 27444
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27444


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




We thank Jacob Bastian, Marianne Bitler, David Card, Liz Cascio, Janet Currie, Nathaniel Hendren,
Hilary Hoynes, Henrik Kleven, Pat Kline, Erzo Luttmer, Maya Rossin-Slater, Jesse Rothstein, Emmanuel
Saez, and Dmitry Taubinsky as well as seminar audiences at Brown, Dartmouth, George Washington
University, Stanford, University of Ottawa, UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Santa Cruz, and the NBER
Children's Meeting for helpful comments. We also thank Lynn Fisher, Thuy Ho, and Richard Chard
at SSA for their help accessing the data and with the disclosure review process. This research was
supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #5 DRC12000002-06 to the National
Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Disability Research Consortium. The findings and
conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not represent the views of SSA, any
agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Elira Kuka and Na'ama Shenhav. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Long-Run Effects of Incentivizing Work After Childbirth
Elira Kuka and Na'ama Shenhav
NBER Working Paper No. 27444
June 2020
JEL No. H20,H24,J16,J20,J22,J24

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper uses a panel of SSA earnings linked to the CPS to estimate the impact of increasing
post-childbirth work incentives on mothers' long-run career trajectories. We implement a novel
research design that exploits variation in the timing of the 1993 reform of the Earned Income Tax
Credit (EITC) around a woman's first birth and in eligibility for the credit. We find that single
mothers exposed to the expansion immediately after a first birth ("early-exposed") have 3 to 4
p.p. higher employment in the 5 years after a first birth than single mothers exposed 3 to 6 years
after a first birth ("late-exposed"). Ten to nineteen years after a first birth, early-exposed mothers
have the same employment and hours as late-exposed mothers, but have accrued 0.5 to 0.6 more
years of work experience and have 6 percent higher earnings. Incorporating long-run effects on
EITC benefits and earnings increases the implied marginal value of public funds (MVPF) of the
expansion. Our results suggest that there are steep returns to work incentives at childbirth that
accumulate over the life-cycle.


Elira Kuka
Economics Department
The George Washington University
2115 G Street NW
Monroe Hall 340
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
ekuka@gwu.edu

Na'ama Shenhav
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
naama.shenhav@dartmouth.edu
       In recent decades, motherhood has become an increasingly important factor in the gender gap
in earnings (Kleven, Landais and Søgaard, 2019). The substantial "child penalty" in women's
earnings has been documented globally across various demographic groups, and has been shown
to persist for at least a decade after a first birth.1 In response to this, there is growing interest
in policies that could accelerate or increase mothers' labor force participation as a step towards
promoting their career advancement (Rossin-Slater, 2017). Nevertheless, the effectiveness of such
policies is unclear because, to date, there is no consensus on the answer to a key question: does
going to work sooner after childbirth yield long-run earnings gains for mothers?
       Importantly, the gains from promoting work for new mothers are uncertain because of the
coinciding and, possibly, overriding, demands of childrearing. On the one hand, part-time work
and less-time-intensive occupations are common among new mothers, which may entail a lower
return to experience (Goldin, 2014). Women also tend to sort into lower-paying firms, which
could be associated with a flatter earnings trajectory (Card et al., 2015). On the other hand,
precisely because the opportunity cost of work is higher for new mothers, employers may view
work after childbirth as a signal of commitment, which could be rewarded with higher returns to
early experience (Thomas, 2019; To, 2018). Reducing time out of the labor force after childbirth
may also make it easier to find future employment or encourage mothers to work full-time earlier.
These conflicting channels make the size and the duration of the effect of early work experience
ambiguous.
       In this paper, we estimate the long-run impact of post-childbirth work incentives on maternal
labor market outcomes. We obtain variation in work incentives from the 1993 expansion of the
Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), a federal cash transfer program for working families. Effective
in 1994, the reform increased the post-tax earnings of low-income families by up to 16%, and thus
raised the expected benefit of work, particularly for single mothers (e.g., Meyer and Rosenbaum,
2001). Unlike the prior literature on the labor market impacts of the EITC that uses variation in
the number of children across households, we isolate the impact of exposure to the reform at first
birth by exploiting variation in the timing of a first birth around the reform and in eligibility for
the credit.2 We use a panel of administrative earnings to implement this new design, which allows
us to follow the precise career trajectories of mothers around a first birth. We hypothesize that
exposure at first birth may lead mothers to begin working sooner after childbirth, accrue valuable
work experience, and have higher earnings in the long-run. We test each of these predictions, and
use our estimates to calculate implied fiscal externalities of the expansion.
       We rely on a large-scale panel of household earnings that we construct by linking two data
sources: (i) longitudinal earnings data from 1978 to 2015 and individual date of birth from the
Social Security Administration (SSA); and (ii) twenty three years of the March Current Population
Survey (CPS), spanning from 1991 to 2016. We use the detailed demographics in the CPS to
identify a "high impact" sample of never-married mothers and their children, and the SSA records
   1
    See Kuziemko et al. (2018); Nix and Andresen (2019); Kleven, Landais, Posch, Steinhauer and Zweim¨   uller (2019);
Angelov et al. (2016); Chung et al. (2017).
  2
    We use "exposed at first birth" or "exposed at birth" to refer to mothers who had a first birth in or after 1993.


                                                          2
to track annual earnings and employment (defined as positive earnings) around a first birth for each
of these mothers. This gives us annual earnings for roughly ten times as many sample mothers as
appear in the CPS in each March survey. Further, we use the snapshot of employment and fertility
information in the CPS to provide suggestive evidence on part-time and full-time work, as well as
on occupation choice and fertility, which may be potential mechanisms.
   We use two complementary research designs to estimate the impact of work incentives after a
first birth. First, we estimate a difference-in-difference (DD) model using never-married mothers,
nearly all of whom are eligible for the EITC. We compare the post-childbirth outcomes of mothers
who are exposed to the 1993 expansion at first birth ("early," i.e whose first birth was in 1993­1996)
to the post-childbirth outcomes of mothers who are exposed 3 to 6 years after a first birth ("late,"
i.e whose first birth was in 1988­1991), and to pre-childbirth outcomes. This approach follows
in the spirit of Chetty et al. (2013) and Bailey et al. (2019), who compare treated and untreated
mothers around childbirth to estimate the impact of EITC knowledge and paid leave, respectively.
   Second, we take advantage of the fact that married mothers are less likely to be eligible for
the EITC to implement a triple-difference (DDD) approach. We compare the gap in outcomes
between early- and late-exposed never-married mothers to the gap for married mothers, before
and after a first birth. This allows us to rule out potential confounders common to all mothers in
each calendar year, such as the booming economy or changes in policies or norms around maternal
work. Reassuringly, the DD and DDD designs yield similar estimates throughout our analysis, as
do alternative DDD comparisons using childless women who become mothers in the future or who
never become mothers. This suggests that any bias from unobserved shocks is small.
   For both of these designs, we present our results using event studies. In favor of our approach,
we find parallel trends between early- and late-exposed mothers prior to childbirth. Moreover, we
show that changes in employment upon motherhood were constant prior to the reform.
   Using these dual strategies, we find that early-exposed mothers have 3.4 to 3.7 percentage points
(p.p.) higher employment in the first five years years after a first birth (which we refer to as the
"short run.") This represents a 5.9 percent increase relative to the mean post-birth employment
rate of late-exposed mothers, which is equivalent to 18 percent of the 20 p.p. drop in employment
in the year after birth. We show that these effects are concentrated among wage earners -- rather
than self-employed workers -- which validates the effects as real changes in labor supply.
   We present multiple pieces of evidence supporting a causal link between these short-run changes
in employment and the EITC expansion. First, we use an expanded sample of births to show that,
consistent with EITC incentives, post-birth employment responses are larger for mothers after
a second birth, but not additionally larger after a third or higher-order birth. Second, we use
subgroup analyses to demonstrate that our results can not be explained by welfare reform or the
economic boom (Kleven, 2019). In particular, we show that our results persist even when we
restrict our analysis to the subset of states that did not enact welfare waivers and to the period
prior to federal welfare reform; or to states that experienced little change in the unemployment
rate in the 1990s. For these reasons, we view our long-run results as a dynamic response to the


                                                  3
EITC reform. However, the precise incentive that causes mothers to work sooner is not critical for
our interpretation of later-life effects, which are our focus.3
       Examining outcomes ten to nineteen years after a first birth (which we refer to as the "long
run"), we find that early-exposed mothers have the same employment rate as late-exposed mothers,
but have accumulated 0.5 to 0.6 years of additional experience. Early-exposed mothers also earn
$1,206­$1,392 ($2016) more on average in the long-run, which is 6% (4.2%) higher than the average
earnings of all (working) late-exposed mothers. In total, over twenty years after a first birth, early-
exposed mothers earn an additional $36,702 to $37,945 in labor income, up to 41% of which is
earned over the long run.
       More descriptively, we show that early-exposed mothers' short-run increase in employment is
driven by part-time work, but that they transition to full-time work in years five to nine years after
a first birth (the "medium run"), when children reach schooling age. This growth in hours has a
visibly apparent impact on medium-run earnings, and contributes 70% of an estimated 0.68 years
of additional full-time, full-year experience in the CPS. However, we find no effect on hours of work
in the long run, which suggests that the long-run increase in earnings that we document reflects
higher wages.
       These results hint at the fact that post-birth work experience may be rewarded with steep
returns. As further evidence for this mechanism, we find that the increase in early-exposed mothers'
long-run earnings is driven by a rise in the share of mothers who jointly have high earnings (in
the top 25%) and also worked during the first three years after a first birth. If experience was the
only source of earnings gains, the implied return to a year of full-time, full-year experience would
be 6.2 percent. This is within the range of estimates for similar populations (Adda et al., 2017;
Gladden and Taber, 2000; Looney and Manoli, 2013; Card and Hyslop, 2005), but our larger shock
to experience gives us more precision than other causal estimates (Card and Hyslop, 2005).
       We find weaker evidence for other potential mechanisms for increased earnings. Early-exposed
mothers appear to be slightly more likely to work in health service occupations in the long-run, but
this effect is too small to explain a large share of the increase in earnings. We also examine changes
in family structure, but find no impact on completed fertility, birth spacing, or marriage rates.
Finally, it is possible that mothers experience higher wages due to increases in post-birth resources
(which could facilitate, e.g., better health); however, we argue that the lack of any long-run impact
on labor supply makes this less likely.
       We estimate that the sustained increase in early-exposed mothers' earnings leads to a reduction
in EITC payments and an increase in tax contributions in the long-run. Thus, while early-exposed
mothers are expected to receive higher EITC benefits over the short-run, the net fiscal cost of
increasing generosity in the long run is much smaller than the gross cost (and possibly close to zero).
Incorporating these long-run effects raises the implied marginal value of public funds (MVPF) of
the expansion (Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2019): our lower bound of the "long-run MVPF" is
   3
    In particular, we interpret the long-run effects as a by-product of having worked sooner after childbirth. For this
to be valid, we only need exogenous variation in the timing of work after childbirth. This could in principle include
responses to welfare policy (although as we discuss, we find evidence against this interpretation.)


                                                          4
around 1.3 (i.e., the value to recipients is at least 1.3 times as large as the cost), which is at least
twice as large as the implied "medium-run MVPF." This suggests that policies to promote work
after childbirth, such as tax incentives for new mothers, could largely pay for themselves.
       Our paper is at the center of two active debates. First, we provide new evidence on the role of lost
work experience after childbirth on the long-run child penalty. The most relevant estimates on this
topic come from two sources of variation: (i) paid leave extensions;4 and (ii) welfare experiments
(Card and Hyslop, 2005).5 These studies generally find little effect of changing mothers' time
away from work, with a few exceptions showing mixed effects (see, e.g., Rossin-Slater, 2017; Bailey
et al., 2019). However, they also utilize relatively small changes in experience (e.g., 0.2 to 0.3
years in Card and Hyslop, 2005), which may make it difficult to detect an impact on long-run
earnings. Additionally, paid leave reforms commonly include job protection, which could mitigate
the negative effects of a longer leave (Stearns, 2018). Finally, paid leave often requires mothers to
be back at work within a year of childbirth, which makes it difficult to extrapolate to the 40% of
mothers who remain out of the labor force for a longer period (Laughlin, 2011).
       Our study has several unique features relative to this body of work. First, we leverage variation
from substantial reductions in non-employment beyond the first year after childbirth. Our impacts
on employment are largest in the first six years after birth, but extend up to nine years after birth.
This large shock provides us with substantial power to identify the return to working in the first
years after birth. Second, we can estimate long-run impacts on wages because we find convergence
in employment and hours. In contrast, the paid leave studies that find long-run impacts on earnings
also find significant reductions in employment (e.g., Sch¨
                                                         onberg and Ludsteck, 2014; Bailey et al.,
2019).
       Third, we provide new estimates of the returns to post-birth work experience for single moth-
ers, who are not commonly studied in this literature. The closest benchmarks come from non-
experimental or quasi-experimental studies, including Looney and Manoli (2013), who estimate an
insignificant 0.4% return using variation in experience across synthetic cohorts of US single mothers;
Gladden and Taber (2000), who estimate a 4­5% return for low-skilled US women using potential
experience as an instrument; Adda et al. (2017), who estimate a 9­12% return to experience us-
ing individual variation across new mothers in Germany. However, these estimates are subject to
concerns about measurement error in self-reported earnings and experience (Looney and Manoli,
2013; Gladden and Taber, 2000) and endogenous experience (Looney and Manoli, 2013; Adda et al.,
2017). Card and Hyslop (2005), instead, leverage a series of welfare experiments in Canada and es-
timate an insignificant -7% return (but have little variation, as mentioned above). We thus provide
the most precise evidence of the causal return to experience for low-income mothers.
   4
     These include Sch¨onberg and Ludsteck (2014), Lalive et al. (2013), Lalive and Zweim¨        uller (2009), Dahl et al.
(2016), Stearns (2018), Lequien (2012), Canaan (2019) in European contexts, or Bailey et al. (2019) and Rossin-Slater
et al. (2013), in the US context. For a summary, see Rossin-Slater (2017).
   5
     Expansions in child care availability or changes in fertility provide two other potentially useful sources of variation
in maternal experience. To our knowledge, there are no estimates of the effect of the availability of child care on
experience. Lundborg et al. (2017) measure the impact of fertility on work experience, but those estimates are not
comparable to ours since children are a potential confound for impacts on earnings.



                                                             5
        We also contribute to the literature on the effect of the EITC on female labor supply (e.g., Eissa
and Liebman, 1996; Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001; Hotz and Scholz, 2006; Eissa and Hoynes, 2004;
Chetty et al., 2013; Neumark and Shirley, 2017; Hoynes and Patel, 2018; Bastian, 2018; Kleven,
2019; Bastian and Jones, 2020; Wilson, 2020). Existing studies focus on short-run responses, with
the exception of Neumark and Shirley (2017) who find imprecise impacts on long-run earnings in
the PSID, but also have a small sample of women.
        Relative to these studies, we provide the first short- and long-run estimates of the impact of a
more generous EITC at first birth on labor market outcomes. To identify these effects we implement
a new panel DD identification strategy, which, unlike prior work, allows us to flexibly control for
potential selection into giving birth and to inspect for trends in labor market outcomes prior to a
first birth. Moreover, we provide transparent and precise evidence of long-run impacts of the 1993
expansion, which improves upon the suggestive results in Neumark and Shirley (2017).
        We also contribute to a smaller strand of the EITC literature that considers the benefit-cost
ratio of the EITC using short-run, static estimates of impacts on labor supply (Bastian and Jones,
2020; Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2019). We improve upon earlier estimates for this critical
component of the safety net by (i) directly estimating the mechanical and behavioral change in
EITC benefits, which are necessary inputs for the MVPF calculation; and (ii) incorporating long-
run effects on EITC benefits, income tax revenue, and program participation for never-married
mothers. Importantly, we show that the long-run MVPF for this population is at least twice
as large as a "medium-run" MVPF. This suggests that prior estimates of the EITC MVPF may
underestimate the long-run MVPF (Bastian and Jones, 2020; Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2019).6


1        Background
        The EITC is a refundable tax credit that is currently one of the largest cash transfers to low-
and middle-income households in the United States (Nichols and Rothstein, 2015). In 2014 there
were 28.5 million EITC recipients -- roughly 1 in 5 tax filers -- who received a total of $68.3
billion (Bitler et al., 2017; Hoynes and Patel, 2018). Single mothers make up the largest group
of taxpayers eligible for the credit, and receive almost 75% of EITC dollars (Bitler et al., 2017).
Married couples with children make up the second-largest group, and receive 20% of EITC dollars.
Benefits are claimed by filing a tax return, and refunds are typically issued within a few weeks
(Nichols and Rothstein, 2015).
        Eligibility for the EITC depends on two key inputs: number of qualifying children and household
earnings.7 Although the EITC is available to childless households, the childless credit is restricted
to very low income households and is quite small ­ e.g., in 2016, the maximum credit was $506,
    6
      Because we focus on never-married mothers, our MVPF is not directly comparable to the earlier MVPF estimates
(Bastian and Jones, 2020; Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2019), which incorporate effects for the whole population. In
that sense, our MVPF is most relevant for evaluating the benefits of a hypothetical policy that incentivizes post-birth
employment for single mothers.
    7
      A qualifying child must be in the household for at least half of the tax year and either be under the age of 19 (24
if in school full-time) or permanently disabled.


                                                           6
and was only available to families with annual earnings between $6,610 and $8,270. The maximum
credit for families with one child (two children) is typically six (ten) times higher than the childless
credit. Thus, in practice the EITC is primarily a child-based credit.
       Conditional on number of children, the EITC amount varies non-linearly with household earn-
ings (wages plus self-employment). To fix ideas, Panel (a) of Appendix Figure A.1 shows the EITC
schedule for households with one child in 1993, 1994, and 1995. To receive any credit, a household
must have earned income that is positive, but does not exceed a household-size-specific earnings
threshold. Within that range, EITC benefits are first calculated as a percent of household earnings
up to a yearly maximum credit (in the "phase-in region"), then are flat, and then are equal to the
maximum benefit less a fixed percent for each additional dollar earned (in the "phase-out" region).
       Outside of small inflation adjustments, the maximum federal EITC credit for one-child house-
holds was increased twice over our period of study. The larger of the two, the 1993 EITC expansion,
is the focal point of our analysis.8 Effective in 1994, the expansion increased the real maximum
credit for one-child families ($2016) from $2,381 to $3,300, and augmented benefits at every level
of eligible earnings (see Panel (a) Appendix Figure A.1.) The minimum real earnings to qualify for
the maximum credit was initially set as $12,550 in 1994; but the following year, this was reduced
to $9,701, which made the more generous credit available to a broader set of households with low
incomes.
       To consider the impact of the 1993 expansion on individuals' behavior, it is useful to scale the
change in benefits by household earnings in each EITC region. Panel (b) Appendix Figure A.1
shows that, as a percent of pre-tax earnings, the additional benefits represented 8% growth in the
"phase-in" region (or 16%, accounting for the 1995 adjustment), 5 to 8% growth in the "flat" region,
and 0 to 2% growth for most of the "phase-out" region. Put differently, post-reform low-income
households could expect to receive the equivalent of an additional month's wages in the phase-in,
or three-quarters of a month's wages in the flat region. On the margin, this would be expected to
encourage more low-income mothers to work.9
       The 1993 reform also raised the real maximum credit for households with two or more children,
more so than the one-child credit (see Appendix Figure A.2).10 The real maximum credit for these
families rose by $1,584 in 1994, and by an additional $1,400 over the next two years. Because of
our interest in first births, this variation is less relevant for our main analysis; however, we return
to exploit the variation in EITC benefit amount as a secondary identification strategy in Section
4.3.
       Consistent with the substantial financial incentives at stake, EITC take-up during this period
is quite high, between 80 and 86 percent (Scholz, 1994), based on data from the 1990 tax year.
   8
      The second, smaller EITC reform during our period was in 1990, and raised the maximum credit from $1,750
to $2,381 over three years. We emphasize this reform less because it contributes relatively little to our identifying
variation, as we discuss in Section 1.1.
    9
      There could also be intensive margin responses, although knowledge of the non-linear incentive structure of the
EITC appears to be limited, which makes extensive margin responses more likely (Chetty and Saez, 2013).
  10
      The 1993 expansion also established the first credit for households with no dependents, although this is less
relevant for our analysis because we difference out pre-birth outcomes.



                                                         7
This compares favorably with the take-up of other low-income programs around the same time,
such as traditional welfare (AFDC, which has 60­65% take-up) or Food Stamps (which has 55-60%
take-up) (Blank and Ruggles, 1996). Further, Saez (2010) finds strategic "bunching" at the first
kink of the EITC schedule beginning in the early 1990s, suggestive of spreading awareness of the
program's incentives.

Welfare Reform Along with the 1993 EITC expansion, the other major policy development for
single mothers in the 1990s was a series of reforms that tightened the requirements for cash welfare.
Modifications to welfare took place first through piecemeal waivers at the state-level (1992-1996)
and then nationally with the replacement of traditional welfare with the Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF) program in 1996. The reforms included several key elements intended
to encourage work among recipients: work requirements, time limits on the duration of welfare,
sanctions, and earnings disregards.
       The close timing of these events with the EITC reform raises some challenges for the identifi-
cation of EITC effects, as recently highlighted in Kleven (2019). Nevertheless, because the timing
and details of welfare and other low-income policies vary across states, we are able to control for
these in our analysis, which we do at baseline and with increasing flexibility in Section 4.3. An
alternative approach could be to exploit changes in welfare as a secondary source of post-birth
work incentives. Doing so would change the policy attribution of our short-run effects but would
be immaterial for the interpretation of our long-run effects as stemming from early work incentives.
In that sense, while we are careful to show that our results are not driven by other policies, our
long-run results would remain valid even if our estimates incorporate spillovers from welfare policies.



1.1      Identifying Effects on New Mothers
       By substantially increasing the expected benefits of working, the EITC expansion created a
sharp increase in the incentive to work for all mothers in 1994. Multiple papers study the employ-
ment response to this incentive. Our goal is to identify whether a mother that experiences this
incentive immediately after a first birth, and thus begins working soon after birth, has better labor
market outcomes than a mother that experiences the incentive, e.g., five years after a first birth,
after potentially having been out of the labor force for some years.
       To illustrate the variation in work incentives for new mothers, we compute the average maximum
EITC credit available in each year around a first birth for two groups of interest. "Early-exposed"
mothers have a first birth between 1993 and 1996 and therefore are exposed to the EITC expansion
at or around birth. "Late-exposed" mothers have a first birth between 1988 and 1991 and therefore
are exposed to the EITC expansion three to six years after birth.11 For simplicity, we assume that
all mothers have at most one child, and we assign them the no-child EITC before a first birth
  11
     We omit 1992 first-births in these comparisons in order to create a larger difference in the benefits of early- and
late-exposed mothers. We include 1992 first births when we examine outcomes across more-continuous bins of cohorts
(see, e.g., Appendix Figure A.9).


                                                           8
and the one-child EITC after birth. Because EITC benefits became larger for 2-child families after
1993, this will underestimate the gap between early- and late-exposed mothers' maximum benefits
if early-exposed mothers have more than one child (see Appendix Figure A.3).
    Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows that early-exposed mothers are eligible for higher maximum one-
child credit than late-exposed mothers for the first five years after childbirth. The gap in incentives
is $1,222 at birth (year 0); $1,185 to $1,329 in years 1 and 2, $500 to $800 in years 3 and 4, and
near zero in year 6. The vast majority of this difference (75%) is generated by early exposure to
the 1993 reform. Consequently, early-exposed mothers could be expected to work more for at least
the first five years after birth while there remains a gap in EITC incentives. Panel (b) of Figure 1
shows the gap in EITC incentives between early- and late-exposed mothers over twenty years after
birth. The only period when there is a meaningful gap between these groups is in the first six years
after a first birth. This ensures that long-run differences in behavior can not be due to differences
in contemporaneous EITC incentives.
    Our analysis leverages this variation in EITC incentives in the years around first birth to identify
the effect of early work incentives. In particular, we compare the gap in career outcomes between
early- and late-exposed single mothers, pre- and post- birth, in a difference-in-difference design.
To control for other coinciding changes, we compare gaps across eligible moms and less-eligible
women in a triple-difference design. Our main group of less-eligible women are married mothers,
but our results are the same when we instead use childless women in Section 5.2. We formalize our
estimation strategy in Section 3.


2    Data
    Our analysis takes advantage of a novel link between two Social Security Administration (SSA)
administrative databases that include individual earnings records and survey responses from the
1991, 1994, and 1996 to 2016 Annual Social and Economic Supplements of the Current Population
Survey (CPS). The CPS is an annual survey of 60,000 households that collects information on
demographic characteristics as well as on recent labor market activity and program participation.
It is crucial that we have both these sources of data, as neither one is sufficient for our purposes:
the administrative data do not have any demographic information, and the CPS have just a single
year of reported earnings, which are potentially mismeasured.
    We use the CPS survey responses primarily to obtain demographics for our sample. CPS-
provided parent identifiers allow us to connect parents and children in the survey, which we use to
identify the first birth for each woman and to measure her total fertility. We also observe marital
status, which we use to assign treatment, as well as race (white, black, hispanic, or other), age,
completed education (less than or equal to high school, some college, or college graduate), and state
of residence, which serve as control variables. Because we assign demographics at the time of the
CPS survey, rather than at first birth, this introduces a form of measurement error to our analysis.
This is a particular concern for marital status, which we use to assign treatment. We provide a


                                                   9
detailed discussion of potential sources of bias from mismeasurement, and of evidence showing that
this is not empirically relevant for our results, after we introduce our empirical strategy, in Section
3.1.
       The CPS also serves as a supplementary source of information on labor market outcomes and
program participation. The labor outcomes of interest are hours worked in the past week, weeks
of work last year, and current occupation (grouped into 15 categories as in Appendix C.1), which
allow us to explore intensive margin responses. We also take advantage of information on the value
of benefits from public programs for our calculations of fiscal externalities.
       Our main labor market outcomes are obtained from SSA earnings records (the "Detailed Earn-
ings Record" files). Earnings information includes aggregate annual wages, salary, and tips from
Box 1 of the W-2 form as well as earnings from covered self-employment from Form 1040-SE. We
have access to earnings from 1978 to 2015 for individuals that appear in the CPS. We convert all
dollar values to 2016 real dollars using the CPI from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. From these
records, we construct "total earnings" which includes the aggregate earnings from all W-2 forms
("wage earnings") and self-employment filings ("self-employment earnings"). We also calculate
"household earnings" which is equal to total earnings for single individuals and is equal to the sum
of own and spouse's total earnings for married individuals.12 If an individual has positive total
earnings, we consider her to be employed during the year.13
       Along with this earnings information, we have access to the SSA NUMIDENT file, which
contains information on individuals' exact date of birth. We use this to determine year of birth for
mothers and children. We then determine birth order among children by sorting on this year of
birth within a mother, and set the year of first childbirth as the year of birth of the eldest child.14
       We match the SSA records to the CPS using a unique identifier (PIK) created by the Census
Bureau. Across all CPS years, we match between 75% and 80% of the women that meet our sample
criteria. Match rates are similar by year of first birth and marital status, and are generally similar
across CPS years. For details on the matching procedure and match rates, see Appendix Table
A.26 for details. The one exception to this is the 2001 CPS, which we drop for having a particularly
low match rate.

Core sample We construct our core sample of first-time mothers from the set of matched indi-
viduals. First, we limit the sample to women interviewed in the CPS before age 50, whose children
are more likely to have been present at the time of interview. Second, we drop women that had a
first birth at age 18 or younger. We do this to limit the role of high school attendance in our results,
and because these women could be claimed as dependents themselves. Third, we only keep women
who are in our early- or late-exposed birth cohorts, who had a first birth between 1988­1991 or
1993­1996. To examine broader trends, we create an extended sample that retains all first births
  12
     Spousal information is also subject to measurement concerns, which we address in Section 3.1.
  13
     We discuss differences in individual earnings and employment across the CPS and SSA records in Appendix C.2.
  14
     In the few cases were the numident year of birth for children differs by more than 5 years from the CPS age -
year - 1, we assume that the numident match is incorrect, and use CPS age - year - 1.



                                                       10
from 1986 to 1999.
    Fourth, in a similar spirit to earlier work, we use never-married mothers as a "high-impact"
sample. To validate this choice, we use the three years of pre-birth household earnings to project
likely EITC eligibility after a first birth. Based on pre-birth earnings, nearly all of never-married
women are likely to be eligible for the EITC: 97% have earnings that fall strictly below the maximum
earnings for one-child EITC benefits.15 They also would be expected to highly benefit from the 1993
reform: the average working woman could expect the reform to increase her earnings by 8 percent
(recall Appendix Figure A.1). Further, unlike divorcees and widowers, who are often included in
the EITC "high impact sample," we can be certain that the never-married mothers that we observe
were also single at the time of first birth. This combination of factors gives us confidence that
never-married mothers would be highly-eligible for the EITC at the time of first birth.
    For analogous reasons, we identify married mothers as a "low impact" sample. Based on pre-
birth household earnings, 49% of married households are likely to be eligible for some EITC benefits.
However, because married households have higher earnings, the 1993 reform would have a smaller
percent effect on household earnings. Even if we conservatively exclude spousal earnings, the
average working married woman's earnings place her in the phase-out region, and thus she would
be expected to experience a 2% increase in her earnings post-reform.
    One potential complication in including married mothers is the finding in Eissa and Hoynes
(2004) that the EITC expansion reduced the employment of low-educated married mothers. How-
ever, this may be less relevant for our sample. First, the majority of our married sample has
more than a high-school diploma, which puts them outside of the Eissa and Hoynes (2004) sample.
Second, the responses in Eissa and Hoynes (2004) were concentrated among mothers with at least
two children, who obtain more generous EITC benefits than the first-time mothers in our sample.
Nevertheless, we empirically test for these effects in Section 4.
    Appendix Table A.1 provides summary statistics for our final sample by marital status. The
sample consists of 11,291 never-married women and 97,288 married women, who we each observe
for 25 years (five years before and up to 20 years after they first give birth).16 Never-married
women are more disadvantaged than married women in nearly every dimension: more likely to be
non-white, have a high school or less, and, conditional on working pre-birth, have half the earnings
of married women ($12,074 vs. $24,672.)

All births sample In Section 4.3, we compare the change in post-birth employment after a
second-or-higher-order birth compared to a first. Thus, we create a separate sample that includes
any childbirth that occurred between 1988­1991 or 1993­1996, and treat each childbirth as a
separate event. We do this by creating 10-year mother-birth panels around each birth, and then
stacking these panels.
   15
      Different than other studies of the EITC, we do not further restrict the sample by education because (i) education
is typically observed many years after birth, and is potentially an outcome of the policy; (ii) we find a high rate of
pre-birth EITC eligibility among all education groups for never-married women.
   16
      A given CPS survey-year has roughly one-tenth as many responses from women that meet our criteria.



                                                          11
State-level controls We obtain annual measures of state-level economic conditions and policy
parameters used in Bitler and Hoynes (2010), which we merge to our data using each woman's state
of residence. These include the unemployment rate, the maximum level of AFDC/TANF benefits,
the minimum wage, the mean poverty threshold for Medicaid, and an indicator for whether a state
has implemented any welfare reform (waiver or TANF.) We also create indicators for the presence
of each of six types of welfare waivers in a state using the dates of implementation from the tables in
Crouse (1999) (as in Kleven (2019)), as well as additional information from the tables in Gallagher
et al. (1998).17

Supplemental data For supplemental information on child care costs and marriage patterns
during this period, we turn to the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). State-level
measures of weekly child care costs are constructed by averaging the reported costs of SIPP mothers
with a child under age 3 in the 1990­1993 panels. We use these measures to examine heterogeneous
employment responses in Section 4.3. We also use the marital and fertility histories reported in the
1990, 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004, 2008, and 2014 SIPP panels to examine post-birth marriage patterns
over this period in Section 3.1. For further detail on the construction of these data, see Appendix
C.3.


3         Estimation Strategy
         Our goal is to identify the causal effect of early exposure to work incentives after a first birth
on labor market outcomes. Following the framework in Section 1.1, we start with a dynamic DD
analysis that estimates the difference in labor outcomes between early-exposed and late-exposed
never-married women in each year relative to first birth. Denoting an individual as i, the year of
first birth as b, and the year relative to first birth with  , we estimate:

               Yib =  +           k · 1( = k ) · EarlyExposedb +  + b + Xis + Ps +                     ib         (1)
                           k=-1


         The summation term represents the difference in outcomes between early- and late-exposed
never-married women, for each year relative to a first birth (i.e., event-time),  , where EarlyExposedb
is an indicator for having a first birth between 1993­1996. We omit  = -1, such that these coeffi-
cients are estimated relative to the difference in outcomes in the year before childbirth.  capture
the behavior of late-exposed mothers in each year relative to first birth. b are year-of-childbirth
fixed effects, which capture differences in average outcomes in the year prior to childbirth across
childbearing cohorts (e.g., selection into giving birth or new policies across cohorts.) Because year
is a linear combination of event-time  and year of childbirth b, we can not also include year fixed
    17
     These waiver types include changes to: (i) time limits for welfare receipt; (ii) exemptions from participation in
the JOBS (Job Opportunities and Basic Skills) program; (iii) sanctions for non-compliance with JOBS requirements;
(iv) earnings disregards; (v) family caps (reductions in benefits for children conceived while on AFDC); (vi) time
limit for not complying with work requirements.



                                                         12
effects in this model ­ we address this limitation in the DDD design.18 Xis includes fixed effects
for mother's year of birth, age, state, race, and education group. Moreover, we include interactions
between race and education fixed effects and an indicator for post-birth to account for potential
differences in maternal employment across groups. Ps controls for state-level variables, includ-
ing the state unemployment rate, minimum wage, AFDC/TANF maximum benefit level, Medicaid
generosity, the adoption of any welfare reform (TANF or waivers), the adoption of six different
types of welfare waivers, as well as an indicator for the implementation of the 2009 EITC reform.
       To summarize the EITC treatment effect, we replace the  indicators in the summation with
a P ostBirth dummy, which is equal to one in the year of childbirth and the following years. We
interpret this as the DD intent-to-treat impact of exposure to EITC incentives at first birth. We
discuss the assumptions needed for the validity of this and the DDD estimates in Section 3.1.
       Second, we introduce married mothers as a comparison group for never-married mothers, based
on the lower relative importance of the EITC for married households. This sets up a DDD design,
comparing never-married mothers to married mothers, for early- and late-exposed births. Using
N Mm as an indicator for being a never-married woman, we estimate the following dynamic DDD
model:

                     Yimb =  +               k,DDD · 1( = k ) · EarlyExposedb · N Mm +
                                      k=-1                                                                            (2)
                                  · b +  · m + b · m + m Xis + m Ps +                       imb

       The k,DDD coefficients trace out the DDD, comparing the difference between the gap in out-
comes for early- and late-exposed never-married mothers and the gap for early- and late-exposed
married mothers. We include fixed effects for marital status, m ; year of childbirth, b ; and years
since birth  ; as well as the two-way interactions between these. Importantly, the inclusion of
year-of-birth-by-years-since-birth fixed effects,  · b , allow us to control for year-specific shocks
to the labor supply of mothers with children of a particular age. This could include, for example,
changes in federal policies protecting mothers' jobs after childbirth, broad tax policy (e.g., child
tax credits), or the availability of new technology for caring for infants.19 Moreover, we allow all
individual and state-level controls, Xis and Ps , to vary by marital status. As with the DD, we also
replace the indicators for each year around birth with a P ostBirth dummy to estimate average
treatment effects.
       For all analyses, we include standard errors clustered at the state level. To account for potential
correlated shocks across states, we also obtain confidence intervals using randomization inference
and include those results in Section 5.2.
  18
     This limitation is analogous to the omission of quarter-of-birth-by-year effects in Bailey et al. (2019). Within-year
comparisons of early- and late-exposed mothers (that omit  ) produce similar results ­ see Section 5.2.
  19
     Our results are robust to allowing these year effects to vary by state -- see Section 5.2.




                                                           13
3.1   Identification Assumptions and Testable Implications
Common trends         Our first identification assumption is that early- and late-exposed never-
married mothers share common trends in labor market outcomes prior to "treatment." Treatment
in our setting is defined both by becoming a mother and by having a first birth as of 1993. It would
thus be problematic if either (i) early-exposed women were increasing their labor supply faster pre-
birth relative to late-exposed women; or (i) mother's post-birth employment was changing across
child cohorts prior to 1993.
   We implement two tests of this assumption. First, we check for "pre-trends" before giving birth,
i.e., changes in pre-birth labor market participation across cohorts. Second, we look at whether
women's post-birth employment was changing across child cohorts prior to 1993. Previous studies
of the 1993 EITC expansion have shown evidence along the lines of our second test. Our novel
panel allows us to validate this assumption in its entirety. Both of these tests pass easily in Sections
4.1 and 4.3.
   As a more stringent extension of these tests, we also check for balance in the demographic
characteristics and pre-birth levels of work across early- and late-exposed mothers in Panel A of
Appendix Table A.2. We see no difference in age at first birth, household EITC eligibility pre-birth,
or annual earnings conditional on working. However, early-exposed mothers are more likely to be
white, work a higher share of years pre-birth, and have higher levels of education (although since
education is reported after childbirth, this could be an outcome of a higher EITC ­ see Manoli
and Turner, 2018). Importantly, these differences have no impact on employment rates leading up
to birth, as shown in our pre-birth trends, which suggests that they are also unlikely to explain
differences in work after birth. Further, controlling for these characteristics, either explicitly (our
baseline approach) or through inverse p-score reweighting (in Section 5.2) makes little difference to
our results. Thus, differences in individual characteristics do not appear to affect our findings.

Contemporaneous shocks           A second assumption is that there are no other contemporaneous
shocks that differentially affect the labor supply of early- and late-exposed never-married mothers.
For example, the 1993 EITC expansion was concurrent with the 1990s economic expansion and
followed by welfare reform, both of which could also have also raised maternal employment.
   We address this first by following prior work in controlling for the generosity and availability
of a suite of government programs across states as well as for state unemployment rates in our
baseline specifications. Additionally, we show our results are robust to a variety of alternative
parameterizations of these controls (see Sections 4.3 and 5.2). The movement in the DD and DDD
coefficients across more flexible control specifications suggests that welfare reform can explain at
most 20 percent of our estimates.
   Second, we use our DDD design to rule out potential unobserved shocks to early-exposed moth-
ers (e.g., changes in cultural norms around mothers working, changes in firm' policies in promoting
women). Our main DDD estimates use married mothers as a comparison group, who allow us to
absorb common shocks to mothers giving birth in a particular year. To account for unobserved


                                                  14
shocks specific to unmarried women, we also present two alternative DDD designs. In the first
design, we compare never-married mothers with two or more children to those with one child, and
find larger effects for two-or-more-child families, consistent with EITC incentives (see Section 4.3.)
We also do not find a differential response within multiple-child families (i.e., for mothers after a
third-or-higher-parity birth versus a second birth), consistent with EITC incentives. In the second
design, we use two groups of never-married women without children as comparison groups, future
mothers or women that never become mothers, and find similar results across these (see Section
5.2). A confound that survives these tests would have to involve shocks that are larger for mothers
with one or two children after 1993, that are similar for mothers with two or three children after
1993, and that do not change with time for women that will become mothers or who never become
mothers.
       Third, we can conservatively interpret our long-term results as reflecting the weighted sum of
work incentives stemming from the EITC and welfare changes. As mentioned in Section 1, this
would not change our interpretation of the long-run results as stemming from exogenous changes
in early employment (and would only minimally change the attribution of our short-term results.)

Measurement error Finally, because of our reliance on survey measures of marital status, we
require an additional assumption that rules out selection bias stemming from a correlation between
the timing of exposure to the EITC, never-married mothers' decisions to marry, and earnings
growth. This could be violated, for example, if early-exposed mothers who are induced by the EITC
to have strong earnings growth marry at lower rates than both late-exposed mothers and early-
exposed mothers who experience weak earnings growth. Never-married early-exposed mothers that
"survive" to be found in the CPS would thus have a steeper earnings trajectory than the average
early-exposed mother, which would, in turn, bias our estimates upwards.
       To gauge the bias from selective marriage, we need a measure of the difference in post-birth
marriage rates across early- and late-exposed mothers in our sample. The raw difference in the
share married between early- and late-exposed mothers is 1.9% (90.6% vs 88.7%). However, this
gap combines differences in marriage rates at first birth with differences in the rate of marriage
after a first birth.20 If this gap were driven primarily by post-birth marriage rates, we would expect
the gap to grow over time. Instead, we find that the gap in marriage rates is unchanged whether
we look at surveys 7 years or 20 years after first birth, suggesting that early- and late-exposed
mothers marry at similar rates after birth. To confirm this, we use the rich marital histories in the
SIPP to calculate marriage rates among mothers who had a first birth in the same years as our
sample and who were never-married at first birth. Appendix Figure A.4 shows that SIPP "early-"
and "late-exposed" mothers have identical marriage rates after a first birth, suggesting that there
is no impact of early exposure on marriage rates.
       As another test for selective marriage, we check whether the gap in characteristics between early-
and late-exposed mothers widens in surveys further from first birth. Specifically, we regress a series
  20
    Other studies of the EITC also typically find small impacts on marriage (Dickert-Conlin and Houser, 2002;
Ellwood, 2000; Bastian, 2017) as well as on fertility (Baughman and Dickert-Conlin, 2003).


                                                     15
of individual characteristics on a linear trend in "survey years from first birth" interacted with an
indicator for being an early-exposed mother. Appendix Table A.3 shows that the coefficients on this
interaction are always insignificant, including for levels of earnings after a first birth. Further, the
estimates are typically negative, implying that, if anything, early-exposed mothers are relatively
more negatively selected due to attrition. Along similar lines, we also show our results are unaffected
by dropping CPS surveys further from first birth, where selection is likely to be more severe (see
Section 5.2).
    There are also two more minor potential measurement issues. The first of these is that we
observe a higher fraction of early-exposed mothers in the years immediately after birth (by virtue
of only linking CPS's in 1991 on), and thus require that mothers that we observe closer to first
birth are not positively selected on unobservables. We test for this by verifying that our results are
robust to dropping individuals from CPS surveys closer to birth (see Section 5.2.)
    The second more minor measurement issue is that we may misassign child birth order by
including observations from women up to age 50, when children may have already left home. We
test for this in Section 5.2 by restricting our sample to women observed at younger ages, and find
similar results.


4     Short-run Impacts on Working After a First Birth
    We focus first on the impact of work incentives on labor market outcomes in the five years after
a first birth (0    4). This is a natural starting point for the analysis because the gap in work
incentives is largest during this window, which generates a clear prediction for impacts on mother's
careers.

4.1    Employment
    Panel (a) of Figure 2 presents regression-adjusted means of employment around a first birth
for early- and late-exposed never-married women. Leading up to birth, both groups of mothers
show a roughly constant probability of working, exhibiting little, if any, anticipatory response to
pregnancy. In the year of birth, employment for both groups falls by 13 p.p., a 20 percent decline
from pre-birth levels. Late-exposed mothers' employment falls 7 p.p. further in the year after
birth, and remains at this lower level. Early-exposed mothers, instead, experience a smaller fall
in employment in the year after birth, and maintain relatively higher levels of employment for the
next three years.
    Panel (b) of Figure 2 presents our DD event study, which takes the difference between these two
series. The coefficients hover around zero in the years leading up to birth, indicating that early-
and late- exposed women were not trending differentially prior to childbirth. In the year after
birth, early-exposed mothers have roughly 3 p.p. higher employment, which grows to 6 p.p. in the
following year, and remains steady thereafter. The fact that the effect on early-exposed mothers'
employment levels off after the first two years suggests that the response to work incentives was


                                                  16
relatively immediate.
    The DDD event study, shown in panel (c) of Figure 2, is almost identical to the DD. This is
consistent with there being little change in married mothers' employment behavior across cohorts,
which we visually confirm in Appendix Figure A.5.
    Table 1 presents estimated effects on employment. As a way of empirically validating our DDD
strategy, we present DD treatment effects for both never-married and married mothers. We include
in column 1 the additional (maximum) EITC credit available to early-exposed cohorts, $1,009, as
one way of scaling these effects. This amounts to an 8.5% increase in earnings relative to pre-birth
average earnings among never-married workers.
    Our primary DD estimate in column 2 shows that never-married mothers' post-birth employ-
ment increases by a 3.7 p.p. (p < 0.01) in response to higher work incentives, which is a 5.9 percent
increase relative to late-exposed mothers' employment. This represents an 18% recovery relative
to the drop in employment in the year after birth. It also implies an elasticity of employment to
labor earnings between 0.54 and 0.72, based on early-exposed mothers' expected percent change in
EITC benefits (using late-exposed mothers' post-birth earnings ­ see Appendix D for details).21
    Column 3 shows that married women, in contrast, have no significant change in employment
(point estimate = 0.003). To look for potential heterogeneity in these results, Appendix Table A.4
separately estimates effects based on pre-birth household EITC eligibility. We find a positive effect
only among eligible never-married mothers, and no effect among any subset of married mothers.22
The DDD coefficient in column 4 of Table 1 is thus very similar to the DD effect (3.4 p.p.).
    Impacts on positive wage earnings, shown in the following columns, are only slightly smaller than
our initial effects on employment (by 13% for the DD and 9% for the DDD). Since wage earnings
are reported through third-party services, and therefore are not susceptible to manipulation, this
result is consistent with the fact that our employment effects are driven by a real increase in work.
In line with this, we find that early-exposed mothers' self-employment rises by less than 1 p.p. (see
Appendix Table A.5).

4.2    Distribution of Earnings
    Figure 3 shows the effect of early-exposure on the distribution of mothers' earnings in the first
four years after first birth.23 We examine a shorter window here to focus on mother's jobs when
they initially join the workforce after birth. For reference, we label the areas of the distribution
corresponding to the 1994 EITC phase-in, flat, and phase-out regions, as well as the poverty
threshold.
  21
     Our point estimate is close to the 3.1 p.p. effect for all single mothers in Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001), and our
elasticity is similar to the estimate in Chetty et al. (2013) for zip codes in the top decile of EITC knowledge, 0.60.
  22
     One explanation for this is the small incentive for married households (particularly after a first birth), discussed
previously. A second explanation is that the null effect reflects a mix of positive responses among primary earners
and negative responses among secondary earners (Eissa and Hoynes, 2004). Contrary to this, we find insignificant
results even in households where the wife is the primary earner.
  23
     The figure shows estimates from DDD regressions where the outcomes are indicators for having earnings above
X, with X = 0, 2500, 5000,....80,000, i.e., 1-CDF (Duflo, 2001). For the DD estimates, see Appendix Figure A.7.



                                                           17
      We find a significant increase in density in the phase-in and flat regions, where the increase in
EITC credits was largest. Effects in the phase-out region are small and statistically insignificant.
Importantly, this is not simply because never-married mothers never have earnings in the phase-
out region ­ Appendix Figure A.6 shows that they do, and that there is substantial overlap with
married mothers. Rather, it seems more likely that the increase in mass in the phase-in and flat
regions reflects the larger change in incentives.
      Consistent with prior work, only a small share of early-exposed mothers target earnings precisely
at the refund-maximizing (first) EITC kink.24 We find little pre- or post-birth bunching when we
examine all early-exposed mothers, although we do find evidence of post-birth bunching among the
self-employed, as in Chetty et al. (2013) and Saez (2010) (see Appendix Figure A.8 and Appendix
Table A.5). Hence, while early-exposed mothers appear to be aware of the incentive for bunching
at the EITC kink, this does not appear to be a primary driver of earnings responses. Further, we do
not detect any pre- or post-birth bunching among late-exposed mothers, consistent with previous
evidence that bunching increased after the 1993 reform (Saez, 2010).
      On average, early-exposed mothers earn $657 (se: 327) more based on the DDD, which rep-
resents a 7% increase in earnings relative to the mean for late-exposed women ($9,926).25 If the
short-run earnings increase was due to increases in working alone, and early-exposed mothers that
enter the labor market earn as much as the average late-exposed working mother ($15,737), then
we would expect average earnings to rise by $487, rather than by $657. This leaves room for some
small intensive margin effects.

4.3      Are Mothers Responding to EITC Work Incentives?
      Our hypothesis that the rise in employment is primarily a response to EITC incentives generates
several testable predictions. First, there should be an evident break in post-birth employment for
mothers that have a first birth after the expansion. Second, because the rise in the EITC maximum
was larger for mothers with two or more children, we expect a proportionally larger response among
mothers after a second or higher-order birth (2+) relative to a first birth; but not for mothers after
a third-or-higher births (3+) relative to a second birth (Hotz and Scholz, 2006). Third, we expect
our results to extend beyond states with high employment growth, and to begin prior to the
implementation of federal welfare reform in 1997. We can also test the stability of our coefficients
to introducing more detailed controls for welfare waivers and unemployment rates to bound the
importance of these explanations.
      We implement the first test by re-estimating our DD and DDD models replacing "P ostBirth ·
EarlyExposed" with separate interactions between "P ostBirth" and a set of indicators for having
a first birth between '90-91, '92-93, '94-95, or '96-97. If our effects were driven by an ongoing trend,
we would expect all four coefficients to be positive and to increase across cohorts. Contrary to this,
Appendix Figure A.9 shows little change in employment upon motherhood for pre-reform cohorts:
 24
      We find no evidence of bunching at the second EITC kink, as in prior work (e.g., Saez, 2010).
 25
      The effects are smaller in the 3 years after a first birth, and larger in the DD -- see Appendix Table A.6.



                                                           18
mothers that have a first birth in '92-'93 work as much after childbirth (relative to pre-childbirth)
as those with a first birth in '88-89. Subsequent cohorts have a sharp change in post-birth behavior.
For births beginning in 1994, post-birth employment increases by 5 to 7 p.p.26
       To implement the second test, we use the never-married "all births" sample. We then adapt our
triple-difference model to ask: is the change in employment after birth between 2+ "early-exposed"
and "late-exposed" mothers larger than the change between early- and late-exposed mothers after
a first birth?27 Column 1 of Table 2 shows that employment increases by 3.2 p.p. more after a
2+ birth relative to a first birth. Column 3 shows that the rise in working is slightly higher for
3+ births relative to second births, but the difference is not statistically significant. This pattern
aligns with EITC incentives, and is inconsistent with an alternative explanation that predicts
strictly increasing effects by birth parity, such as from higher rates of welfare participation or lower
base rates of employment (Kleven, 2019).28
       Third, we consider the potential role of confounding variation due to the booming economy
and welfare reform, a point recently emphasized by Kleven (2019). For an in-depth discussion of
the argument in Kleven (2019), and how it relates to our paper, see Appendix B. For all following
analyses, we include the DD results for never married mothers in Table 2, and present the (very
similar) DDD results in Appendix Table A.7.
       To test for confounders related to the economy, we examine whether early-exposed mothers'
employment increased more in states that experienced larger declines in unemployment rates during
the 1990s. We do not find that this is the case: columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 show that the
employment effects are very similar for states with above-median and below-median changes in the
unemployment rate between 1994­2000 and 1988-1993. This is despite the fact that the average
change in unemployment was three times as large in the above-median states (-1.8 p.p. versus
-0.6 p.p.). Hence, our employment effects hold to a similar degree even in states that experienced
relatively weak economic growth.29
       Further, in Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2, we allow the coefficients on our baseline unemployment
and welfare controls to vary by the age of one's first child, to address potentially larger responses to
the economy and welfare reform for mothers with young children, which was raised in Kleven (2019).
The additional unemployment controls have virtually no effect. The additional welfare controls
reduce the coefficients by up to 18 percent, but our conclusions are substantively unchanged.
       In the last two columns of Table 2, we limit our analysis to the years up to 1996 to limit the
potential influence of federal welfare reform. We present event study coefficients for these results to
address the fact that this restricted window creates imbalance in event time, and show the results
for all states (column 7) and for states that did not pass any welfare waivers prior to 1997 (column
  26
     For dynamic effects on employment by year of first birth, see Appendix Figure A.10.
  27
     Specifically, we redefine m and N Mm in Equation 2 to be indicators for being a 2+ mother.
  28
     Nevertheless, we do not focus on the comparisons across parity of child as a primary specification since mothers
are likely to have already experienced child-related gaps in work experience prior to a 2nd (or higher-order) birth.
Thus, immediate return to work may have a different (and possibly weaker) effect for mothers after a 2nd birth than
for mothers after a 1st birth.
  29
     Earnings effects are also similar across these states ­ see Appendix Table A.8.



                                                         19
8).30 The coefficients are similar to our main event study, and statistically significant in years 2
and 3 (see Appendix Figure A.11 for the complete graphs, which resemble Figure 2). Further, we
do not find meaningful differences across waiver and non-waiver states. This suggests that while
welfare reform may have reinforced the return to work after birth, it can not explain the majority
of our findings, consistent with Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) and Grogger (2003).
         Finally, we explore the role of two additional potential mechanisms, child care costs and state
EITC benefits, to gain insight into our results. In the interest of space, we summarize the results
here, and include a more complete discussion in Appendix D. First, we do not find a clear rela-
tionship between the impact of work incentives and (state-level) child care costs (see Appendix
Table A.9). This does not imply that child care costs are not relevant for mothers' employment
decisions; rather, we suspect that our observed child care costs proxy for multiple factors that we
cannot fully disentangle. Second, we find that early-exposed mothers' employment increases more
in states that have a supplemental EITC and higher state supplements (see Appendix Table A.10).
Thus, early-exposed mothers' employment grew more in states that had a larger EITC incentive
to work.


5         Long-Run Effects
         We now use the full scope of our data to examine how incentives to work after a first birth affect
outcomes over the medium- and long-run. We thus modify our DD and DDD estimating equations
to allow interactions between "EarlyExposed" or "EarlyExposed · N M " and indicators for each
of the three periods of interest; the short-run, years 0 to 4, the medium-run, years 5 to 9, and the
long-run, years 10 to 19.
         We begin by looking at the persistence of the short-run impacts on the likelihood of working.
Because the gap in incentives between early- and late-exposed mothers closes over time (Figure 1),
we expect that the difference in employment should also attenuate. However, it is not clear that
employment outcomes should fully converge, nor do so within six years, as incentives do. Early-
exposed women could have higher employment over the long-run, for example, if they are more
elastic to incentives, or if job finding rates are higher for women with recent employment (Kroft
et al., 2013). Late-exposed women may also catch up more slowly if there is a lag in the spread
of information about the EITC credit, or if there are other frictions that would similarly delay
responses, such as an insufficient supply of affordable child care.
         Panel A of Figure 4 shows that the impacts on employment begin to fade four to five years
after birth, and completely disappear by year 9 or 11, depending on the specification. After that,
we find a mixed pattern of small positive (DDD) or negative (DD) effects, which we suspect may
be due to imperfect controls for the effects of the Great Recession.31 Controlling for state-level
    30
     The no-waiver states include Alaska, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Louisiana, Minnesota, North Dakota, New Mexico,
Nevada, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Wyoming, as well as Washington DC.
  31
     Early-exposed mothers experienced the Great Recession between years 12­19 after a first birth (see Appendix
Figure A.12).



                                                       20
unemployment rates among low-skilled individuals or women rather than among all individuals
reduces the modest long-run fluctuations (see Section 5.2). Moreover, the long-run fluctuations in
employment seem to reflect entry decisions about relatively small earnings amounts, as indicated
by the results on earnings below. These issues notwithstanding, the point estimates beyond year 11
are overall small and imply no lasting impact on employment. The estimates in Columns 1 and 2
of Table 3 show that early-exposed women have a 4.3 to 5.5 p.p. higher employment rate per year
in the medium-run. This difference fades to an insignificant -1.7 p.p. to 1 p.p. in the long-run.
       Although early-exposed mothers do not have a permanently higher rate of employment, the ad-
ditional time they accumulate in the labor market may improve long-run earnings through increases
in labor market experience. We calculate these impacts on experience by taking a cumulative sum
of annual impacts on employment (shown in Figure 4), and then taking averages over the medium-
and long-run.32 Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 show that early-exposed mothers have 0.46 to 0.47
years of additional experience in the medium-run, which becomes 0.45 to 0.62 additional years in
the long-run. The long-run DDD estimates correspond to a 5.7% increase in years of experience.
To complement these results, we measure impacts on hours of experience in Section 5.1.
       Panel B of Figure 4 presents the dynamic impacts of early exposure on earnings. Early-exposed
mothers experience increasing earnings gains over the first six years after birth, following the
impacts on employment. However, unlike employment, impacts on earnings only decline slightly
over the next few years, do not exhibit non-monotonicities over time, and remain positive and
often statistically significant over the long run.33 The persistent impact on earnings is particularly
apparent in the DDD, where the point estimates are nearly constant between years 10 to 19. The
DD impacts on earnings decline moderately between years 15 to 19, but this appears to reflect a
timing effect (which is controlled for in the DDD), rather than true convergence in earnings (as
we show in Section 5.2). Early-exposed mothers thus appear to have long-lasting earnings gains,
which are not readily explained by differences in the rate of employment.
       Table 3 shows that early-exposed mothers earn $2,618 to $3,655 more per year in the medium-
run and $1,206 to $1,396 more per year in the long run. The majority of this (87%) is due
to increases in pay from employers (see Appendix Table A.11). Relative to the average annual
earnings of late-exposed mothers, the DDD estimates imply that early-exposed mothers experience
a 17% earnings gain in the medium-run and a 6% earnings gain in the long run. Going to work
earlier after a first birth thus appears to have a meaningful and persistent effect on earnings.34
       Further, consistent with the lack of long-run impacts on employment, we find similar long-run
earnings effects when we restrict the sample to those with positive earnings or analyze log earnings
in Appendix Table A.12 (columns 1-4). The DDD estimate on earnings conditional on working
represents a 4.2% increase relative to the average earnings of late-exposed mothers with positive
  32
      Using observed years of experience as an outcome instead produces slightly larger results. This is because
differencing out gaps in pre-birth experience does not fully account for gaps in the pre-birth employment rate.
   33
      The absence of non-monotonicities in the long-run earnings effects is consistent with the long-run employment
fluctuations being concentrated on extensive margin decisions about small earnings amounts.
   34
      For distributional effects on earnings, see Appendix Figure A.13.



                                                        21
earnings. Winsorizing at the top one percent of earnings to avoid the influence of outliers (columns
5-6) also makes little difference.
       Cumulatively, we estimate that early-exposed mothers earn between $36,702 and $37,945 more
over twenty years after a first birth, 29 to 41% of which is earned over the long run. Discounting at
a 5% rate produces a present value of earnings gains between $23,307 and $24,056. If the average
impacts on earnings levels in years 18 and 19 were to be sustained until the average age of early-
exposed mothers is 60 (for an additional 17 years), the present value of earnings gains would be
between $25,872 and $30,335. In Section 7 we discuss how this translates into impacts on total
income, taking into account changes in transfers from the EITC and other government programs.

5.1       Survey Evidence on Hours of Work and Fertility
       For evidence on hours of work and fertility, we turn to our sample's survey responses in the
CPS.35 Recall that, unlike the administrative data, the CPS only contains outcomes for each
mother for a single year and almost always after a first birth. As a result, we can only implement
a single-difference design, comparing early- and late-exposed never-married mothers' outcomes at
each child age; or a double-difference design, adding a comparison across marital status.36 To get
closer to our main analysis, we also add controls for average employment and earnings in the five
years prior to childbirth from the SSA records. Nevertheless, because we can not fully control for
pre-birth outcomes, these results are more susceptible to bias, and thus more suggestive than our
main results.
       Table 4 presents the impacts of early exposure on various measures of weekly hours of work
(including 0's). Columns 1-3 show effects on indicators for any, part-time (0 < hours < 35) and full-
time ( 35 hours) employment, while column 4 shows effects on average hours of work. Relative to
our main results, column 1 shows qualitatively similar, but larger, effects on early-exposed mothers'
employment in the short- and medium-run, and the same (null) effects in the long-run.
       For hours of work, we find that in the short run, early-exposed mothers' additional employment
is concentrated in part-time work, and amounts to an increase of 2 to 3 hours more work per week
(p  0.10). However, in the medium-run, higher employment is completely concentrated in full-
time work (column 3), and amounts to a 3 to 4 hour increase in hours work per week (p < 0.01).
Hence, early-exposed mothers appear to switch to full-time work when their children enter into
primary school (Duchini and Van Effentere, 2018).37 Further, this increase in hours of work likely
  35
       The results are the same if we include all (matched and unmatched) CPS mothers that meet our sample criteria.
  36
       We estimate the single-difference as:
             Yib = + 1 · EarlyExposedb · 0­4 + 2 · EarlyExposedb · 5­9 + 3 · EarlyExposedb · 10pl
                    +  + Xis + Ps +         ib

  where 0­4 , 5­9 , and 10pl are indicators for years 0-4, 5-9, and 10+ after a first birth. The double-difference
uses:
Yib = + 1 · EarlyExposedb · 0­4 · N Mm + 2 · EarlyExposedb · 5­9 · N Mm + 3 · EarlyExposedb · 10pl · N Mm
         +  · b +  · m + m Xis + m Ps + ib
  37
       This does not appear to be a purely "mechanical" effect of children aging. 67% of late-exposed employed mothers



                                                           22
contributes to the growth in the earnings effects between the short- and medium-run documented
above.
    In the long run, there is no difference in the hours of work between early- and late-exposed
mothers. We also do not find any long-run (nor any) effect on weeks of work (see Appendix Table
A.13). Thus, the long-run increase in earnings that we document appear to reflect higher wages. In
particular, our DDD estimates of earnings gains among workers above suggest that early-exposed
mothers earn 4.2% higher wages.
    Appendix Table A.13 shows effects on total hours of experience. We obtain this by summing
annual impacts on total hours of work, which we calculate as hours per week times weeks worked
last year. Using the married comparison group, we find that early-exposed mothers accrue an
additional 945 hours of work in the long run (p < 0.05), which represents 0.675 of a year of full-
time work experience (defined as 35 hours per week, 40 weeks per year). Moreover, two-thirds of
this experience is accumulated in the medium-run, which underscores the relative importance of
full-time work towards amassing experience.
    Finally, we consider whether early-exposed mothers make different fertility choices, in terms of
number of children or birth spacing. For this analysis, we limit our sample to women between the
ages of 36 and 44, who are more likely to have completed their childbearing (although our results
are not sensitive to this restriction). We present our results in Appendix Table A.14. We find no
significant effect on any outcome, and the magnitudes allow us to rule out effects larger than a 0.15
increase in early-exposed mothers' number of children (a 7% effect).

5.2       Robustness
    To verify the interpretation of our results, we perform additional analyses to rule out potential
confounds and check the sensitivity of our estimates.

Calendar-year event studies                   First, a potential concern with our DD estimates is that they may
reflect differences in year effects across early- and late-exposed mothers. Therefore, we study if our
conclusions about employment and earnings hold when we compare early- and late-exposed mothers
in the same calendar year. In particular, we plot calendar year event studies (i.e., coefficients on
year dummies) for early- and late-exposed mothers and, for context, also show year effects for
mothers that have a first birth in the years around our core sample (i.e., 1986-87 and 1997-99).
Similar to the main analysis, we omit the year prior to the earliest childbirth in each group.38
    Consistent with our DD results, Appendix Figure A.14 shows that early- and late-exposed
mothers converge to a similar rate of employment in the long-run (roughly equal to pre-birth
work full-time (in the CPS), while our estimates suggest that 100% of marginal early-exposed mothers work full-time.
  38
     Specifically, denoting calendar year as t, we estimate:

Yibt =             j · 1(t = j ) × 1(b < 1987) +             j · 1(t = j ) × LateExposedb +             j · 1(t = j ) × EarlyExposedb
         j =1985                                   j =1987                                    j =1992

         +             j · 1(t = j ) × 1(b > 1996) + b + Xist + Pst +        ibt
             j =1996




                                                                    23
employment), but that early-exposed mothers earn on average $1,500 to $2,000 more per year than
late-exposed mothers.39 Further, we find that the coefficients for early- and late-exposed mothers
are very similar to those for mothers that give birth in the following or preceding years, respectively.
This makes clear that our conclusions are not sensitive to making within-calendar-year comparisons
or to adding more cohorts of mothers.

Alternative comparison groups             Second, we test the sensitivity of our DDD results to using
single women that do not have children as a comparison group instead of married mothers. In
particular, we use as comparison either (i) women who will soon be mothers ("future mothers")
or (ii) women who will never be mothers ("childless"). This addresses the potential concern that
the earnings of all single women may have improved during 1990s (e.g., from the economy), and
moreso than the earnings of married women.
      Our "future mothers" comparison group consists of never-married women who have first births
four years after mothers in our sample (i.e., in 1992­1995, 1997­2000).40 This ensures that these
women are close in age to our core sample. We assign each future mother a fake year of childbirth,
^
b, equal to her true b minus 4, and set her fake "years since first birth" as the year minus ^  b.
Hence, "pre-birth" and "post-birth" consist of the same sets of calendar years for all mothers that
have the same "year of childbirth." We use this comparison only to estimate effects on outcomes
3 years after a first birth (prior to a future mother's first birth). If there is a confound that
differentially affects single women, then future-mothers with post-1993 "births" should experience
gains in employment relative to future mothers with pre-1993 "births", and drive our DDD to zero.
Reassuringly, the DDD in Appendix Table A.15 produces similar-sized increases in employment as
our baseline results.
    Our "childless" comparison group consists of women that we observe between the ages of 40
to 45 without any children in the household. To assign ^
                                                       b, we follow Kleven, Landais and Søgaard
(2019), and take a random draw from the distribution of b among never-married mothers who have
the same year of birth and level of education as a given childless woman. Then, as above, the fake
"years since first birth" is year minus ^
                                        b. Again, if there is a confound, then childless women with
post-1993 "births" should have better outcomes relative to childless women with pre-1993 "births,"
and lead our DDD to produce no effect. Contrary to this, we find that -- in line with our main
results -- early-exposed mothers earn $1,000 to $1,900 more in the long-run when we use either
all childless women or never-married childless women as comparison groups (see Appendix Table
A.16).41 This underscores the fact that our effects on employment and earnings are specific to
never-married mothers, and can not be explained by broader changes among women.

Alternative control variables          Third, we test whether our results change when we allow for
greater flexibility in our controls for economic conditions or individual characteristics. Allowing
 39
    Mothers with earlier exposure have weakly higher earnings ­ see Appendix Figure A.15.
 40
    We construct this sample independently, such that a woman can be both an "actual" and "future" mother.
 41
    Our short-run results are also the same when we use this group -- we omit those results for brevity.



                                                     24
the impact of unemployment rates and welfare reform to vary with the age of one's child (as in
our short-run results) does not change any of our long-run effects (see Appendix Table A.17).
We also control for state-level unemployment rates specific to women or low-skilled individuals
(calculated from the March CPS) -- which might better proxy for single mothers' employment
opportunities -- or including state-year fixed effects. Appendix Figure A.16 show that our results
are very similar across these specifications, though using group-specific unemployment rates yields
smoother long-run impacts on employment.
      Our results are similarly unchanged when we introduce richer controls for individual character-
istics. Appendix Table A.18 shows that our short- and long-run results hold when we use inverse
p-score reweighting to impose balance in pre-birth employment and demographics. Similarly, Ap-
pendix Table A.19 shows that our results are not sensitive to allowing the effect of mother's age to
vary with the age she first gave birth; including individual fixed effects; or restricting the sample
to mothers who are CPS heads of household or were income-eligible for the EITC pre-birth, both
of whom may be more strongly affected by EITC incentives.

Alternative sample restrictions Fourth, we re-run our results using alternative sample re-
strictions to address potential concerns about bias from measurement error (which we previewed in
Section 3.1). To test for positive selection among "surviving" never-married mothers across survey
years, we look for an upward trend in our estimates when we successively only keep individuals
interviewed in the CPS between 0­8, 0­9, ..., and 0­20 years from first birth. We find no such
trend: our earnings results are nearly identical when we only keep mothers interviewed within 8 or
within 20 years of birth, and are generally similar across years (although the confidence intervals
are wider when we use a smaller sample). See Appendix Figure A.17. We also do not find smaller
impacts on earnings when we successively only keep mothers interviewed further from first birth
(see Appendix Figure A.18).42 Moreover, we also find similar effect when we successively drop
mothers who were relatively older (39­49) at CPS interview, some of whose children may have
already left home (see Appendix Figure A.19). This assures us that our qualitative results are
robust to a variety of assumptions about how measurement error could affect our sample.

Randomization inference               Last, we use randomization inference as an alternative method of
obtaining confidence intervals for our estimates. In particular, we randomly assign a placebo "early-
exposure" to four randomly chosen years of first birth drawn without replacement, and estimate
a placebo effect using this definition. We do this 500 times for each of our main outcomes, and
plot the resulting distribution of estimates in Appendix Figure A.20. The one-sided p-values for
short-term employment and long-term earnings are between 0.01 and 0.02.
 42
      Earnings effects are also similar for women surveyed 0­4, 5­9, 10­14, 15­20, or 20+ years from first birth.




                                                           25
6         Why do Early-Exposed Mothers Earn More?
         Our results show that early-exposure to work incentives causes mothers to earn more at every
stage of their careers. This primarily reflects increased employment in the short run, and higher
wages in the long run. In this section, we explore potential explanations for higher long-run wages.43
         A leading explanation for early-exposed mothers' higher wages is increases in experience. Our
earlier results provide some indirect evidence for this mechanism. Correlationally, earnings and
experience increased together. Also, consistent with concave returns to experience, early-exposed
mothers' earnings gains make up a decreasing share of earnings over time (i.e., from 10.8% to 5.1%
between years 10 and 19 after first birth). As a more direct test of this mechanism, we ask whether
the mothers that experience higher earnings are the same mothers that were induced to work
after a first birth. To avoid conditioning on post-birth experience (which is an outcome of early
exposure), we run regressions where the outcomes are indicators for the four possible combinations
of having "high" or "low" earnings crossed with having "high" or "low" experience. We define "high
experience" as having worked during each of the first three years after a first birth (1    3)
to capture short-run responses to post-birth work incentives. We define "high earnings" as having
earnings in the top 25 percent of mothers in each year, which we find is the best (binary) proxy for
the impact of early exposure on earnings.44 If greater experience is driving our effects on earnings,
then we would expect to find an increase in the share of mothers with "high earnings and high
experience," but a decrease or no change in the share of mothers that have "high earnings with low
experience." We also do not expect any effect on the share of "low experience" mothers with high
earnings (i.e., in the return to low experience).45
         Appendix Table A.21 presents long-run effects on indicators for these four outcomes: having
"high earnings and high experience" (column 1), having "high earnings and low experience" (col-
umn 2), having "low earnings and high experience" (column 3), and having "low experience and
low earnings" (column 4). In line with our hypotheses, we find that early-exposed mothers are
significantly more likely to have "high earnings and high experience," and are less likely to have
"high earnings and low experience." We find no change in the share of "low-experience" mothers
that have high earnings (see Appendix E for details). As a share of the additional early-exposed
mothers that have high experience (the sum of columns 1 and 3), 21% end up being "high earning,"
which is similar to the share among all never-married mothers (19%). Hence, women induced to
work immediately after a first birth have similar returns to experience as the average never-married
mother. These results support experience as a main mechanism for our earnings gains.
         If experience were the only source of wage gains, the implied return to a full-time full-year of
    43
     In the medium-run, earnings gains do not appear to be explained by employment alone, since we find larger
earnings gains but the same employment effects as in the short-run. We examine the role of growth in hours versus
growth in wages for explaining the difference between short- and medium-run gains in Appendix E.
  44
     We provide further details and results using an alternative measure of "high experience," see Appendix E.
  45
     A related possible explanation is that our earnings effects reflect the impact of gaining experience during a good
economy. This seems unlikely, since we find similar effects across states with weak and strong economic growth
(Appendix Table A.8), and our long-run effects do not vary by post-birth unemployment rates.



                                                          26
work would be 6.2 percent (4.2%/0.675), using the estimates of impacts on earnings conditional
on working and of (hours-inclusive) experience gains from the CPS. This falls in the range of prior
estimates for similar populations, including the 5% return per year for women with at most a
high school education in Gladden and Taber (2000), or the 9-12% return per year of uninterrupted
experience among German mothers in Adda et al. (2017). However, our precision contrasts with
the imprecise and negative returns in Card and Hyslop (2005) which have clean identification from
a randomized experiment. Relative to Card and Hyslop (2005), our shock to experience is twice
as large, which increases our precision. The return to experience may also be higher in our setting
because working after childbirth provides a costly signal to employers of one's commitment to work
(Thomas, 2019; To, 2018).
       Second, it is possible that early-exposed mothers obtain higher returns to experience by choosing
different occupations. For instance, Adda et al. (2017) find that the returns to experience are higher
in "abstract" occupations that have more analytic or interactive tasks. We find some imprecise
support for this channel when we look at CPS occupations (see Appendix Tables A.23 for impacts
on service occupations and A.24 for impacts on non-service occupations). In the long run, early-
exposed mothers are 4 p.p. more likely to be in health occupations (p < .05) and 5 p.p. less likely
to be in clerical occupations (p < 0.1) in the CPS. However, we find inconsistently-signed and
noisily-estimated changes across the thirteen other job categories. Given this, it is unclear whether
the increase in health occupations is a true effect of early exposure or noise in the data. However,
even taking the increase in health occupations at face value, the effect is too small to explain much
of the total increase in earnings.46
       Third, early-exposed mothers may avoid skill depreciation by reducing the number or length of
time out of work. We do not have any direct evidence on this; however, Adda et al. (2017) find that
annual skill depreciation is low (< 1% per year) during mothers' early careers. Hence, mothers in
our sample would be expected to experience little depreciation.
       Finally, having additional resources after childbirth may have lasting impacts through purchases
of productivity-enhancing durables, such as a car, or through improvements in well-being. For
instance, expansions of the EITC have been shown to increase maternal and child health (Evans
and Garthwaite, 2014; Hoynes et al., 2015). If such improvements were major factors in our results,
we might also expect to find increases in employment alongside with wages (e.g., Frijters et al.,
2014). The fact that we do not find any such effects suggests that these improvements are likely to
have muted effects on wages.
       Overall, we find the strongest empirical support for the role of higher experience as a primary
channel for early-exposed mothers' higher earnings. However, changes in occupation, reductions in
skill depreciation, and higher income immediately after a first birth may also contribute to long-run
earnings gains.
  46
    In order to explain the entire increase in long-run earnings, the average earnings in health services would have
to be $34,825 ( 1393
                 .04
                     ) higher than in early-exposed mothers' other occupations.




                                                        27
7         Long-Run MVPF
         Thus far, we have focused on the EITC expansion as an experiment for estimating the returns
to going to work sooner after childbirth. We now consider whether the government funding used for
the expansion was efficient by quantifying the fiscal impact -- through direct costs and associated
fiscal externalities -- relative to the benefit to mothers. To do so, we measure impacts of early
exposure on EITC benefits, income tax revenues, and program participation. We use these inputs
to calculate the implied MVPF of the expansion -- the ratio of the value of the EITC transfer to
mothers to the net cost inclusive of fiscal externalities (Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2019). A key
caveat is that we calculate the MVPF under the assumption that these responses are solely due to
changes in the generosity of the EITC after a first birth.

EITC For the MVPF calculation, we need to estimate impacts on total EITC benefits, as well
as to decompose this total effect into changes in benefits stemming from labor supply responses
("behavioral") and changes in EITC generosity ("mechanical.") In the MVPF framework, the
"mechanical" growth is a pure transfer to recipients and thus gives the lower bound of the value of
the benefits to mothers (Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2019). We focus on the EITC benefits that
a household is eligible for, but discuss incomplete take-up below.
         We create three measures of EITC benefits. First, we simulate total EITC benefits for each
mother and child age using household earnings and the 1-child EITC schedule for 1989 first births
(if late-exposed) or for 1994 first births (if early-exposed).47 (This simplification makes the decom-
position more straightforward, but does not affect the results.) This is the EITC amount that a
household is expected to receive in each year. Second, to estimate the "behavioral" response, we
simulate a hypothetical EITC benefit at each child age based on household earnings and the EITC
schedule for 1994 first births. This is the EITC amount that a household would receive in each year
if its first birth had been in 1994, holding earnings constant. Third, we take the difference between
total benefits and this hypothetical "behavioral" benefit. This is the additional amount of benefits
that a household would receive in each year if its first birth had been in 1994 (i.e the "mechanical"
change in benefits from the expansion).48
         Table 5 presents the estimated effects for these three simulated EITC benefits. Columns (1), (2)
and (3) present the effect on total EITC benefits; benefits through the "behavioral" channel; and
benefits through the "mechanical" channel, respectively. The DD and DDD estimates are presented
in Panels (a) and (b), but for brevity we will discuss our results as a range between these.
         In the short-run, early-exposed mothers' EITC benefits increase by $400 to $619. This represents
a substantial 40% to 60% increase relative to average post-birth benefits. Over half of this increase
(54­70%) is accounted for by greater generosity (column 3), which implies that a large share of
the increase in EITC spending was a transfer to already-working mothers. In the medium-run,
    47
     In particular, the EITC benefit for an early-(late-) exposed mother with a child of age  is calculated using the
one-child EITC schedule from tax year t = 1994 (1989) +  applied to household earnings in  . We assign zero EITC
in the years pre-birth.
  48
     For more formal intuition for this decomposition, see Appendix F.1.


                                                         28
early-exposed mothers' EITC benefits increase by $53 to $93 (4­7%). There is no meaningful
"mechanical" difference in benefits and, consistent with the substantial earnings growth during this
period, the "behavioral" response is roughly half the size of the short-run estimate.
      In the long run, early-exposed mothers' EITC benefits decrease by $89 to $99, an effect driven
by the behavioral response. This reduces the fiscal impact of the expansion, but does not fully
compensate for the initial increase in benefits. Over twenty years, early-exposed mothers are
eligible for $2,626 to $3,229 more in EITC benefits, which has a present value between $2,328 and
$3,027 using a 5% discount rate.

Income taxes and non-EITC transfers In the absence of administrative data on taxes, we
generate a back-of-the-envelope estimate of federal income taxes owed by estimating early-exposed
mothers' average tax rate from our distributional earnings results and the NBER TAXSIM federal
tax rates (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993). This produces an average tax rate of 0% in the short run,
5% for the medium run, and 13% over the long run.49 Multiplying the annual earnings increases by
these rates, early-exposed mothers would be expected to pay the equivalent of $1,441­$1,559 more
in federal income taxes in present value terms. Hence, over the long run, early-exposed mothers
could be expected to pay back in taxes up to two-thirds of what they receive in EITC benefits.
      To estimate effects on program participation, we rely on self-reported measures from the CPS
and the estimation strategies in Section 5.1. We focus on impacts on the value of benefits re-
ceived from the largest transfer programs, including welfare benefits, disability benefits, food
stamps/SNAP, the value of Medicaid, and housing subsidies. See Appendix F.3 for a detailed
discussion of the definitions and availability of these variables, and the potential for misreporting
to affect these results (see, e.g., Meyer et al., 2015).
      Appendix Table A.25 shows that early-exposed mothers receive fewer benefits from nearly every
category, including welfare, food stamps/SNAP, Medicaid, and housing subsidies. If we use the
more conservative (smaller) estimates, we find that the value of transfers paid to early-exposed
mothers (and their families) is $936 lower per year in the short run, $1,599 lower per year in the
medium run and $61 lower per year in the long run. Summing up these annual impacts over twenty
years, this amounts to a $9,155 decline in total government benefits, with a present value of $6,657.
If we further exclude welfare benefits, which may be sensitive to welfare reform, and also the value
of Medicaid, which may be mismeasured, net transfers decline by $4,880 (present value = $2,791)
and $1,799 (present value = $831), respectively. This fits with prior evidence that expansions of
the EITC lead to important reductions in program participation (Hoynes and Patel, 2018; Bastian
and Jones, 2020).

MVPF          In sum, we find that over twenty years early-exposed mothers are eligible to receive in
present value terms at least $2,328 in EITC benefits, $1,000 of which is a pure transfer to recipients,
pay at least $1,441 more in taxes, and receive at least $831 less in government transfers (excluding
 49
      See Section F.2 for greater discussion of the calculation of these tax rates.



                                                            29
welfare and the value of Medicaid).
       If we focus only on impacts on earnings and taxes, we can compute a lower bound of the MVPF
for our population as:

                                            WTP                     WTP
                      MV PF =                                                                                     (3)
                                   Cost + Fiscal Externality  Cost + Add'l Taxes
                                                                         Our baseline estimate

       Depending whether we use the DDD estimates or the DD estimates, we obtain an MVPF
                   2,000                     1000
between 1.26 ( 3,027 -1,441 ) and 1.30 ( 2,328-1,559 ). The MVPF increases to 1.5 if we account for
incomplete take-up of the EITC, or to at least 5.6 if we incorporate the (at least) $831 decline in
transfers. We show a range of MVPFs across specifications and tax rate assumptions in Appendix
Figure A.21. In words, this means that the value of the expansion for never-married mothers is
between 1.3 and 5.6 times as large as the cost to the government. Importantly, we find that includ-
ing long-run impacts makes a meaningful difference in our MVPF. If we focus only on medium-run
effects, we obtain an MVPF that is between 0.4 to 0.6 of our baseline long-run MVPF. The ratio
between the long-run to the medium-run MVPF is similarly large when we allow for incomplete
takeup and include transfers (see Appendix Figure A.22). This implies that previous MVPF es-
timates that focused on short- and medium-run effects of the EITC on earnings (Hendren and
Sprung-Keyser, 2019; Bastian and Jones, 2020), are likely to be lower bounds on the long-run
MVPF.
       We note that our focus on new mothers and never-married mothers implies that our MVPF
is not the same as the overall MVPF of the 1993 EITC expansion (i.e., for all eligible families).
Inclusive of transfers, our MVPF estimate of 5.6 is larger than prior EITC MVPFs, which range
from 1.08 to 1.12 (Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2019) for the 1993 expansion, or from 3.18 to 4.23
(Bastian and Jones, 2020) for all post-1990 EITC expansions.50 Our higher estimate likely reflects
a couple of key factors. First, as mentioned above, incorporating long-run earnings increases the
MVPF. Second, we show that new mothers experience larger changes in work experience and thus
greater gains from work incentives. Third, our estimates exclude married mothers, who generally
reduce the MVPF of the EITC. In that sense, our estimates are a more relevant benchmark for the
benefits of a work incentive for new mothers or single mothers than for evaluating the EITC.
       Because we do not observe all possible externalities, our MVPF reflects an incomplete accounting
of the net cost of the expansion. We have argued that our MVPF is likely to be a lower bound
because we are omitting impacts on many non-EITC transfers, particularly cash welfare. However,
our calculation also omits intergenerational impacts, which could in theory be either positive or
negative. Suggestively, Bastian and Michelmore (2018) and Dahl and Lochner (2012) find that
EITC expansions during childhood tend to raise test scores, educational attainment and earnings.
These average impacts may not translate completely to our population of mothers exposed at first
  50
    In other respects, our estimates align closely with this prior work. Our estimated "mechanical" share of the EITC
increase is identical to Bastian and Jones (2020) (who estimate this to be between 54­72%), and is slightly lower than
Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2019) (who estimate this to be 89.5% using estimates from Hoynes and Patel, 2018).



                                                         30
birth; however, at face value they imply that our MVPF is an underestimate.
    From another perspective, these calculations also imply that mothers have more income after
the expansion. Summing impacts on earnings ($23,307), EITC benefits ($2,328), taxes (-$1,441),
and the upper bound of the absolute decline in transfers (-$6,657), we find that maternal income
increases by $17,537 in present value terms. Even so, it is difficult to conclude whether early-
exposed mothers are better off. Such an argument would require information on child care costs,
the value of lost leisure, and impacts on children, which are outside the scope of this study.


8    Conclusion
    This paper provides new evidence on the impact of increasing post-birth work incentives on
mothers' long-run career trajectories. For identification, we use a large-scale panel of administrative
earnings linked to the CPS, and variation in the timing of the 1993 EITC expansion around a first
childbirth. We find that never-married mothers exposed to more generous EITC incentives at
first birth, rather than 3 to 6 years after birth, have 3.4 to 3.7 p.p. (5.9 percent) higher rates of
employment in the first five years after a first birth. Ten to nineteen years after a first birth, early-
exposed mothers have the same employment rate as late-exposed mothers, but have accumulated
0.5 to 0.6 years of additional work experience. They also earn $1,206­$1,392 more on average, which
translates to a 6 percent increase in unconditional earnings. We find no effect on hours of work in
the long run which suggests that early-exposed mothers earn higher wages. These results suggest
that there are steep returns to work incentives at childbirth that accumulate over the life-cycle.
    One important caveat to these results is that increases in earnings do not necessarily equate
to early-exposed mothers being "better off." A complete accounting would require, for instance,
information on costs associated with work (commuting, child care), the value of lost leisure, and
spillover effects to children. Nevertheless, quantifying the scope of earnings gains from early return
to work is a crucial input to this calculation. It is also critical for understanding the drivers of the
child penalty. Finally, these estimates should inform the benefits of policies to encourage maternal
work (e.g., job protection, tax incentives, etc.) We leave it to future work to quantify impacts on
other dimensions of maternal and child welfare.




                                                   31
References
Abowd, John M. and Stinson, Martha H. (2013). `Estimating Measurement Error in Annual
  Job Earnings: A Comparison of Survey and Administrative Data', The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 95(5), 1451­1467.
  URL: https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/10.1162/RESTa 0 0352

Adda, J´
       er^
         ome, Dustmann, Christian and Stevens, Katrien. (2017). `The Career Costs of
  Children', Journal of Political Economy 125(2), 293­337.

Anderson, Patricia M. and Levine, Phillip B. (2000), Child Care and Mothers' Employ-
  ment Decisions, in David Card and Rebecca Blank., eds, `Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare
  Reform', Russell Sage Foundation.

Angelov, Nikolay, Johansson, Per and Lindahl, Erica. (2016). `Parenthood and the Gender
  Gap in Pay', Journal of Labor Economics 34(3), 545­579.
  URL: https://doi.org/10.1086/684851

Bailey, Martha J, Byker, Tanya S, Patel, Elena and Ramnath, Shanthi. (2019), The
  Long-Term Effects of California's 2004 Paid Family Leave Act on Women's Careers: Evidence
  from US Tax Data, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bastian, Jacob. (2017). `Unintended Consequences? More Marriage, More Children, and the
  EITC', Unpublished manuscript .

Bastian, Jacob. (2018). `The Rise of Working Mothers and the 1975 Earned Income Tax Credit',
  Unpublished manuscript .

Bastian, Jacob and Jones, Maggie. (2020). `Do EITC Expansions Pay for Themselves? Effects
  on Tax Revenue and Public Assistance Spending', Unpublished manuscript .

Bastian, Jacob and Michelmore, Katherine. (2018). `The Long-Term Impact of the Earned
  Income Tax Credit on Children's Education and Employment Outcomes', Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 36(4), 1127­1163.

Baughman, Reagan and Dickert-Conlin, Stacy. (2003). `Did Expanding the EITC Promote
  Motherhood?', American Economic Review 93(2), 247­251.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/000282803321947137

Bitler, Marianne, Hoynes, Hilary and Kuka, Elira. (2017). `Do In-Work Tax Credits Serve
  as a Safety Net?', Journal of Human Resources 52(2), 319­350.

Bitler, Marianne P. and Hoynes, Hilary W. (2010). `The State of the Social Safety Net in
  the Post-Welfare Reform Era [with Comments and Discussion]', Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity .

                                              32
  URL:      https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/the-state-of-the-social-safety-net-in-the-post-
  welfare-reform-era-with-comments-and-discussion/

Blank, Rebecca M. and Ruggles, Patricia. (1996). `When Do Women Use Aid to Families
  with Dependent Children and Food Stamps? The Dynamics of Eligibility Versus Participation',
  The Journal of Human Resources 31(1), 57­89.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/146043

Canaan, Serena. (2019). `Parental Leave, Household Specialization and Children's Well-Being',
  Working Paper .

Card, David, Cardoso, Ana Rute and Kline, Patrick. (2015). ` Bargaining, Sorting, and
  the Gender Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women *', The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(2), 633­686.
  URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjv038

Card, David and Hyslop, Dean R. (2005). `Estimating the Effects of a Time-Limited Earnings
  Subsidy for Welfare-Leavers', Econometrica 73(6), 1723­1770.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3598750

Chetty, Raj, Friedman, John N. and Saez, Emmanuel. (2013). `Using Differences in Knowl-
  edge across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings', American Eco-
  nomic Review 103(7).
  URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.103.7.2683

Chetty, Raj and Saez, Emmanuel. (2013). `Teaching the Tax Code: Earnings Responses to an
  Experiment with EITC Recipients', American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(1), 1­31.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.5.1.1

Chung, YoonKyung, Downs, Barbara, Sandler, Danielle H. and Sienkiewicz, Robert.
  (2017), The Parental Gender Earnings Gap in the United States, Technical Report 17-68, Center
  for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.
  URL: https://ideas.repec.org/p/cen/wpaper/17-68.html

Crouse, Gilbert. (1999), `State Implementation of Major Changes to Welfare Policies', http:
  //aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/Waiver-Policies99/policy_CEA.htm. Accessed: 2019-05-04.

Czajka, John L., Mabli, James and Cody, Scott. (2008), Sample Loss and Survey Bias in
  Estimates of Social Security Beneficiaries: A Tale of Two Surveys, Mathematica policy research
  reports, Mathematica Policy Research.

Dahl, Gordon B and Lochner, Lance. (2012). `The Impact of Family Income on Child Achieve-
  ment: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit', American Economic Review 102(5), 1927­
  1956.
  URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer.102.5.1927

                                               33
Dahl, Gordon, Løken, Katrine, Mogstad, Magne and Salvanes, Kari Vea. (2016). `What
  Is the Case for Paid Maternity Leave?', The Review of Economics and Statistics 98(4), 655­670.
  URL: https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:tpr:restat:v:98:y:2016:i:4:p:655-670

Dickert-Conlin, Stacy and Houser, Scott. (2002). `EITC and Marriage', National Tax Journal
  55(1), 25­40.
  URL: http://www.ntanet.org/NTJ/55/1/ntj-v55n01p25-40-eitc-marriage.html

Duchini, Emma and Van Effentere, Cl´
                                   ementine. (2018). `Do Women Want to Work More
  or More Regularly? Evidence from a Natural Experiment', Unpublished manuscript .

Duflo, Esther. (2001). `Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in In-
  donesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment', American Economic Review 91(4), 795­
  813.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer.91.4.795

Eissa, Nada and Hoynes, Hilary Williamson. (2004). `Taxes and the Labor Market Par-
  ticipation of Married Couples: The Earned Income Tax Credit', Journal of Public Economics
  88(9), 1931 ­ 1958.
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0047272703001440

Eissa, Nada and Liebman, Jeffrey B. (1996). `Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income
  Tax Credit', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2), 605­637.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2946689

Ellwood, David T. (2000). `The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy
  Reforms on Work, Marriage, and Living Arrangements', National Tax Journal 53(4), 1063­1106.
  URL: https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:ntj:journl:v:53:y:2000:i:4:p:1063-1106

Evans, William N. and Garthwaite, Craig L. (2014). `Giving Mom a Break: The Impact
  of Higher EITC Payments on Maternal Health', American Economic Journal: Economic Policy
  6(2), 258­90.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.6.2.258

Feenberg, Daniel and Coutts, Elisabeth. (1993). `An introduction to the TAXSIM model',
  Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 12(1), 189­194.
  URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.2307/3325474

Flood, Sarah, King, Miriam, Rodgers, Renae, Ruggles, Steven and Warren, Robert J.
  (2020), `Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 7.0.
  [Machine-readable database].'.

Frijters, Paul, Johnston, David W and Shields, Michael A. (2014). `The Effect of Mental
  Health on Employment: Evidence from Australian Panel Data', Health Economics 23(9), 1058­
  1071.

                                              34
Gallagher, L. Jerome, Gallagher, Megan, Perese, Kevin, Schreiber, Susan and Watson,
  Keith. (1998), One Year After Federal Welfare Reform: A Description of State Temporary
  Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) Decisions as of October 1997, Technical report, Urban
  Institute.

Gladden, Tricia and Taber, Christopher. (2000), Wage Progression Among Less Skilled Work-
  ers, in David Card and Rebecca Blank., eds, `Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform',
  Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 160­192.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7758/9781610441049.8

Goldin, Claudia. (2014). `A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter', American Economic
  Review 104(4), 1091­1119.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.104.4.1091

Grogger, Jeffrey. (2003). `The Effects of Time Limits, the EITC, and Other Policy Changes on
  Welfare Use, Work, and Income among Female-Headed Families', The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 85(2), 394­408.

Hendren, Nathaniel and Sprung-Keyser, Ben. (2019), A Unified Welfare Analysis of Gov-
  ernment Policies, Working Paper 26144, National Bureau of Economic Research.
  URL: http://www.nber.org/papers/w26144

Hotz, V. Joseph and Scholz, John Karl. (2006), Examining the Effect of the Earned Income
  Tax Credit on the Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare, Working Paper 11968,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
  URL: http://www.nber.org/papers/w11968

Hoynes, Hilary, Miller, Doug and Simon, David. (2015). `Income, the Earned Income Tax
  Credit, and Infant Health', American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(1), 172­211.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.20120179

Hoynes, Hilary W. and Patel, Ankur J. (2018). `Effective Policy for Reducing Poverty and
  Inequality? The Earned Income Tax Credit and the Distribution of Income', Journal of Human
  Resources 53(4), 859­890.
  URL: http://jhr.uwpress.org/content/53/4/859

Kleven, Henrik. (2019). `EITC and the Extensive Margin: A Reappraisal'.

Kleven, Henrik, Landais, Camille, Posch, Johanna, Steinhauer, Andreas and
  Zweim¨
       uller, Josef. (2019), Child Penalties Across Countries: Evidence and Explanations,
  Working Paper 25524, National Bureau of Economic Research.
  URL: http://www.nber.org/papers/w25524




                                             35
Kleven, Henrik, Landais, Camille and Søgaard, Jakob Egholt. (2019). `Children and
  Gender Inequality: Evidence from Denmark', American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
  .
  URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20180010from=f

Kroft, Kory, Lange, Fabian and Notowidigdo, Matthew J. (2013). `Duration Dependence
  and Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment*', The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 128(3), 1123­1167.
  URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjt015

Kuziemko, Ilyana, Pan, Jessica, Shen, Jenny and Washington, Ebonya. (2018), The
  Mommy Effect: Do Women Anticipate the Employment Effects of Motherhood?, Working Paper
  24740, National Bureau of Economic Research.
  URL: http://www.nber.org/papers/w24740

Lalive, Rafael, Schlosser, Anal´
                               ia, Steinhauer, Andreas and Zweim¨
                                                                uller, Josef. (2013).
  `Parental Leave and Mothers' Careers: The Relative Importance of Job Protection and Cash
  Benefits', The Review of Economic Studies 81(1), 219­265.
  URL: https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdt028

Lalive, Rafael and Zweim¨
                        uller, Josef. (2009). `How Does Parental Leave Affect Fertility
  and Return to Work? Evidence from Two Natural Experiments*', The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 124(3), 1363­1402.
  URL: https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2009.124.3.1363

Laughlin, Linda. (2011), Maternity Leave and Employment Patterns of First-Time Mothers:
  1961-2008, Technical report, U.S. Census Bureau.

Lequien, Laurent. (2012). `The Impact of Parental Leave Duration on Later Wages', Annals of
  Economics and Statistics (107/108), 267­285.
  URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/23646579

Looney, Adam and Manoli, Dayanand. (2013). `Are there Returns to Experience at Low-Skill
  Jobs? Evidence from Single Mothers in the US over the 1990s', Unpublished manuscript .

Lundborg, Petter, Plug, Erik and Rasmussen, Astrid W¨
                                                    urtz. (2017).                `Can Women
  Have Children and a Career? IV Evidence from IVF Treatments', American Economic Re-
  view 107(6), 1611­37.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.20141467

Manoli, Day and Turner, Nicholas. (2018). `Cash-on-Hand and College Enrollment: Evidence
  from Population Tax Data and the Earned Income Tax Credit', American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 10(2), 242­71.
  URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.20160298

                                                 36
Meyer, Bruce D., Mok, Wallace K. C. and Sullivan, James X. (2015). `Household Surveys
  in Crisis', Journal of Economic Perspectives 29(4), 199­226.
  URL: http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.29.4.199

Meyer, Bruce D. and Rosenbaum, Dan T. (2001). `Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit,
  and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3), 1063­
  1114.
  URL: https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/116/3/1063/1899757/Welfare-the-Earned-Income-
  Tax-Credit-and-the-Labor

Neumark, David and Shirley, Peter. (2017), The Long-Run Effects of the Earned Income Tax
  Credit on Women's Earnings, Working Paper 24114, National Bureau of Economic Research.
  URL: http://www.nber.org/papers/w24114

Nichols, Austin and Rothstein, Jesse. (2015), The earned income tax credit, in `Economics of
  Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States, Volume 1', University of Chicago Press,
  pp. 137­218.

Nix, Emily and Andresen, Martin Eckhoff. (2019), What Causes the Child Penalty? Evidence
  from Same Sex Couples and Policy Reforms, Discussion Papers 902, Statistics Norway, Research
  Department.
  URL: https://ideas.repec.org/p/ssb/dispap/902.html

Rossin-Slater, Maya. (2017), Maternity and Family Leave Policy, in Susan L. Averett,
  Laura M. Argys and Saul D. Hoffman., eds, `Oxford Handbook of Women and the Econ-
  omy', Oxford University Press.

Rossin-Slater, Maya, Ruhm, Christopher J. and Waldfogel, Jane. (2013). `The Effects
  of California's Paid Family Leave Program on Mothers' Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor
  Market Outcomes', Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 32(2), 224­245.
  URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/pam.21676

Saez, Emmanuel. (2010). `Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?', American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 2(3), 180­212.
  URL: https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/pol.2.3.180

Sch¨
   onberg, Uta and Ludsteck, Johannes. (2014). `Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage
  and Mothers' Labor Market Outcomes after Childbirth', Journal of Labor Economics 32(3), 469­
  505.
  URL: https://ideas.repec.org/a/ucp/jlabec/doi10.1086-675078.html

Scholz, John. (1994). `The Earned Income Tax Credit: Participation, Complicance and An-
  tipoverty Effectiveness', National Tax Journal 47(1), 63­67.



                                               37
Stearns, Jenna. (2018). `The Long-Run Effects of Wage Replacement and Job Protection: Evi-
  dence from Two Maternity Leave Reforms in Great Britain'.

Thomas, Mallika. (2019), The Impact of Mandated Maternity Benets on the GenderDifferential
  in Promotions: Examining the Role of Adverse Selection, Technical report.

To, Linh. (2018), The Signaling Role of Parental Leave, Working Paper.

Wilson, Riley. (2020). `The EITC and Employment Transitions: Labor Force Attachment and
  Annual Exit', National Tax Journal 73(1), 11­46.
  URL: https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:ntj:journl:v:73:y:2020:i:1:p:11-46




                                              38
Figure 1: Maximum EITC Credit by Age of First Child and Year of First Birth
                                                        (a) Levels, Up to Age 10




                          6,000
          Maximum EITC Credit ($2016)
             2,000         4,000




                                                                                 Early-exposed (1993-1996)
                                                                                 Late-exposed (1988-1991)
                          0




                                               -5           0                             5                  10
                                                                Years Since First Birth


                      (a) Difference Between Early- and Late-Exposed, Up to Age 20
                          1500
          Gap in Maximum EITC Credit ($2016)
                  500     0    1000




                                               -5   0             5               10          15             20
                                                                Years Since First Birth

     Notes: Panel (a) shows the average maximum EITC benefits in each year since first birth
     for mothers that are exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) or
     late (first birth: 1988­1991). Panel (b) presents the difference in benefits between early-
     and late-exposed mothers. Data: Nominal EITC benefits are obtained from the Tax
     Policy Center (https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/eitc-parameters), and
     have been converted to 2016 dollars using the CPI from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                      39
                            Figure 2: Effect of Early Exposure to Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment
              (a) Early- and Late-Exposed Never-Married Mothers                                                                          (b) Difference-in-Difference




                                                                                                        .15
     .1




                                                                 Early-exposed (1993-1996)
                                                                 Late-exposed (1988-1991)
     .05




                                                                                                        .1
     0




                                                                                                            .05
       -.05
Coefficient




                                                                                                   Coefficient
-.1




                                                                                                   0
     -.15




                                                                                                        -.05
     -.2
     -.25




                                                                                                        -.1
              -5     -4      -3     -2      -1       0         1            2      3         4                    -5   -4       -3         -2      -1       0         1     2   3   4
                                   Years from Birth of First Child                                                                        Years from Birth of First Child


                                                                                 (c) Triple-Difference
                                                  .15
                                                  .1  .05
                                             Coefficient
                                             0    -.05
                                                  -.1




                                                            -5      -4     -3     -2      -1       0         1              2        3       4
                                                                                 Years from Birth of First Child

              Notes: These figures present the point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from event studies of employment around birth for
              mothers who were exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) or late (first birth: 1988­1991). Panel A plots the
              estimates on indicators for years since first birth crossed with being "early-exposed" or "late-exposed" using never-married mothers.
              Panel B shows the estimates for the dynamic DD using never-married mothers. Panel C shows the estimates for the dynamic DDD,
              where we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. All regressions include indicators for year of first childbirth and
              years since first childbirth, mother's age and birth year, mother's race and education group interacted with post-birth, and state, as
              well as controls for the state-level unemployment rate, minimum wage, AFDC/TANF maximum benefit level, Medicaid generosity,
              implementation of six types of welfare waivers, implementation of any waiver or TANF, and implementation of the 2009 EITC reform.
              The DDD regressions allow for differential effects by marital status for these controls. Standard errors are clustered by state. Data:
              1991, 1994, 1996­2000 and 2002­2015 ASEC CPS linked to 1978­2015 longitudinal SSA earnings records. All dollar amounts have
              been converted to 2016 dollars using the Bureau of Labor Statistics CPI. Sample: women whose first child was born in 1988­1991 or
              1993­1996, who were at least 19 at first birth and less than 50 years old at CPS interview, and were either married or never married
              at the time of the CPS interview. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 5th year after a first birth.




                                                                                             40
  Figure 3: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Earnings Density ­
                     Triple-Difference Estimates
                 .15




                                      Phase-in   Flat        Phase-out
                             .1
      Effect on Pr(Earnings>x)
     0           .05




                                                    Poverty line
                 -.05




                                  0                 20,000           40,000          60,000   80,000
                                                        Wages + Self Employment ($2016)

Notes: This figure shows the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from DDD re-
gressions that compare the earnings distribution of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC
reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), across never-
married and married mothers. Each marker is obtained from a different regression,
where the outcome is an indicator for having annual earnings ($2016) at least as great
as X ­ where X is the amount shown on the x-axis ­ during years 0-3 since birth.
The dashed grey lines show, respectively, the end of the phase-in region on the 1994
EITC schedule; the 1994 poverty line; the end of the flat region on the 1994 EITC
schedule; and the end of the phase-out region on the 1994 EITC schedule. See the
notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables, standard errors, data and sam-
ple construction. Nominal EITC benefits are obtained from the Tax Policy Center
(https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/eitc-parameters). Years: We include
data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 4th year after a first birth.




                                                                         41
 Figure 4: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Long-Run Outcomes
                                 (a) Employment




          .15
                                                                         DD
                                                                         DDD



          .1
     Coefficient
          .05
          0
          -.05




                   -5   0             5               10          15          20
                                Years from Birth of First Child


                              (b) Annual Earnings
          6000




                                                                         DD
                                                                         DDD
          4000
     Coefficient
       2000
          0
          -2000




                   -5   0             5               10          15          20
                                Years from Birth of First Child

Notes: These figures present the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from event
studies that compare the employment (Panel A) or earnings ($2016, Panel B) of mothers
exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth:
1988­1991), in each year from a first birth. For each outcome we present both the DD
using never-married mothers as well as the DDD in which we use married mothers as
an additional comparison group. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control
variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from
5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                                          42
                Table 1: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment

                                 Max 1-Child           Employed (Earnings>0)                    Wage Earnings>0
                                EITC ($2016)     Never-Married     Married    DDD      Never-Married    Married     DDD
 PostBirth * EarlyExp              1009.2          0.037            0.003                0.032           0.001
                                                    (0.009)        (0.003)                (0.009)       (0.003)

 PostBirth * EarlyExp * NM                                                   0.034                                 0.031
                                                                             (0.008)                               (0.008)
 Mean Y                                               0.682         0.753     0.746         0.678         0.736     0.730
 Observations                                        112910        972880    1085790       112910        972880    1085790

Notes: This table shows estimates from regressions comparing the maximum EITC benefits (column 1), employment
(positive total earnings, columns 2­4), and positive wage earnings (columns 5­7) of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC
reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991). We present the DD using never-married mothers
(columns 2 and 5), the DD using married mothers (columns 3 and 6), and the DDD (columns 4 and 7). All regressions
include indicators for year of first childbirth and years since first childbirth, mother's age and birth year, mother's
race and education group interacted with post-birth, and state, as well as controls for the state-level unemployment
rate, minimum wage, AFDC/TANF maximum benefit level, Medicaid generosity, implementation of six types of welfare
waivers, implementation of any waiver or TANF, and implementation of the 2009 EITC reform. The DDD regressions
allow for differential effects of these controls by marital status. Standard errors are clustered by state. Data: 1991, 1994,
1996­2000 and 2002­2015 ASEC CPS linked to 1978­2015 longitudinal SSA earnings records. All dollar amounts have
been converted to 2016 dollars using the Bureau of Labor Statistics CPI. Sample: women whose first child was born in
1988­1991 or 1993­1996, who were at least 19 at first birth and less than 50 years old at CPS interview, and were either
married or never married at the time of the CPS interview. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up
to the 5th year after a first birth.




                                                              43
             Table 2: Testing Alternative Explanations for Short-Run Employment Effects ­
                   Heterogeneity and Sensitivity of Effects for Never-Married Mothers

                                     By Birth Parity     By Change in U-Rate     Control for Dynamics        Up to 1996
                                    2+ vs.1   3+ vs 2     High          Low      U-Rate    Ref+Waivs      All     No Waiver
 PostBirth * EarlyExp * Child 2+    0.032
                                    (0.014)
 PostBirth * EarlyExp * Child 3+                0.011
                                               (0.022)
 PostBirth * EarlyExp                                    0.032         0.033     0.033      0.032
                                                         (0.011)       (0.015)   (0.009)    (0.009)
 EarlyExp * 1 Yr. From Birth                                                                             0.020       0.012
                                                                                                        (0.013)     (0.015)
 EarlyExp * 2 Yr. From Birth                                                                            0.041       0.051
                                                                                                        (0.013)     (0.022)
 EarlyExp * 3 Yr. From Birth                                                                            0.043       0.053
                                                                                                        (0.015)     (0.032)
 Parity:
  1st child                             X        -          X             X         X           X          X           X
  2nd + child                           X        X          -             -         -           -          -           -
 Mean Y                               0.648    0.583      0.701         0.664     0.682       0.682      0.659       0.625
 Chg. U-Rate: 94-00 - 88-93             -        -       -0.018        -0.006       -           -          -           -
 Observations                        174050    61140     55860         57050     112910      112910      96795       26371

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the employment of never-married mothers exposed to the 1993
EITC reform early (birth: 1993­1996) and late (birth: 1988­1991). Column (1) includes all mothers with a birth from 1988­
1991 or 1993­1996, and uses mothers after a first birth as comparisons for mothers after a second-or-higher-order birth ("child
2+"). Column (2) includes all mothers with a second-or-higher-order birth from 1988­1991 or 1993­1996, and uses mothers
after a second birth as comparisons for mothers after a third-or-higher-order birth ("child 3+"). Columns (3) and (4) compare
mothers with early- and late-exposed first births in states that experienced an above-median (column 3) or below-median
(column 4) change in the unemployment rate between 1994-2000 and 1988-1993. Columns (5) and (6) present estimates when
we add to our baseline DD specification interactions between the age of one's first child and the unemployment rate (column
5) or between the age of one's first child and our indicators for welfare reform and waivers (column 6). Columns (7) and (8)
present the DD event study estimates for years 1­3 after a first birth when we restrict the sample to the years prior to 1996
(column 7) and to states that didn't pass a waiver up to 1996 (column 8). See Table 1 for information on control variables,
standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 5th year
after a first birth.




                                                                  44
           Table 3: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Long-Run Labor Market Outcomes

                                        Employed (Earnings>0)       Years of Experience             Earnings
                                        Never Married    DDD      Never-Married    DDD      Never-Married      DDD
 5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp            0.043                     0.471                     3655.9
                                           (0.010)                   (0.075)                   (362.6)

 10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp              -0.017                   0.449                     1206.1
                                           (0.011)                   (0.139)                    (444.1)

 5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                     0.055                     0.464                     2617.6
                                                        (0.010)                   (0.070)                    (526.6)

 10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                      0.010                    0.617                      1392.7
                                                        (0.011)                   (0.129)                     (587.3)
 Mean Y                                     0.761        0.765         0.761       0.765      17000.050     23612.672
 Observations                              282275       2714475       282275      2714475      282275        2714475

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the employment (columns 1­2), years of experience
(columns 3­4), and annual earnings ($2016, columns 5­6) of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth:
1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 5-9 and 10+ years from first birth. For each outcome we present both the
DD using never-married mothers as well as the DDD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group.
See Table 1 for information on control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data
from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                                                            45
   Table 4: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Hours of Work ­
                          CPS Responses

                                           Hours Worked Last Week (including 0's)
                                          Positive   Part Time   Full Time     Level
 A: Never-Married
 0-4 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp            0.092       0.082         0.010     3.074
                                          (0.042)     (0.029)     (0.036)    (1.700)
 5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp            0.100        -0.001     0.100      4.533
                                          (0.029)     (0.033)     (0.029)    (1.146)
 10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp             -0.015      -0.008      -0.007     -0.484
                                          (0.033)     (0.027)     (0.034)    (1.493)
 Mean Y                                     0.659      0.186        0.474     24.313
 Individuals                                9907        9907        9907       9907
 B: Add Married Comparison
 0-4 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM        0.069      0.063        0.006       2.161
                                          (0.043)     (0.030)     (0.037)    (1.748)
 5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM        0.054       -0.030     0.084      3.324
                                          (0.032)     (0.037)     (0.033)    (1.239)
 10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM        0.004       0.000       0.004      0.277
                                          (0.033)     (0.030)     (0.035)    (1.545)
 Mean Y                                    0.694       0.243       0.451      24.443
 Individuals                               94414       94414       94414      94414

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the likelihood of
working any hours last week (column 1), the likelihood of working part time (>0 and
<35 hours per week, column 2), the likelihood of working full time (35 hours per
week, column 3), and the average hours of work (column 4) between mothers exposed
to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­
1991), 0-4, 5-9 and 10+ years from first birth. Panel A shows estimates from a single
difference. Panel B shows estimates from a DD in which we use married mothers as an
additional comparison group. All regressions include indicators for mother's age, birth
year, race, education group, state, and average pre-birth employment and earnings, as
well as controls for the state-level unemployment rate, minimum wage, AFDC/TANF
maximum benefit level, Medicaid generosity, implementation of six types of welfare
waivers, implementation of any waiver or TANF, and implementation of the 2009
EITC reform. The DD regressions allow for differential effects of these controls by
marital status. See Table 1 for information on standard errors, data and sample
construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the
20th year after a first birth.




                                         46
      Table 5: Effect of Early Work Incentives on EITC Benefits

                                                   Total      Behavioral     Mechanical
  A: Never-Married
  0-4 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp                   619.3        188.0           431.3
                                                   (38.1)       (34.8)          (17.3)
  5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp                     52.9         35.0           17.9
                                                   (32.5)       (32.8)            (1.5)
  10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp                   -99.1        -95.7             -3.5
                                                   (31.0)       (31.8)            (1.6)
  Observations                                    282275       282275          282275
  B: DDD
  0-4 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM              400.3        186.2           214.1
                                                    (45.0)       (39.5)         (16.1)
  5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM               92.9         81.9            11.0
                                                    (33.2)       (33.0)          (1.8)
  10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM               -89.0        -85.1           -3.9
                                                    (33.7)       (34.0)          (1.2)
  NM Mean 0-4 Yrs From Birth                       1068.5          ­               ­
  NM Mean 5-9 Yrs From Birth                       1423.3          ­               ­
  NM Mean 10+ Yrs From Birth                       1280.4          ­               ­
  Observations                                    2714475      2714475         2714475
Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the simulated EITC
benefits (in 2016 dollars) between mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first
birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 0-4, 5-9 and 10+ years from first birth.
Panel A shows the results from the DD using never-married mothers. Panel B shows the
results from the DDD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison
group. The outcomes are simulated total EITC eligibility (column 1); the "behavioral"
change in EITC benefits, estimated using a simulated EITC that assigns all mothers the
EITC schedule of 1994 first births (column 2); and the "mechanical" change in benefits,
estimated using the difference between simulated benefits in columns 1 and 2 (column 3).
See the text for details. See Table 1 for information on control variables, standard errors,
data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth
up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                                            47
                ONLINE APPENDIX:
Long-Run Effects of Incentivizing Work After Childbirth



             Elira Kuka and Na'ama Shenhav

                       June, 2020




                           48
A   Supplemental Tables and Figures

                  Table A.1: Summary Statistics by Marital Status

                                                             Never Married    Married
             Share Non-White                                      0.638         0.254
                                                                 (0.481)       (0.435)
             Age at First Birth                                   23.61         26.44
                                                                 (4.393)       (4.574)
             HH EITC Eligibility Pre-Birth                        0.968         0.490
                                                                 (0.175)       (0.500)
             Secondary Earner Pre-Birth                             ­           0.630
                                                                    ­          (0.483)
             HH EITC 0-4 Yrs Post-Birth ($2016, 94 Sched.)       1127.8         522.2
                                                                (1291.0)      (1013.3)
             Share High School or Less                            0.557         0.358
                                                                 (0.497)       (0.479)
             Any Earnings Pre-Birth                               0.894         0.897
                                                                 (0.308)       (0.304)
             Mean of Any Earnings Pre-Birth                       0.660         0.781
                                                                 (0.474)       (0.414)
             Mean Earnings if Working ($2016) Pre-Birth         12073.7       24672.2
                                                               (14264.9)     (44866.8)
             Unique Women                                         11291         97288
             Observations                                        282275       2432200

            Notes: This table shows summary statistics for our sample of never-married
            and married mothers. "Secondary earner pre-birth" is an indicator equal to
            one if the woman earns less than 40% of total household earnings. See Table
            1 for information on data and sample construction.




                                                49
Table A.2: Characteristics of Never-Married Mothers by Early- or Late-Exposure

                                                                       Late        Early
                                                            All      Exposure    Exposure    P-value
                                                                      (88-91)     (93-96)
   A: Pre-Birth Outcomes
   Share Non-White                                         0.638       0.674       0.609     <0.01
                                                          (0.481)     (0.469)     (0.488)
   Age at First Birth                                      23.61       23.54       23.67      0.170
                                                          (4.393)     (4.173)     (4.557)
   HH EITC Eligibility Pre-Birth                           0.968       0.967       0.969      0.481
                                                          (0.175)     (0.179)     (0.172)
   Share High School or Less                               0.557       0.601       0.523     <0.01
                                                          (0.497)     (0.490)     (0.499)
   Any Earnings Pre-Birth                                  0.894       0.888       0.898      0.151
                                                          (0.308)     (0.315)     (0.303)
   Mean of Any Earnings Pre-Birth                          0.660       0.641       0.674     <0.01
                                                          (0.474)     (0.480)     (0.469)
   Mean Earnings if Working ($2016) Pre-Birth             12073.7     11929.7     12181.2     0.478
                                                         (14264.9)   (14153.4)   (14347.0)
   B: Post-Birth Outcomes
   Mean of Any Earnings 0-4 yrs Post-Birth                 0.705        0.631      0.763     <0.01
                                                          (0.456)     (0.483)     (0.425)
   Mean of Any Earnings 5-9 yrs Post-Birth                 0.812        0.771      0.844     <0.01
                                                          (0.391)     (0.420)     (0.363)
   Mean of Any Earnings 10+ yrs Post-Birth                 0.815        0.823      0.808      0.054
                                                          (0.389)     (0.382)     (0.394)
   Mean Earnings ($2016) 0-4 yrs Post-Birth               11656.9      9926.4     13012.6    <0.01
                                                         (16407.3)   (14750.6)   (17477.6)
   Mean Earnings ($2016) 5-9 yrs Post-Birth               18271.2     15584.2     20376.3    <0.01
                                                         (19672.1)   (17474.0)   (20997.2)
   Mean Earnings ($2016) 10+ yrs Post-Birth               23525.4     22685.0     24183.9    <0.01
                                                         (25116.5)   (22473.7)   (26988.8)
   Mean Earnings if Working ($2016) 0-4 yrs Post-Birth    16577.9     15737.1     17126.8    <0.01
                                                         (17400.4)   (15905.6)   (18289.8)
   Mean Earnings if Working ($2016) 5-9 yrs Post-Birth    22715.5     20373.4     24408.4    <0.01
                                                         (19618.0)   (17486.2)   (20862.1)
   Mean Earnings if Working ($2016) 10+ yrs Post-Birth    29558.0     28107.6     30729.7    <0.01
                                                         (25125.8)   (22012.3)   (27327.8)
   Unique Women                                            11291        4960       6331      11291
   Observations                                           282275      124000      158275     282275

 Notes: This table shows summary statistics for our early and late-exposed never-married samples,
 respectively, for pre-birth outcomes (Panel A) and post-birth outcomes (Panel B). While we include
 "Share High School or Less" in Panel A along with the other demographic characteristics, we actually
 observe this outcome after a first birth, which makes it a potential outcome of early exposure. See
 Table 1 for information on the data and sample construction.




                                                 50
 Table A.3: Do Observables Change Differentially Across CPS Surveys
        for Early-Exposed Mothers? ­ Never-Married Mothers

                                                                      Beta    P-value
          Share Non-White                                            0.002     0.211
          Age at First Birth                                          0.019    0.185
          HH EITC Eligibility Pre-Birth                              -0.000    0.780
          Share High School or Less                                   0.000    0.818
          Any Earnings Pre-Birth                                      0.001    0.415
          Mean of Any Earnings Pre-Birth                             0.002     0.187
          Years of Experience Pre-Birth                               0.002    0.871
          Mean Earnings ($2016) Pre-Birth                            -3.510    0.933
          Mean Earnings if Working ($2016)     Pre-Birth             -4.576    0.920
          Mean Earnings if Working ($2016)     0-4 yrs Post-Birth   -51.707    0.150
          Mean Earnings if Working ($2016)     5-9 yrs Post-Birth    -1.170    0.984
          Mean Earnings if Working ($2016)     10+ yrs Post-Birth     0.366    0.996
          Observations                                               11291     11291

         Notes: Each row of this table shows the results from a separate regression
         of an observable characteristic (column 1) on a linear trend in "survey years
         from first birth" (CPS year minus year of first birth) and the interaction of
         "survey years from first birth" and early-exposure. Columns 2 and 3 shows
         the coefficient on the interaction and its p-value, which indicate whether
         the characteristics of early-exposed mothers evolve differently than late-
         exposed mothers over time. See Table 1 for information on standard errors,
         data and sample construction.




Table A.4: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment ­
           By Marital Status and Pre-Birth EITC Eligibility

                                   Never Married                          Married
                            All     Eligible   Non Eligible     All     Eligible   Non Eligible
 PostBirth * EarlyExp    0.037      0.039         -0.017       0.003     0.002        0.002
                         (0.009)    (0.009)      (0.017)      (0.003)   (0.005)      (0.004)
 Mean Y                   0.682      0.673        0.982        0.753     0.636        0.866
 Observations            112910     109320         3590       972880    476700       496180

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the employment of mothers
exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­
1991) in the first 5 years since the birth of a first child, by pre-birth EITC eligibility. We
present the DD using never-married mothers (columns 1­3) as well as the DD using married
mothers (columns 4­6). See Table 1 for information on control variables, standard errors,
data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up
to the 5th year after a first birth.




                                               51
Table A.5: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Self-Employment and Bunching

                                     Self-Emp. Earnings >0         Bunching ($1500 bins)      Bunching ($2500 bins)
                                    Never Married      DDD        Never Married     DDD      Never Married    DDD
   PostBirth * EarlyExp               0.010                         0.015                      0.020
                                       (0.003)                       (0.004)                    (0.005)

   PostBirth * EarlyExp * NM                           0.006                      0.011                      0.014
                                                      (0.003)                     (0.004)                    (0.005)
   Mean Y                                0.013         0.034          0.047        0.043          0.077       0.071
   Observations                         112910        1085790        112910       1085790        112910      1085790

  Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the labor market outcomes of mothers exposed
  to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991) in the first 5 years since
  the birth of a first child. For each outcome we present both the DD using never-married mothers as well as the
  DDD in which we we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. Columns 1­2 present results
  where the outcome is an indicator for positive self-employment earnings, while columns 3­6 present results
  where the outcome is an indicator for bunching at the first EITC kink, which is defined as having earnings
  within $1,500 (columns 3­4) or $2,500 (column 5­6) of the first EITC kink. See Table 1 for information on
  control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior
  to a first birth up to the 5th year after a first birth.




              Table A.6: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Earnings

                                                       Earnings ($2016)        Wage Earnings ($2016)
                                                       0-3           0-4           0-3          0-4
                   A: Never Married
                   PostBirth * EarlyExp             833.920       1120.734     746.304      1011.188
                                                    (223.545)      (244.138)   (237.290)     (260.694)
                   Mean Y                            9251.446      9820.838     9144.424     9698.245
                   Individuals                        101619        112910       101619       112910
                   B: DDD
                   PostBirth * EarlyExp * NM         463.846      657.175       403.693       590.697
                                                    (325.425)     (326.522)    (340.478)     (343.140)
                   Mean Y                           18087.091     18272.975    17739.758     17900.830
                   Individuals                       977211        1085790      977211        1085790

                  Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing earnings (in 2016
                  dollars) of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996)
                  and late (first birth: 1988­1991) in the first 5 years since the birth of a first child.
                  For each outcome we present both the DD using never-married mothers as well
                  as the DDD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group.
                  See Table 1 for information on control variables, standard errors, data and sample
                  construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the
                  5th year after a first birth.




                                                             52
Table A.7: Testing Alternative Explanations for Short-Run Employment Effects ­
                          Triple-Difference Estimates

                                       By Change in U-Rate       Control for Dynamics           Up to 1996
                                        High         Low         U-Rate     Ref+Waivs        All    No Waiver

 PostBirth * EarlyExp * NM             0.028        0.031        0.032        0.028
                                       (0.010)      (0.013)      (0.008)      (0.008)
 EarlyExp * NM * 1 Yr. From Birth                                                          0.020       0.013
                                                                                          (0.014)     (0.017)
 EarlyExp * NM * 2 Yr. From Birth                                                         0.039       0.053
                                                                                          (0.015)     (0.027)
 EarlyExp * NM * 3 Yr. From Birth                                                         0.050        0.056
                                                                                          (0.017)     (0.040)
 Mean Y                                 0.759        0.732        0.746        0.746       0.745       0.739
 Chg. U-Rate: 94-00 - 88-93            -0.018       -0.006          -            -            -          -
 Observations                          548800       536990       1085790      1085790     946146      232607

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the employment of mothers exposed to the
1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), across never-married and
married mothers. Columns (1) and (2) compare early- and late-exposed first births in states that experi-
enced above-median or below-median change in the unemployment rate between 1994-2000 and 1988-1993,
respectively. Columns (3) and (4) present estimates where we add to our baseline specification interactions
between the age of one's first child and the unemployment rate (column 3) or between the age of one's
first child and our indicators for welfare reform and waivers (column 4). Columns (5) and (6) present the
event study estimates for years 1­3 after a first birth when we restrict the sample to the years prior to 1996
(column 5) and to states that didn't pass a waiver up to 1996 (column 6). See Table 1 for information on
control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior
to a first birth up to the 5th year after a first birth.




         Table A.8: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Earnings ­
                          By the Size of the Economic Boom

                                                      > Med.                     < Med.
                                                   Decline U-Rate             Decline U-Rate
                                                   NM           DDD           NM          DDD
               PostBirth * EarlyExp            1049.840                    951.293
                                                (302.348)                  (350.866)
               PostBirth * EarlyExp * NM                       502.234                   779.074
                                                              (440.040)                 (414.426)
               Mean Y                            9579.092     17925.061    10057.406    18628.373
               Chg. U-Rate: 94-00 - 88-93         -0.018        -0.018       -0.006       -0.006
               Individuals                        55860        548800        57050        536990

              Notes: This table shows the results from DD regressions comparing the earnings
              (in 2016 dollars) of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth:
              1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991) in the first 5 years since the birth
              of a first child. Columns (1) and (2) examine impacts in states that had an
              above-median change in unemployment rates between 1994-2000 and 1988-1993
              (i.e a larger boom); while Columns (3) and (4) examine impacts in states that
              had a below-median change in unemployment rates (i.e a smaller boom). See
              Table 1 for information on control variables, standard errors, data and sample
              construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to
              the 5th year after a first birth.




                                                      53
 Table A.9: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment ­
             Heterogeneity by State-Level Child Care Costs

                                                    Base      Cost      Cost if >0   Cost=0
    A: Never Married
    PostBirth * EarlyExp                         0.038       0.039       0.031       0.034
                                                 (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.010)
    PostBirth * EarlyExp * Child Care                          0.006     0.022       0.024
                                                             (0.016)     (0.008)      (0.009)
    PostBirth * Child Care                                    -0.026    -0.031       -0.036
                                                             (0.021)     (0.010)      (0.013)
    Mean Y                                         0.677      0.677       0.677        0.677
    Observations                                  102980     102980      102980       102980
    B: DDD
    PostBirth * EarlyExp * NM                    0.037       0.037       0.030       0.033
                                                 (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.009)
    PostBirth * EarlyExp * NM * Child Care                     0.006     0.021       0.023
                                                             (0.016)     (0.008)      (0.009)
    PostBirth * NM * Child Care                               -0.026    -0.031       -0.036
                                                             (0.021)     (0.010)      (0.013)
    Mean Y                                         0.736      0.736       0.736        0.736
    Observations                                  943240     943240      943240       943240

   Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the employment of moth-
   ers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth:
   1988­1991) in the first 5 years since the birth of a first child. Column 1 shows our baseline
   estimate. Columns (2)-(4) show interactions between early exposure and three measures
   of child care costs in the state: (i) the average cost per child; (ii) the average cost per
   child conditional on having positive costs; and (iii) the share of mothers with zero child
   care costs. Panel A shows the DD using never-married mothers. Panel B shows the
   DDD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. See Table 1
   for information on control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. We
   construct data on child care costs from Wave 3 of the 1990, 1991, and 1993 SIPP panels,
   and Wave 6 of the 1992 SIPP panel. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first
   birth up to the 5th year after a first birth.



 Table A.10: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment ­
Heterogeneity by the Presence and Generosity of a State EITC Supplement

                                                     (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
      PostBirth * EarlyExp                        0.039       0.033      0.038       0.035
                                                  (0.009)     (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.009)
      PostBirth * State EITC                       -0.015    -0.054
                                                  (0.009)     (0.011)
      PostBirth * State EITC * EarlyExp                       0.053
                                                              (0.012)
      PostBirth * State EITC (%)                                           -0.007    -0.014
                                                                          (0.005)     (0.004)
      PostBirth * State EITC (%) * EarlyExp                                           0.013
                                                                                      (0.006)
      Mean Y                                         0.682     0.682       0.682       0.682
      Observations                                  112910    112910      112910      112910

     Notes: This table shows the results from DD regressions comparing the employment
     of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late
     (first birth: 1988­1991) in the first 5 years since the birth of a first child. Columns
     (1) and (2) show interactions between early exposure and whether there is any state
     EITC supplement available in the current year; while columns (3) and (4) show
     interactions between early exposure and whether the size (%) of the state EITC
     supplement available in the current year. See Table 1 for information on control
     variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data
     from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 5th year after a first birth.


                                               54
    Table A.11: Long-Run Effects on Wage Earnings and Self-Employment Earnings

                                                Wage Earnings            Pos. Self-Emp.        Self Emp Earnings
                                               NM            DDD         NM         DDD         NM         DDD
  5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp            3390.469                    0.019                 265.416
                                            (372.353)                  (0.005)                (81.426)

  10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp            1053.696                    0.013                  152.367
                                            (445.639)                  (0.004)                (78.356)

  5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                     2467.511                 0.014                   150.071
                                                          (515.123)               (0.005)                (100.623)

  10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                     1352.872                  0.004                   39.854
                                                          (566.332)               (0.005)                 (95.049)
  Mean Y                                   16539.998     22846.020       0.045     0.061       460.053    766.652
  Individuals                               282275         2714475      282275    2714475      282275     2714475

 Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing wage earnings ($2016, columns 1­2), positive
 self-employment earnings (columns 3­4), self-employment earnings ($2016, columns 5­6) of mothers exposed to
 the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 5­9 and 10+ years since
 first birth. The odd columns show DD regressions using never-married (NM) mothers. The even columns show
 DDD regressions that use married mothers as an additional comparison group. See Table 1 for information on
 control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to
 a first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                Table A.12: Long-Run Effects on Alternative Measures of Earnings

                                            Earnings, if Positive       Log Earnings              Winsorized
                                             NM            DDD          NM        DDD           NM         DDD
 5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp           3648.069                     0.261                 3542.770
                                          (355.019)                   (0.030)                (360.322)

 10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp           1980.859                     0.076                 1025.886
                                          (421.074)                   (0.030)                (406.615)

 5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                     1515.576                 0.165                   2510.213
                                                         (580.168)               (0.034)                  (451.650)

 10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                     1190.222                  0.050                  1201.351
                                                        (683.396)                (0.034)                  (478.678)
 Mean Y                                   21937.658     30705.208      9.399      9.750     16915.479    22971.402
 Individuals                               282275        2714475      282275     2714475     282275        2714475

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the earnings of mothers exposed to the 1993
EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 5­9 and 10+ years since first birth.
"Earnings, if Positive" (columns 1­2) is missing for all individuals that have zero earnings. "Winsorized" earnings
(columns 5­6) have been top-coded at $175,000 ($2016), which is the top 1% of married mothers' earnings. DD
regressions using never-married (NM) mothers are shown in the odd columns, while the DDD regressions that
use married mothers as an additional comparison are shown in the even columns. See Table 1 for information on
control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a
first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                                                        55
  Table A.13: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Hours and Weeks of Work ­
                               CPS Responses

                                              Level (including 0's)                Cumulative
                                          Weekly    Annual     Hours×    Weekly      Annual     Hours ×
                                          Hours     Weeks      Weeks     Hours       Weeks       Weeks
A: Never Married
0-4 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp              3.074    4.191      145.0     8.915      12.208       428.1
                                          (1.700)   (1.830)    (72.9)    (4.633)     (5.204)     (210.0)
5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp             4.533      1.039      84.0    33.494      26.861      1245.1
                                          (1.146)   (1.218)    (60.8)    (8.905)    (10.212)     (442.3)
10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp              -0.484    0.127      22.4     33.360      22.578      1125.0
                                          (1.493)   (1.303)    (74.8)   (18.217)    (17.443)     (905.1)
Scaled  0-4                                                               0.255       0.305       0.306
Scaled  5-9                                                               0.957       0.672       0.889
Scaled  10+                                                               0.953       0.564       0.804
Observations                               9907      10020      9921      9907        10020       9921
B: Add Married Comparison
0-4 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM         2.161      3.137     32.0     7.938      12.882       283.7
                                          (1.748)    (1.907)   (75.3)    (2.598)     (4.083)     (135.8)
5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM        3.324       1.264    107.1    27.294      36.054      1192.2
                                          (1.239)    (1.408)   (64.6)    (4.508)     (7.545)     (244.5)
10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM         0.277      0.528     30.9    28.455      31.706       944.8
                                          (1.545)    (1.293)   (75.4)    (7.004)     (8.727)     (355.1)
Scaled  0-4                                                               0.227       0.322       0.203
Scaled  5-9                                                               0.780       0.901       0.852
Scaled  10+                                                               0.813       0.793       0.675
Observations                               94414     98077     96918      94414       98077       96918

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing labor market outcomes between mothers
exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 0­4,
5­9 and 10+ years since first birth. Panel A shows a single-difference using never-married mothers.
Panel B shows the DD estimates in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group.
The outcomes are number of hours worked per week (column 1), number of weeks worked last year
(column 2), and hours times weeks (column 3), as well as the cumulative sums of each these (columns
4­6). For interpretation, we calculate a "scaled  " for the short-run, medium-run, and long-run, shown
at the bottom of each panel, by dividing the cumulative total for each of these periods by the number
of hours in a full-time, full-year of work (i.e., 35 hours × 40 weeks). The scaled  is thus the additional
years of full-time, full-year work accrued by early-exposed mothers. See Table 4 for information on
control variables, and Table 1 for information on standard errors, data and sample construction. Years:
We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                                                    56
       Table A.14: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Completed Fertility ­
                                  CPS Responses

                     Number of Kids            2+ Kids               3+ Kids           Yrs b/w 1 and 2
                     NM      + Married     NM      + Married     NM      + Married     NM      + Married
 EarlyExp           0.008                 -0.005                0.005                 -0.288
                   (0.068)               (0.044)               (0.035)               (0.414)
 EarlyExp * NM                 0.010                 0.012                 -0.006                 -0.117
                              (0.070)               (0.045)               (0.036)                (0.439)
 Mean Y             1.834      2.222      0.537      0.771      0.207      0.317      4.313       3.619
 Observations       3638       45392      3638       45392      3638       45392      1953        34981

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing completed fertility between mothers
exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991). The odd
columns show estimates from a single difference using never-married mothers. The even columns show
the DD estimates in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. The outcomes
are total number of children in the household (columns 1­2), an indicator for having at least 2 children
(columns 3­4), having at least three children (columns 5­6), and the number of years between one's first
and second child (columns 7­8). We restrict the sample to mothers interviewed in the CPS between the
ages of 36 to 44, who are more likely to have completed their childbearing. See Table 4 for information on
control variables, and Table 1 for additional information on standard errors, data and sample construction.
Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                                                   57
    Table A.15: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment ­
                     Using Future Mothers for Comparison

                                         Baseline                              0-3 Yrs Post
                                Never Married        DDD       Never Married     DDD     No Kids      DDD
 PostBirth * EarlyExp             0.037                          0.032                    0.010
                                   (0.009)                        (0.009)                (0.008)
 PostBirth * EarlyExp * NM                          0.034                      0.028
                                                    (0.008)                    (0.008)
 PostBirth * EarlyExp * Kids                                                                          0.026
                                                                                                      (0.012)
 Never Married Moms                  Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes       No           Yes
 Married Moms                         No             Yes            No           Yes       No           No
 Never Married Future Moms            No              No            No            No       Yes          Yes
 Observations                       112910          482120        101619        433908    78828       146574

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing short-run (0-3 years after birth) em-
ployment of "mothers" exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first "birth": 1993­1996) and late (first
"birth": 1988­1991), across never-married mothers and future mothers with placebo births. Column
(1) and (2) present our baseline DD and DDD estimates. Columns (3) and (4) present results limit the
sample to up to 3 years after birth. Columns (5) and (6) limit the sample to up to 3 years after birth and
use future mothers as a comparison group limiting up. Future mothers are assigned a placebo year of
first birth equal to her true year of childbirth minus 4. See Table 1 for information on control variables,
standard errors, and data. Sample: women whose child was born in 1988­1991 or 1993­1996 ("actual
mothers") or between 1992­1995 or 1997-2000 ("future mothers"), and who were at least 19 at first birth
and less than 50 years old at CPS interview, were never married at the time of the CPS interview. Years:
We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 4th year after a first birth.




      Table A.16: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Long-Run Earnings --
                     Using Childless Women for Comparison

                                                                  DD                            DDD
                                              NM Moms         Childless   NM Childless    All         NM
   5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp               3656              64          -1293
                                                (366)          (785)        (2058)
   10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp               1206            -1053          -296
                                                (444)          (923)         (990)
   5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * Mom                                                   2964      4005
                                                                                          (806)    (1989)
   10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * Mom                                                   1922       1015
                                                                                          (945)    (1029)
   Mean Y                                        17000          30652        34085        26519     24103
   Observations                                 282275         649875       200750       932150    483025

 Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing short-run earnings (in 2016 dollars) of
 "mothers" exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first "birth": 1993­1996) and late (first "birth":
 1988­1991), across never-married and childless women with placebo births, 5­9 and 10+ years since a
 first "birth." Column (1) presents our baseline DD estimates for never-married mothers. Columns (2)
 and (3) present the DD estimates using for all childless women and never-married childless women.
 Columns (4) and (5) present the DDD using all childless women or never-married childless women
 as comparison groups. Childless women are assigned a placebo year of first birth by taking a draw
 from the distribution of years of birth for never-married mothers who have the same year of birth
 and level of education as a given childless woman. See Table 1 for information on control variables,
 standard errors, and data. Sample: never-married women who were less than 50 years old at the time
 of the CPS interview, and whose child was born in 1988­1991 or 1993­1996 ("actual mothers"), or
 women between the ages of 40 to 45 at the time of the CPS interview without any children ("childless
 mothers"). Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a first
 birth.




                                                     58
               Table A.17: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Long-Run Earnings ­
                      Sensitivity to Controls for Unemployment and Welfare

                                                    Base                    UR Dynamics             (Ref+Waivs)*Dynamics
                                              NM            DDD            NM          DDD              NM          DDD
5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp.            3655.885                     3707.143                     3441.965
                                           (362.636)                    (379.546)                    (418.293)
10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp             1206.063                     1184.553                     1070.210
                                           (444.053)                    (426.525)                    (470.978)
5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                      2617.581                     2532.927                     2338.119
                                                         (526.602)                    (515.671)                    (523.906)
10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                      1392.726                     1340.217                      1158.918
                                                         (587.335)                    (569.402)                    (612.296)
Mean Y                                     17000.050     23612.672     17000.050      23612.672     17000.050      23612.672
Observations                                282275        2714475       282275         2714475       282275         2714475

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing earnings (in 2016 dollars) of never-married mothers
exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 5­9 and 10+ years from
first birth. The odd columns show the DD using never-married mothers. The even columns show the DDD in which
we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. Columns 1­2 present our baseline results. Columns 3­4
show the estimates when we add to our baseline specification interactions between the age of one's first child and the
unemployment rate. Columns 5­6 show the estimates when we add to our baseline specification interactions between the
age of one's first child and our indicators for welfare reform and waivers. See Table 1 for information on control variables,
standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th
year after a first birth.


            Table A.18: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Labor Market Outcomes ­
                            Sensitivity to Inverse P-Score Reweighting

                                                       Employed (Earnings > 0)           Earnings ($2016)
                                                       Never Married     DDD        Never Married       DDD
             0-4 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp               0.054                       1119.915
                                                          (0.010)                     (292.660)

             5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp                 0.045                     3705.595
                                                           (0.010)                    (365.233)

             10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp                  -0.011                   1092.091
                                                           (0.011)                    (441.579)

             0-4 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                         0.040                          536.620
                                                                        (0.009)                       (326.863)

             5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                         0.048                        2326.752
                                                                        (0.010)                       (526.485)

             10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                          0.003                        1100.900
                                                                        (0.011)                       (591.831)
             Observations                                  282275       2714475        282275          2714475

           Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the employment (columns 1­2) and
           earnings (columns 3­4) of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996)
           and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 0­4, 5­9 and 10+ years from first birth. The odd columns show
           the DD using never-married mothers. The even columns show the DDD in which we use married
           mothers as an additional comparison group. All regressions are reweighted using inverse p-scores
           so that late and early-exposed mothers are balanced on pre-birth characteristics. See Table 1 for
           information on control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include
           data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                                                             59
                              Table A.19: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Labor Market Outcomes ­
                                               Sensitivity to Alternative Specifications

                                                      Base             Add AFB*YSB             Add Ind FE           Sample: Heads        Sample: Eligibles
                                                 NM          DDD        NM        DDD         NM        DDD         NM        DDD         NM         DDD
     A: Short-Run Employment
     PostBirth * EarlyExp                      0.037                 0.036 .                0.031                 0.042                 0.039
                                               (0.009)                (0.009)               (0.009)               (0.009)               (0.009)
     PostBirth * EarlyExp * NM                            0.034                  0.033                 0.027                 0.039                 0.038
                                                          (0.008)                (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.009)
     Mean Y                                      0.682     0.746       0.682      0.746      0.682      0.746      0.688      0.751       0.673     0.643
     Observations                               112910    1085790     112910     1085790    112910     1085790     89220     1039940     109320    586020
     B: Long-Run Earnings
     5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp             3656                  3693                   3612                  3660                  3670
                                               (362.6)               (366.11)               (349.6)               (377.4)               (357.4)
60




     10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp             1206                  1259                   1177 .                1491                  1232
                                               (444.1)                (446.2)               (429.6)               (479.7)               (411.4)
     5-9 Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                   2618 .                 2422 .                2574 .                2648                  2238
                                                          (526.6)                (533.2)               (515.3)               (520.9)               (469.7)
     10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM                    1393                   1170                  1341                 1695                   1303
                                                          (587.3)                (605.0)               (576.1)               (597.6)               (536.5)
     Mean Y                                      17000     23613       17000      23613      17000      23613       17259     23936      15736      15826
     Observations                               282275    2714475     282275     2714475    282275     2714475     223050    2599850     245950    1465050

       Notes: This table shows the sensitivity of our results comparing the labor market outcomes of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early
       (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991). Panel A shows the results for employment 0-4 years from first birth. Panel B shows
       the results for earnings ($2016) 5-9 and 10+ years from first birth. The odd columns show the DD using never-married mothers. The even
       columns show the DDD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. Columns 1­2 show our baseline results. To the
       baseline controls, we add age-at-birth by years-since-birth fixed effects (columns 3­4) and individual fixed effects (columns 5­6). Columns 7­10
       use our baseline controls, but restrict the sample to heads of household (columns 7­8) or women whose income in the years prior to childbirth
       made them eligible for the EITC (columns 9­10). See Table 1 for information on our baseline control variables, standard errors, data and
       baseline sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 5th (20th ) year after a first birth in Panel A
       (B).
        Table A.20: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Having Earnings or Experience
                                in the Top 75%, 50%, or 25%

                                                          Top 75 Percent       Above Median          Top 25 Percent
                                                          NM        DDD        NM        DDD         NM        DDD
A: Earnings
PostBirth * EarlyExp * 10+ Yrs From Birth                 -0.007               0.007               0.019
                                                         (0.012)              (0.010)              (0.006)
PostBirth * EarlyExp * 10+ Yrs From Birth * NM                      0.019                0.016                0.017
                                                                   (0.012)              (0.011)               (0.008)
Mean Y                                                    0.724     0.738      0.418     0.500       0.145     0.250
Individuals                                              282275    2714475    282275    2714475     282275    2714475
B: Experience
PostBirth * EarlyExp * 10+ Yrs From Birth 0.052                    0.028                -0.018
(0.008)                                                            (0.006)               (0.005)
PostBirth * EarlyExp * 10+ Yrs From Birth * NM                     0.028                  0.011                0.005
                                                                   (0.008)               (0.007)              (0.005)
Mean Y                                                    0.582     0.719      0.251      0.470      0.093     0.214
Individuals                                              282275    2714475    282275    2714475     282275    2714475

  Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the outcomes of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC
  reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 10+ years from first birth. The outcomes
  are indicators for being at or above a threshold in the earnings (Panel A) or experience (Panel B) distributions.
  The thresholds are: top 75% (columns 1-2), top 50% (columns 3­4), or top 25% (columns 5­6). The distributions
  are defined separately for each year since first birth and include both married and never-married mothers. The odd
  columns show the DD using never-married mothers. The even columns show the DDD in which we use married
  mothers as an additional comparison group. See Table 1 for information on control variables, standard errors, data
  and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a
  first birth.




                                                         61
          Table A.21: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Jointly Having
"High Earnings" (Top 25%) and "High Experience" (Work 3 Yrs. After a First Birth)

                                            Pr(High Earn     Pr(High Earn     Pr(Low Earn     Pr(Low Earn
                                            + High Exp)      + Low Exp)       + High Exp)     + Low Exp)
  A: Never-Married
  10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp                0.028            -0.009           0.108           -0.127
                                               (0.006)           (0.003)         (0.016)          (0.015)
  Mean Y                                        0.125             0.021           0.545            0.310
  Observations                                 282275            282275          282275           282275
  B: DDD
  10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM           0.020             -0.003          0.075           -0.092
                                               (0.008)          (0.004)          (0.016)          (0.014)
  Mean Y                                        0.230             0.020           0.472            0.278
  Observations                                 2714475          2714475          2714475         2714475

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing outcomes of mothers exposed to the 1993
EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 10+ years from first birth.
The outcomes are indicators for having "high earnings" (top 25%) or "low earnings" (bottom 75%) crossed
with indicators for having "high experience" (having worked in each of the three years after a first birth) or
"low experience" (not having worked in each of the three years after a first birth). We show estimates for
having "high experience and high earnings" (column 1), having high earnings and low experience (column 2),
"low earnings and high experience" (column 3), and "low earnings and low experience" (column 4). Panel A
presents the DD using never-married mothers. Panel B presents the DDD in which we use married mothers as
an additional comparison group. See the text and Appendix E for more details. See Table 1 for information
on control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years
prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.



             Table A.22: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Jointly Having
             "High Earnings" (Top 25%) and "High Experience" (Top 75%)

                                            Pr(High Earn     Pr(High Earn     Pr(Low Earn     Pr(Low Earn
                                            + High Exp)      + Low Exp)       + High Exp)     + Low Exp)
  A: Never-Married
  10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp                0.021              -0.002         0.031           -0.050
                                               (0.005)           (0.002)         (0.009)          (0.009)
  Mean Y                                        0.134              0.012          0.449            0.406
  Observations                                 282275            282275          282275           282275
  B: DDD
  10+ Yrs From Birth * EarlyExp * NM           0.017             0.000            0.010          -0.028
                                               (0.007)          (0.002)          (0.010)          (0.008)
  Mean Y                                        0.240            0.010            0.478            0.272
  Observations                                 2714475          2714475          2714475         2714475

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing outcomes of mothers exposed to the 1993
EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 10+ years from first birth. The
outcomes are indicators for having "high earnings" (top 25%) or "low earnings" (bottom 75%) crossed with
indicators for having "high experience" (top 75%) or "low experience" (bottom 25%). We show estimates for
having "high experience and high earnings" (column 1), having high earnings and low experience (column 2),
"low earnings and high experience" (column 3), and "low earnings and low experience" (column 4). Panel A
presents the DD using never-married mothers. Panel B presents the DDD in which we use married mothers as
an additional comparison group. See the text and Appendix E for more details. See Table 1 for information
on control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years
prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                                                     62
                  Table A.23: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Service Occupations ­
                                             CPS Responses

                                                                                        Service
                                           Housekeep    Janitor        Food   Child       Beauty    Recreation   Protect   Health Serv
  Panel A: Never Married
  0-4 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp             -0.019       -0.007     0.027      0.012       -0.003     0.001       0.008       0.013
                                            (0.011)     (0.009)    (0.022)    (0.007)     (0.008)    (0.003)     (0.006)     (0.018)
  5-9 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp              -0.011      -0.001     0.015     0.012        0.004      0.002       0.010      0.033
                                            (0.012)     (0.008)    (0.020)    (0.007)     (0.010)    (0.003)     (0.009)     (0.018)
  10+ Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp              -0.009      -0.004     0.019      0.003       -0.004     0.000       0.006      0.040
                                            (0.011)     (0.007)    (0.013)    (0.006)     (0.009)    (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.018)
  Mean Y                                      0.025       0.017     0.064      0.015       0.013      0.006       0.012       0.066
  Individuals                                10006       10006      10006      10006       10006      10006       10006       10006
  Panel B: Add Married Comparison
  0-4 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp * NM        -0.019       -0.007     0.029      0.010       -0.007     0.004       0.008       0.013
                                            (0.010)     (0.009)    (0.022)    (0.009)     (0.010)    (0.004)     (0.006)     (0.020)
  5-9 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp * NM         -0.010      -0.005     0.012      0.011       0.002      0.003       0.015       0.027
                                            (0.012)     (0.008)    (0.020)    (0.007)     (0.011)    (0.003)     (0.009)     (0.019)
  10+ Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp * NM         -0.007      -0.006     0.021      0.002       -0.004     0.002       0.008      0.035
                                            (0.011)     (0.007)    (0.013)    (0.007)     (0.009)    (0.005)     (0.007)     (0.017)
  Mean Y                                      0.013      0.008      0.034      0.018        0.012     0.004       0.006       0.034
  Individuals                                95573       95573      95573      95573       95573      95573       95573       95573

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the probability of reporting being in each service occupation
(including mothers that are not working) between mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996)
and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 0­4, 5­9, and 10+ years from a first birth. Panel A presents the single-difference using never-
married mothers. Panel B presents the DD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. Occupation
definitions are in Appendix C.1. See Table 4 for information on control variables, and Table 1 for information on standard
errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a
first birth.




                                                                  63
                Table A.24: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Non-Service Occupations ­
                                             CPS Responses

                                                                                   Non-Service
                                           Exec/Man     Prof/Tech   Fin Sales   Ret Sales    Cleric    Agricultural   Mech/Constr/Min
  Panel A: Never Married
  0-4 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp              0.019        -0.028      0.017       -0.021     -0.005       0.001             -0.003
                                            (0.021)      (0.021)     (0.012)     (0.025)    (0.032)      (0.005)           (0.005)
  5-9 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp              0.013        -0.009      0.007       -0.013      0.000       0.009             -0.002
                                            (0.020)      (0.025)     (0.010)     (0.018)    (0.025)      (0.006)           (0.005)
  10+ Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp              0.018        -0.031      0.002       -0.013    -0.038       0.008              -0.002
                                            (0.015)      (0.023)     (0.007)     (0.013)    (0.023)      (0.004)           (0.004)
  Mean Y                                     0.064         0.107      0.022        0.064      0.188       0.006              0.005
  Individuals                                10006        10006       10006       10006      10006        10006             10006
  Panel B: Add Married Comparison
  0-4 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp * NM         0.032        -0.026       0.014      -0.008      -0.006      -0.007            -0.002
                                            (0.023)      (0.024)     (0.012)     (0.026)     (0.034)     (0.006)           (0.006)
  5-9 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp * NM         0.012        -0.002       0.004      -0.007      -0.012       0.006            0.001
                                            (0.020)      (0.030)     (0.011)     (0.019)     (0.026)     (0.006)           (0.005)
  10+ Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp * NM         0.025        -0.023      -0.001      -0.014    -0.051         0.008            -0.000
                                            (0.016)      (0.024)     (0.009)     (0.014)     (0.025)     (0.005)           (0.004)
  Mean Y                                     0.105         0.204      0.032        0.044       0.177       0.008             0.004
  Individuals                                95573        95573       95573       95573       95573       95573             95573

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the probability of reporting being in each non-service occupation
(including mothers that are not working) between mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996)
and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 0­4, 5­9, and 10+ years from a first birth. Panel A presents the single-difference using never-
married mothers. Panel B presents the DD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. Occupation
definitions are in Appendix C.1. See Table 4 for information on control variables, and Table 1 for information on standard
errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a
first birth.




                                                               64
           Table A.25: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Government Transfers ­
                                       CPS Responses

                                          Welfare    Disability     SNAP        Medicaid    Hous Sub      Total
 A: Never Married
 0-4 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp          -740.874       51.908      -402.114      -273.883     3.214    -1298.326
                                         (254.608)    (69.386)      (192.637)   (186.802)   (11.235)     (480.694)
 5-9 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp          -846.759       -23.961    -780.109        -49.528    -19.218   -1551.727
                                         (148.823)    (57.493)      (157.032)   (194.046)   (12.810)     (358.077)
 10+ Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp             17.816       23.956       -231.168     53.832    -14.539       -31.829
                                         (116.330)    (67.529)      (139.410)   (178.773)    (8.383)     (325.256)
 Mean Y                                   864.630       79.039      1309.217    1334.773     60.216      3628.724
 Observations                              10020        10020          9438        8228       9193         8228
 B: Add Married Comparison
 0-4 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp * NM     -724.784       120.044     -343.550       -85.638     4.018      -936.082
                                         (243.054)    (104.412)    (181.961)    (168.744)   (11.141)     (475.686)
 5-9 Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp * NM     -823.997        -54.906   -710.442       -134.911    -18.236   -1599.150
                                         (158.484)     (73.306)    (153.548)    (200.210)   (12.726)     (356.497)
 10+ Yrs from Birth * EarlyExp * NM        -8.960        -7.312    -237.127       81.541    -14.640       -61.332
                                         (110.452)     (77.426)    (130.537)    (195.118)    (8.355)     (302.951)
 Mean Y                                   138.584      136.681      281.872       866.221     8.672      1405.240
 Observations                              98077         98077       91689         80508      89921        80508

Notes: This table shows the results from regressions comparing the amount of cash and in-kind transfers from
each government program (shown in the headers) between mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first
birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 0­4, 5­9, and 10+ years from a first birth. Panel A presents
the single-difference using never-married mothers. Panel B presents the DD in which we use married mothers as
an additional comparison group. See Table 4 for information on control variables, and Table 1 for information on
standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the
20th year after a first birth.




                                                        65
          Figure A.1: EITC Schedule for Households with One Child

                                                             (a) 1993, 1994 and 1995 Benefit Levels




                          4,000
                       3,000
     EITC Benefits ($2016)
  1,000     2,000         0




                                                        0          10,000            20,000            30,000      40,000
                                                                            Household Earnings ($2016)

                                                                        1993              1994             1995


                                                       (b) 1993-1994 Change in Benefits (as % of Earnings)
                                                   8
   Growth in EITC Benefits as % of Income, 1993--94
  0           2            4           6




                                                        0          10,000           20,000           30,000       40,000
                                                                            Household Earnings ($2016)

Notes: Panel A shows EITC benefits ($2016) at each level of earnings for households
with one child in 1993, 1994, and 1995. Panel B shows the difference between
1994 and 1993 benefits as a share of household income. Data: Nominal EITC
benefits are obtained from the Tax Policy Center (https://www.taxpolicycenter.
org/statistics/eitc-parameters), and have been converted to 2016 dollars using
the CPI from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                                    66
                                             Figure A.2: Maximum EITC Benefits by Number of Children




                                                          6000
                                              Max. EITC Benefits ($2016)
                                                2000      0   4000




                                                                           1985     1990          1995              2000                                     2005     2010              2015

                                                                                      0 kids                  1 kid                                          2 kids              3 kids

                                            Notes: This figure shows the maximum EITC benefits ($2016) in each year and
                                            by number of qualifying children. Data: Nominal EITC benefits are obtained
                                            from the Tax Policy Center (https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/
                                            eitc-parameters), and have been converted to 2016 dollars using the CPI from
                                            the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                    Figure A.3: Maximum EITC Credit by Age of First Child and Year of First Birth

                                        (a) Assume 1 Child Only                                                                                            (b) Assume 2nd Child After 4 Years
              6,000




                                                                                                                                     6,000
 Maximum EITC Credit ($2016)




                                                                                                                        Maximum EITC Credit ($2016)
                  4,000




                                                                                                                                         4,000
    2,000




                                                                                                                           2,000




                                                                                  Early-exposed (1993-1996)                                                                                 Early-exposed (1993-1996)
                                                                                  Late-exposed (1988-1991)                                                                                  Late-exposed (1988-1991)
              0




                                                                                                                                     0




                               -5               0                                     5                       10                                      -5               0                             5                  10
                                                        Years Since First Birth                                                                                            Years Since First Birth

Notes: Panel (a) presents the average maximum EITC benefits in each year since first birth for mothers exposed to the 1993
EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), assuming they have at most 1 child. Panel (b)
shows the same outcomes, but assuming all mothers have a second child 4 years after a first birth. The spacing between children
only affects where the second bump in Panel (b) occurs, not the maximal difference or the year of convergence. Data: Nominal
EITC benefits are obtained from the Tax Policy Center (https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/eitc-parameters),
and have been converted to 2016 dollars using the CPI from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                                                                   67
                   Figure A.4: Share of Mothers Remaining Never-Married in Each Year Since First Birth (SIPP)




                                                     1         .8
                                            Share Never-Married
                                          .4        .6
                                                     .2




                                                                    0                  5                      10                           15                    20
                                                                                                 Years Since First Birth

                                                                                           Early-exposed                         Late-exposed

                                    Notes: This figure presents the share of mothers who were never-married at first birth that
                                    remain never-married in each year since first birth. We plot this separately for mothers
                                    exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth:
                                    1988­1991). Data: 1990, 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004, 2008 SIPP Wave 2 Topical Modules
                                    and 2014 SIPP. Sample: women whose first child was born in 1988­1991 or 1993­1996,
                                    and who were never married at the time of this first birth. Estimates weighted by SIPP
                                    weights.




                     Figure A.5: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment ­ Married Mothers
                          (a) Early- and Late-Exposed                                                                                     (b) Difference-in-Difference
                                                                                                                  .15
     .1




                                                                        Early-exposed (1993-1996)
                                                                        Late-exposed (1988-1991)
     .05




                                                                                                                  .1
     0




                                                                                                                      .05
       -.05
Coefficient




                                                                                                             Coefficient
-.1




                                                                                                             0
     -.15




                                                                                                                  -.05
     -.2
     -.25




                                                                                                                  -.1




              -5     -4     -3     -2      -1       0         1                    2         3        4                     -5     -4     -3     -2      -1       0         1     2   3   4
                                  Years from Birth of First Child                                                                               Years from Birth of First Child

              Notes: These figures present point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from event studies of employment around birth for married
              mothers who were exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) or late (first birth: 1988­1991). Panel A plots the
              estimates on indicators for years since first birth crossed with being "early-exposed" or "late-exposed" using never-married mothers. Panel
              B shows the estimates for the dynamic DD using married mothers. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables, standard
              errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 5th year after a first birth.




                                                                                                       68
    Figure A.6: Distribution of Post-birth Earnings, Excluding 0's ­
                        Late-Exposed Mothers




              .08
                                                                               Never-Married
                                                                               Married

                         .06
  Share of all in sample
           .04.02
              0




                               0   20,000       40,000         60,000         80,000     100,000
                                            Earnings ($2016), Excluding 0's

Notes: This figure shows the truncated distribution of earnings, excluding 0's, zero to
three years after a first birth for never-married and married mothers who were exposed to
the 1993 EITC reform late (first birth: 1988­1991). We omit the never-married distribu-
tion beyond $40,000 due to to having too few observations (less than 20 observations per
bin). See the notes of Figure 2 for information on data and sample construction. Years:
We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 4th year after a first birth.




                                                      69
 Figure A.7: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Earnings Density ­
                 Difference-in-Difference Estimates
                 .15




                                      Phase-in   Flat        Phase-out
                             .1
      Effect on Pr(Earnings>x)
     0           .05




                                                    Poverty line
                 -.05




                                  0                 20,000           40,000          60,000   80,000
                                                        Wages + Self Employment ($2016)

Notes: This figure shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from difference-in-
difference regressions that compare the earnings distribution of never-married mothers
exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth:
1988­1991). Each marker is obtained from a separate regression, where the outcome is
an indicator for having annual earnings ($2016) at least as large as X ­ where X is the
amount shown on the x-axis ­ during years 0-3 since birth. The dashed grey lines show,
respectively, the end of the phase-in region on the 1994 EITC schedule; the 1994 poverty
line; the end of the flat region on the 1994 EITC schedule; and the end of the phase-out
region on the 1994 EITC schedule. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control
variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. Nominal EITC benefits are
obtained from the Tax Policy Center (https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/
eitc-parameters). Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the
4th year after a first birth.




                                                                         70
Figure A.8: EITC Expansion and Bunching Before and After Birth ­ Never-Married Mothers
                                              (a) Late-Exposed Self-Employed Mothers


                         .01
                                                                                             Post-birth
                         .008                                                                Pre-birth
                Share of all sample
                  .004   .002
                         0   .006




                                      -5000    -2500   0     2500     5000      7500 10000   12500   15000
                                                        Income Relative to Kink ($2016)


                                              (b) Early-Exposed Self-Employed Mothers
                         .01




                                                                                             Post-birth
                                                                                             Pre-birth
                         .008
                Share of all sample
                  .004   .002
                         0   .006




                                      -5000    -2500   0     2500     5000      7500 10000   12500   15000
                                                        Income Relative to Kink ($2016)

           Notes: These figures shows the share of all never-married mothers who are self-employed
           and have income in $2,500 ($2016) bins centered around the first EITC kink, pre- and
           post-birth. Panel A shows no post-birth bunching for for mothers exposed to the 1993
           EITC reform late (first birth: 1988­1991). Panel B shows post-birth bunching for for
           mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996). "Pre-Birth"
           includes the 5 years prior to a first birth, and "post-birth" includes up to the fifth year
           after a first birth. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables, standard
           errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a
           first birth up to the 5th year after a first birth.




                                                                 71
Figure A.9: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment ­
                          By Year of First Birth




                       .1
          Estimate Relative to '88-89
               0       -.05   .05




                              1988-89   1990-91        1992-93      1994-95   1996-97

                                                  Never Married   DDD

Notes: These figures show coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from regressions of
employment on an indicator for "Post-Birth" interacted with indicators for having a first
birth in 1990­91, 1992­93, 1994­95, or 1996­97. The omitted category (reference group)
is first births in 1988-89. We present both the DD using never-married mothers as well as
the DDD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. See the
notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables, standard errors, data and sample
construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 5th
year after a first birth.




                                                       72
Figure A.10: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment ­
              By Year of First Birth and Years Since Birth




                      .1
          Coefficient Relative to 88-89
              0       -.05   .05




                                          -5   -4    -3    -2      -1       0         1       2   3     4
                                                          Years from Birth of First Child

                                                1990-91        1992-93              1994-95       1996-97

  Notes: These figures show coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from event studies of
  employment in each year around birth by year of first birth. We plot the estimates on
  indicators for years since first birth interacted with indicators for having a first birth in
  1990­91, 1992­93, 1994­95, or 1996­97. The omitted category (reference group) is first
  births in 1988-89. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables, standard
  errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a
  first birth up to the 5th year after a first birth.




                                                                    73
                                     Figure A.11: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Short-Run Employment ­
                                                          Prior to Federal Welfare Reform
                                     (a) All States                                                             (b) No-Waiver States
     .15




                                                                                            .15
     .1




                                                                                            .1
         .05




                                                                                                .05
Coefficient




                                                                                       Coefficient
0




                                                                                       0
     -.05




                                                                                            -.05
     -.1




                                                                                            -.1
               -5      -4       -3       -2        -1          0         1    2   3                   -5   -4     -3      -2        -1          0         1    2   3
                                      Years from Birth of First Child                                                  Years from Birth of First Child

                                         Never Married                  DDD                                               Never Married                  DDD

               Notes: These figures present estimates and 95% confidence intervals from event studies of employment up to five years after a first birth, for
               mothers who were exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) or late (first birth: 1988­1991). For each figure we shows
               the estimates for the dynamic DD using never-married mothers and the dynamic DDD, where we use married mothers as an additional
               comparison group. Panel A limits the data to the years up to 1996. Panel B additionally restricts the data to states that had not passed
               a welfare waiver by 1996. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction.
               Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 5th year after a first birth or 1996, whichever comes first.




                                                                                  74
Figure A.12: Difference in the Average Unemployment Rate Between Late-
                       and Early-Exposed Mothers




             Gap in Unemployment Rate (88-91 Minus 93-96)
           -4           -2              0             2




                                                            -5   0     5               10      15   20
                                                                     Years Since First Birth


   Notes: This figure shows the difference between the average unemployment rate for moth-
   ers who were exposed to the 1993 EITC reform late (first birth: 1988­1991) or early (first
   birth: 1993­1996). Hence, a positive value implies that early-exposed mothers had better
   employment conditions than late-exposed mothers at a given number of years since first
   birth. Data: State-level unemployment rates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.




                                                                           75
                                   Figure A.13: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Earnings Density ­ Medium- and Long-Run
                                                                                      (a) Earnings in Years 5-9
                                                                (i) Never-Married                                                                          (ii) DDD
            .15




                                                                                                                    .15
                             Phase-in   Flat    Phase-out                                                                            Phase-in   Flat    Phase-out
                        .1




                                                                                                                                .1
 Effect on Pr(Earnings>x)




                                                                                                         Effect on Pr(Earnings>x)
            .05




                                                                                                                    .05
0




                                                                                                        0
                                         Poverty line                                                                                            Poverty line
            -.05




                                                                                                                    -.05
                             0            20,000         40,000        60,000       80,000    100,000                                0            20,000         40,000        60,000       80,000   100,000
                                                    Wages + Self Employment ($2016)                                                                         Wages + Self Employment ($2016)


                                                                                     (b) Earnings in Years 10+
                                                                (i) Never-Married                                                                          (ii) DDD
            .15




                                                                                                                    .15




                             Phase-in   Flat    Phase-out                                                                            Phase-in   Flat    Phase-out
                        .1




                                                                                                                                .1
 Effect on Pr(Earnings>x)




                                                                                                         Effect on Pr(Earnings>x)
            .05




                                                                                                                    .05
0




                                                                                                        0




                                         Poverty line                                                                                            Poverty line
            -.05




                                                                                                                    -.05




                             0            20,000         40,000        60,000       80,000    100,000                                0            20,000         40,000        60,000       80,000   100,000
                                                    Wages + Self Employment ($2016)                                                                         Wages + Self Employment ($2016)

                    Notes: These figures show coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from DDD regressions that compare the earnings distribution of mothers with
                    early exposure (first birth: 1993­1996) and late-exposure (first birth: 1988­1991) to the EITC reform, across never-married and married mothers.
                    Each marker is obtained from a different regression, where the outcome is an indicator for having annual earnings ($2016) at least as large as X ­
                    where X is the amount shown on the x-axis ­ during years 5-9 (Panel A) or 10+ (Panel B) since birth. The dashed grey lines show, respectively,
                    the end of the phase-in region on the 1994 EITC schedule; the 1994 poverty line; the end of the flat region on the 1994 EITC schedule; and the
                    end of the phase-out region on the 1994 EITC schedule. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables, standard errors, data
                    and sample construction. Nominal EITC benefits are obtained from the Tax Policy Center (https://www.taxpolicycenter.org/statistics/
                    eitc-parameters). Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 4th year after a first birth.




                                                                                                 76
Figure A.14: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Labor Market Outcomes ­
    Never-Married Mothers, By Year of First Birth and Calendar Year
                                           (a) Employment




                .15
                .1   .05
         Coefficient
         -.05 0 -.1
                -.15
                -.2




                           1982   1986   1990     1994      1998   2002    2006   2010
                                                         Year

                                                   86-87           88-91
                                                   93-96           97-99


                                                (b) Earnings
                2000
                0
         Coefficient
           -2000-4000
                -6000




                           1982   1986   1990     1994      1998   2002    2006   2010
                                                         Year

                                                   86-87           88-91
                                                   93-96           97-99


       Notes: These figures show coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from
       calendar-year event studies of the employment (Panel A) or earnings ($2016,
       Panel B) of never-married mothers. We show the estimates on indicators for
       calendar years interacted with an indicator for being exposed to the 1993
       EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996), late (first birth: 1988­1991),
       very late (first birth: 1986­1987) or very early (first birth: 1997­1999). For
       each group of mothers, the omitted category (reference group) is the year
       prior to the earliest birth (e.g. 1992, for 1993­1996 births). All regressions
       include fixed effects for the year of first childbirth, mother's age, race, educa-
       tion, state of residence, the state-level unemployment rate, minimum wage,
       AFDC/TANF maximum benefit level, Medicaid generosity, implementation
       of six types of welfare waivers, implementation of any waiver or TANF, and
       implementation of the 2009 EITC reform. See the notes of Figure 2 for infor-
       mation on standard errors, data and sample construction. Years: We include
       data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to 2012.




                                                     77
Figure A.15: Zooming in on Earnings of Early- and Late-Exposed Never-Married Mothers ­
                       Groups of Two Cohorts, By Calendar Year




                     2000
                     0
                Coefficient
                  -2000
                     -4000
                     -6000




                              1982   1986   1990   1994      1998   2002     2006   2010
                                                           Year

                                                    88-89            90-91
                                                    93-94            95-96


               Notes: This figure shows coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from
               calendar-year event studies of the earnings ($2016) of never-married mothers.
               We show the estimates on indicators for calendar years interacted with an
               indicator for being exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­
               1996) or late (first birth: 1988­1991). or each group of mothers, the omitted
               category (reference group) is the year prior to the earliest birth (e.g. 1992,
               for 1993­1996 births). See the notes of Figure 2 for information on standard
               errors, data and sample construction, and of Appendix Figure A.14 for con-
               trol variables. Years: We include data from 5 years prior to a first birth up
               to 2012.




                                                          78
                         Figure A.16: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Labor Market Outcomes ­
                    Sensitivity to Alternative Unemployment Rate Measures and State-Year Fixed Effects
                                                                     (a) Employment
                                   (i) Never-Married                                                         (ii) DDD
        .2




                                                                                         .15
        .15




                                                                                         .1
          .1
 Coefficient




                                                                                    Coefficient
                                                                                      .05
 .05




                                                                                         0
        0
        -.05




                                                                                         -.05
                    -5      0          5               10           15         20                 -5   0             5               10            15     20
                                 Years from Birth of First Child                                               Years from Birth of First Child

                                Base                 No U-rate                                         Base              No U-rate        Female U-rate
                                Female U-rate        < Col U-Rate                                      < Col U-Rate      St*Yr FE


                                                                         (b) Earnings
                                   (i) Never-Married                                                         (ii) DDD
                                                                                         6000
        6000




                                                                                         4000
             4000
 Coefficient




                                                                                    Coefficient
                                                                                      2000
   2000




                                                                                         0
        0
        -2000




                                                                                         -2000




                    -5      0          5               10           15         20                 -5   0             5               10            15     20
                                 Years from Birth of First Child                                               Years from Birth of First Child

                                Base                 No U-rate                                         Base              No U-rate        Female U-rate
                                Female U-rate        < Col U-Rate                                      < Col U-Rate      St*Yr FE


Notes: These figures present the sensitivity of the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for event studies that compare the
employment (Panel A) or earnings ($2016, Panel B) of mothers exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and
late (first birth: 1988­1991), in each year from a first birth. Figure (i) in each panel presents the dynamic DD using never-married
mothers. Figure (ii) in each panel presents the DDD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. In addition
to the baseline estimates, we show results from specifications where we remove all unemployment rate controls (blue circles); substitute
the state-level unemployment rate with a control for the average unemployment rate for women in the state (green squares) or with
a control for the average unemployment rate in the state for individuals with less than a college education (red diamonds). See
the notes of Figure 2 for information on baseline control variables, standard errors, data and sample construction. We calculate the
unemployment rate for women and for individuals with less than college education from the 1983­2015 March CPS. Years: We include
data from 5 years prior to a first birth up to the 20th year after a first birth.




                                                                             79
                    Figure A.17: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Labor Market Outcomes ­
                     Sensitivity to Keeping CPS Surveys at most from 8 to 20 Years of Birth
                                                             (a) Short-term Employment
                                   (i) Never-Married                                                                   (ii) DDD




                                                                                              .08
    .1
    .08




                                                                                              .06
 Estimate




                                                                                       Estimate
      .06




                                                                                         .04
    .04




                                                                                              .02
    .02




                                                                                              0


            8   9    10     11    12    13      14    15    16    17   18   19    20                  8   9   10     11    12    13      14    15    16    17   18   19   20
                          Years from First Birth of Last CPS Year Kept                                             Years from First Birth of Last CPS Year Kept


                                                                 (b) Long-run Earnings
                                   (i) Never-Married                                                                   (ii) DDD
                                                                                              4000
    3000
    2000




                                                                                              2000
 Estimate




                                                                                       Estimate
  1000




                                                                                              0
    0
    -1000




                                                                                              -2000




            8   9    10     11    12    13      14    15    16    17   18   19    20                  8   9   10     11    12    13      14    15    16    17   18   19   20
                          Years from First Birth of Last CPS Year Kept                                             Years from First Birth of Last CPS Year Kept


Notes: These figures present estimates and 95% confidence intervals from regressions comparing the labor market outcomes of mothers
exposed to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), as we vary the sample restrictions.
Each marker comes from a separate regression where we keep CPS surveys that occurred at most 8, 9, ...20 years from first birth.
Panel A shows the results for employment 0-4 years from first birth. Panel B shows the results for earnings ($2016) 5-9 and 10+ years
from first birth. Figure (i) in each panel presents the DD using never-married mothers. Figure (ii) in each panel presents the DDD
in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables,
standard errors, data and sample construction.




                                                                                 80
                      Figure A.18: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Labor Market Outcomes ­
                         Sensitivity to Keeping CPS Surveys at least 1 to 20 Years after Birth
                                                               Long-Run Earnings ($2016)
                                     (i) Never-Married                                                      (ii) DDD
       4000




                                                                                       6000
       3000




                                                                                       4000
          2000
   Estimate




                                                                                    Estimate
                                                                                     2000
 1000




                                                                                       0
       0
       -1000




                                                                                       -2000
                 0            5                  10                15          20              0          5                  10                15         20
                             Years from Birth of First CPS Survey Kept                                   Years from Birth of First CPS Survey Kept


Notes: These figures shows estimates and 95% confidence intervals from regressions comparing the earnings ($2016) of mothers exposed
to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 10+ years from a first birth, as we vary the
sample restrictions. Each marker comes from a separate regression where we keep CPS surveys that occurred at least 1, 2, ...20 years
from first birth. Figure (i) presents the DD using never-married mothers. Figure (ii) presents the DDD in which we use married
mothers as an additional comparison group. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables, standard errors, data and
sample construction.




                        Figure A.19: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Long-Run Earnings ­
                              Sensitivity to Using Women Interviewed By Age 39 to 49
                                     (i) Never-Married                                                      (ii) DDD
                                                                                       3000
       2000




                                                                                       2000
       1500
 Estimate




                                                                                    Estimate
                                                                                     1000
  1000 500




                                                                                       0
                                                                                       -1000
       0




                 39     41              43           45                  47    49              39   41              43           45                  47   49
                                   Oldest Age Observed in CPS                                                  Oldest Age Observed in CPS


Notes: These figures shows estimates and 95% confidence intervals from regressions comparing the earnings ($2016) of mothers exposed
to the 1993 EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) and late (first birth: 1988­1991), 10+ years from a first birth, as we vary
the sample restrictions. Each marker comes from a separate regression where we restrict our sample to only keep women that were
no older than 39, 41...49 when interviewed in the CPS. Figure (i) presents the DD using never-married mothers. Figure (ii) presents
the DDD in which we use married mothers as an additional comparison group. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control
variables, standard errors, data and baseline sample construction.




                                                                              81
                     Figure A.20: Effect of Early Work Incentives on Labor Market Outcomes ­
                                              Randomization Inference
                                                               (a) Short-term Employment
                                  (i) Never-Married                                                                       (ii) DDD
       15




                                                                                              15
       10




                                                                                              10
 Percent




                                                                                        Percent
       5




                                                                                              5
       0




                                                                                              0
            -.05                               0                                 .05                  -.04             -.02              0               .02               .04
                     Permutations for DD for Any Earnings, 0-4 yrs from birth                                 Permutations for DDD for Any Earnings, 0-4 yrs from birth


                                                           (b) Long-Term Earnings ($2016)
                                  (i) Never-Married                                                                       (ii) DDD
                                                                                              10
       10




                                                                                              8
                                                                                              6
 Percent




                                                                                        Percent
  5




                                                                                              4
                                                                                              2
       0




                                                                                              0




            -2000         -1000                 0               1000             2000              -2000            -1000                 0              1000                2000
                    Permutations for DD for Income ($2016), 10+ yrs from birth                               Permutations for DDD for Income ($2016), 10+ yrs from birth


Notes: These figures show the distribution of estimates from 500 placebo experiments comparing the employment (Panel A) or earnings
($2016, Panel B) of mothers exposed to the EITC "reform" with "early" and "late", where early and late exposure are randomly
assigned. In particular, for each placebo experiment we randomly assign "early-exposure" to four randomly chosen years of birth
drawn without replacement, and estimate a placebo DD and DDD estimate. Panel A keeps data up to 5 years from first birth and
reports the DD or DDD coefficient (figures (i) and (ii), respectively). Panel B keeps data up to 20 years from first birth and reports
the DD or DDD coefficient on the interaction with "10+ Yrs From Birth" (figures (i) and (ii), respectively). The red dotted line shows
our baseline estimate. The one-sided p-values for short-run employment are 0.01 for both the DD and DDD. The one-sided p-values
for long-run earnings are 0.02 for both the DD and DDD. See the notes of Figure 2 for information on control variables, standard
errors, data and baseline sample construction.




                                                                                 82
           Figure A.21: Long-Run MVPF Across Varying Assumptions




    >25
    7
    6  5
  MVPF
   43
    2




                                                             Baseline MVPF
    1
    0




           -.015           -.01       -.005        0          .005             .01            .015
                                      Tax Rate Relative to Baseline
                   NM, base           DDD, base                     NM, adj. takeup
                   DDD, adj. takeup   NM, adj. takeup + transfers   DDD, adj. takeup + transfers


Notes: This figure shows the estimated MVPF of the EITC expansion for early-exposed never-
married mothers under varying assumptions about the average income tax rate (shown on the
x-axis) and about EITC take-up and fiscal externalities (shown in different markers). The MVPF
estimates shown in the "base" markers are calculated as Cost-W    TP
                                                               Add'l Taxes
                                                                           . The estimates shown
in the "adj. takeup" markers multiply WTP and cost by 0.85 to account for incomplete EITC
takeup. The estimates shown in the "adj. takeup + transfers" markers apply this rescaling and
also subtract our conservative change in transfers (excluding welfare and Medicaid) from the
denominator of the MVPF. The tax rate relative to baseline applies to the tax rates that we
use for the short-run, medium-run, and long run. In other words, we add (or subtract) 0.01 to
the tax rate in each period, or set the tax rate equal to zero if subtracting makes the tax rate
less than 0. The grey dotted line shows the MVPF corresponding to our baseline tax rate and
assumptions.




                                                  83
Figure A.22: Ratio of Long-Run to Medium-Run MVPF Across Varying Assumptions




                                   inf/inf
       Long-Run to Medium-Run MVPF
        2    4     6    8  inf




                                                                                           Medium-Run =
                                                                                          Long-Run MVPF
                       0




                                             -.015          -.01        -.005        0          .005        .01        .015
                                                                        Tax Rate Relative to Baseline

                                                     NM, base                            DDD, base
                                                     NM, adj. takeup                     DDD, adj. takeup
                                                     NM, adj. takeup + add transfers     DDD, adj. takeup + add transfers

     Notes: This figure shows the ratio of the "long-run" MVPF to the "medium-run" MVPF (i.e.,
     excluding impacts 10+ years from first birth) under varying assumptions about the average
     income tax rate (shown on the x-axis) and about EITC take-up and fiscal externalities (shown
     in different markers). The MVPF estimates shown in the "base" markers are calculated as
            WTP
      Cost-Add'l Taxes
                       . The estimates shown in the "adj. takeup" markers multiply WTP and cost
     by 0.85 to account for incomplete EITC takeup. The estimates shown in the "adj. takeup +
     transfers" markers apply this rescaling and also subtract our conservative change in transfers
     (excluding welfare and Medicaid) from the denominator of the MVPF. The tax rate relative to
     baseline applies to the tax rates that we use for the short-run, medium-run, and long run. In
     other words, we add (or subtract) 0.01 to the tax rate in each period, or set the tax rate equal to
     zero if subtracting makes the tax rate less than 0. The red dotted line shows where the long-run
     and medium-run MVPFs are equal (i.e., the ratio is 1). Values above this line indicate that the
     long-run MVPF is greater than the medium-run MVPF




                                                                                  84
B        Relationship to Kleven (2019)
       As we note in the paper, the close timing of welfare reform with the 1993 EITC reform (hereafter,
the reform) raises a number of potential challenges for our estimation. Kleven (2019) highlights
a number of specific concerns in this vein. In this section, we outline the key points in Kleven's
analysis of the reform and how our results address or differ from Kleven's findings.51

Brief summary of Kleven (2019)                Kleven (2019) analyzes the effect of the reform using the
1989 to 2003 March and monthly CPS files, and a sample consisting of single women (never-
married, divorced, widowed) between the ages of 20 and 50. His main analysis is a difference-in-
difference design comparing women with kids to women without kids, before and after the reform.
He presents three main results. First, he shows that the post-reform increase in employment was
increasing in family size and decreasing in the age of one's youngest child. Second, he calculates
very large implied elasticities of employment (participation), e.g. equal to 2.03 (1.79) for mothers
with one child. Third, he shows that introducing dynamic controls for six types of welfare waivers
(i.e., allowing the coefficients on these variables to vary by year and by number of children), and
allowing the unemployment controls to vary by the presence of children, makes the EITC effect
insignificant for the years prior to PRWORA. Kleven concludes from these results that the patterns
are consistent with welfare reform, but not with the EITC narrative.

1. Impacts by number and age of children Different than Kleven, we do not find strictly
increasing employment effects by family size or decreasing effects by child age. In particular, while
we find that post-birth employment increases more after a second birth than after a first birth;
we do not find a statistically significant difference between third or higher-order births and second
births (see Section 4.3). These patterns are consistent with EITC incentives. Moreover, we do not
find different employment effects between mothers whose first child at the time of the reform was no
older than 1 ("early-exposed"), between the ages of 3-6 ("late-exposed), or between the ages of 7 and
8 (supplementary group) ­ see Appendix Figure A.14. One potential explanation for the difference
in our results is that Kleven's analysis does not account for changes in unobservable characteristics
of mothers over time, while our panel difference-in-difference strategy does. Consistent with this,
Hotz and Scholz (2006) employ a panel family fixed effects strategy and find the same patterns by
family size as we do.

2. Elasticity estimates          Our back-of-the-envelope calculation in Section 4 suggests that the
elasticity of employment to pre-tax labor earnings is between 0.54 and 0.72, or roughly 27% and
40% as large as the estimate for mothers with one child in Kleven (2019). The discrepancy between
our estimates and Kleven's estimates reflect differences both in the numerator and the denominator
of the elasticity. First, our employment effects in percent terms are half the size of Kleven's: 5.9
  51
    Kleven also raises concerns with estimated effects of other EITC reforms ­ we do not address those here, since
they are not relevant for our analysis.



                                                       85
          3.7                       8.5 52
percent ( 63.1 ) vs. 12.4 percent ( 68.1 ). Second, Kleven calculates a 6.8% average change in tax
rates. He obtains this by simulating taxes across years using observed earnings for working single
mothers and predicted earnings for non-workers (based on individual characteristics). Instead, we
calculate the change in EITC benefits between early- and late-exposed mothers using the post-
birth distribution of late-exposed never-married mothers for workers, and imputing EITC benefits
in three ways for non-workers. Specifically, we impute benefits assuming that non-workers earnings':
(i) fall only in the phase-in region (ii) fall only in the phase-in or flat regions (weighted using the
distribution of workers across these regions); or (iii) have the same distribution of earnings as
working single mothers.53 This produces changes in EITC benefits equal to an 8.2, 9.9, or 10.9
percent change as a share of pre-tax earnings, respectively. Our higher change in benefits primarily
reflects our lower-income and younger population and the longer period over which we estimate
changes in the EITC credit (e.g., we include the 1990 reform as part of our treatment). It also
reflects the fact that, for some estimates, we allow the distribution of earnings for non-workers
to be more concentrated in the phase-in regions post-reform. Thus, we do not make the strong
assumption that the earnings distribution remains the same post-reform, as Kleven does.

3. Controlling for waivers and business cycle In a similar spirit to Kleven, we allow our
unemployment rate and welfare waiver controls to be "dynamic" in allowing differential impacts
by the age of one's first child.54 Our estimates are not affected by allowing for this flexibility (see
Section 4.3). We also show that our employment effects are present when we restrict our sample
period up to 1996 and limiting our sample to states that did not pass any waivers prior to 1996
(e.g., Table 2, columns 7­8). Thus, these effects do not appear to be sensitive to these welfare
controls, different than Kleven (2019). Further, we note that Kleven's effects inclusive of these
controls are quite imprecise, and could not reject our estimated effects.55




  52
     Again, we speculate that part of this difference is due to the fact that we control for pre-birth differences in labor
market outcomes.
  53
     The first two assumptions are motivated by the idea that non-workers are likely to be negatively selected on
wages, or might be more likely to prefer part-time work.
  54
     We do not model event-year dynamics for the welfare waivers as in some of the specification in Kleven (2019)
because with six welfare waivers, passed largely in the 1990s, the dynamic waiver-event-time indicators quickly become
collinear with our effects of interest. Nonetheless, given the strong relationship that Kleven shows between welfare
response and child age, we would expect that these controls would account for important differences in incentives.
  55
     For example, our effect inclusive of these controls is 3.2 pp. (column 5, Table 2), which is within the confidence
interval of his 1.06 p.p. (s.e = 1.5 p.p.) in column 3 of Table 6.


                                                            86
C       Appendix to Section 2
C.1      CPS occupations
      Because the CPS occupation categories vary over time, we first create a harmonized occupation
variable that spans our entire sample period using the IPUMS "occ1990" classification (Flood et al.,
2020).56 In particular, we downloaded the March CPS from IPUMS for the CPS surveys in our
sample, and then collapsed the data by "occ1990" and the original CPS occupation variable to
create a crosswalk. We then merge the crosswalk on to our data, which gives us the "occ1990"
corresponding to each individual in our sample.
      Next, we create categories of occupations based on similar types of jobs:

    1. Housekeeping (405 <= occ1990 <= 408)
    2. Janitor (448 <= occ1990 <= 455): includes janitors and building operators.
    3. Food (433 <= occ1990 <= 444): includes bartenders, waiters, and kitchen workers.
    4. Child (occ1990 == 468): includes child care workers.
    5. Beauty (456 <= occ1990 <= 458): includes barbers and hairdressers
    6. Recreation (459 <= occ1990 <= 467): includes guides and public transportation attendants.
    7. Protect (459 <= occ1990 <= 467): includes firefighters, police, and guards.
    8. Health Service (445 <= occ1990 <= 447): includes dental assistants and health aides.
    9. Execs/Managers (3 <= occ1990 <= 40): includes legislators, managers, accountants, and
        management support.
 10. Professional/Tech. (43 <= occ1990 <= 240): includes engineers, doctors, therapists, teach-
        ers, lawyers, and health technicians.
 11. Financial sales (243 <= occ1990 <= 260): includes a variety of higher-end sales occupations
        (insurance, real estate, financial services).
 12. Retail sales (263 <= occ1990 <= 300): includes salespersons, cashiers, and retail sales clerks.
 13. Clerical (303 <= occ1990 <= 389): includes bank tellers, data entry, and admin support.
 14. Agricultural (473 <= occ1990 <= 499): includes farmers, farm workers, and agricultural
        inspection.
 15. Mech/Constr/Min (503 <= occ1990 <= 617): includes auto body repair, construction trades,
        and mining.




 56
      See https://cps.ipums.org/cps-action/variables/OCC1990#codes_section for a description of these codes.


                                                        87
C.2    Matching CPS to Administrative Earnings Records
   The match between CPS and SSA records is performed using the PIK, which is a unique
mapping to a Social Security Number (SSN). Until 2006, PIKs were assigned using validated SSN's,
if available, or a probabilistic match using name, address, and demographic information, such as
date of birth. Since 2006, the PIK has been assigned solely using the probabilistic match, which
prevents the need to request an SSN from respondents (Czajka et al., 2008). This match is only
available for the 23 CPS surveys in our sample (1991, 1994, and 1996 to 2016). Conditional on
an individual being matched to the SSA records, we observe W-2 and self-employment earnings in
each year.
   Below we show the share of married and never-married women that meet our sample criteria
who are matched in each March CPS.




                                              88
                          Table A.26: CPS-SSA Data Matching Rates ­
                          By Year, Marital Status and EITC Exposure

                                        Never Married                Married
                                      Late-        Early-       Late-       Early-
                                     Exposed      Exposed      Exposed     Exposed
                            1991      0.819                     0.845
                            1994      0.789         0.750       0.786        0.768
                            1996      0.796         0.816       0.830        0.818
                            1997      0.731         0.812       0.786        0.777
                            1998      0.696         0.762       0.731        0.717
                            1999      0.683         0.661       0.681        0.682
                            2000      0.680         0.696       0.677        0.679
                            2001      0.222         0.264       0.216        0.223
                            2002      0.772         0.784       0.794        0.782
                            2003      0.758         0.788       0.778        0.763
                            2004      0.732         0.670       0.704        0.690
                            2005      0.730         0.675       0.691        0.668
                            2006      0.914         0.918       0.907        0.880
                            2007      0.918         0.874       0.907        0.882
                            2008      0.933         0.864       0.902        0.877
                            2009      0.857         0.883       0.898        0.881
                            2010      0.868         0.859       0.887        0.877
                            2011      0.874         0.893       0.892        0.889
                            2012      0.873         0.906       0.871        0.888
                            2013      0.887         0.891       0.873        0.890
                            2014      0.921         0.894       0.855        0.888
                            2015      0.900         0.864       0.881        0.867
                            2016      0.841         0.871       0.832        0.849
                            Total     0.762         0.776       0.768        0.780
                         Notes: This table shows the share of CPS women that we match
                         to SSA records among mothers who were exposed to the 1993
                         EITC reform early (first birth: 1993­1996) or late (first birth:
                         1988­1991). Data: 1991, 1994, 1996­2000 and 2002­2015 ASEC
                         CPS linked to 1978­2015 longitudinal SSA earnings records.
                         Sample: women whose first child was born in 1988­1991 or
                         1993­1996, who were at least 19 at first birth, and who were
                         less than 50 years old and either married or never married at
                         the time of the CPS interview.


Comparing CPS and administrative earnings To compare earnings in the CPS and SSA
records, we use the "wage and salary" earnings reported in our linked CPS surveys and the sum
of the W2 and self-employment earnings (for the year prior to the survey). We find several dis-
crepancies across these sources. First, we find that 10% of the observations differ on whether an
individual had any earnings. Over 60% of these errors are due to an individual reporting no earn-
ings in the CPS, but having some earnings in the administrative data. Among individuals that have
any earnings in both sources, there are substantial differences between the log of the administrative
earnings and the log of the CPS earnings. The interquartile range for this measure ranges from
-0.27 to 0.20, centered around 0, implying that discrepancies do not go in a consistent direction.
Assuming that individuals can not earn less than what is reported in the administrative records,


                                                       89
this suggests that at least half of the CPS earnings in our sample are reported with error.57

C.3       Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)
       All raw SIPP files were downloaded from
http://data.nber.org/data/survey-of-income-and-program-participation-sipp-data.html,
and were imported using the posted dictionary files.

Child care costs To examine heterogeneous employment effects by child care costs in Section
4.3, we obtain state-level estimates of weekly child care costs using responses from topical modules
in Wave 3 of the 1990, 1991, and 1993 SIPP panels, and Wave 6 of the 1992 SIPP panel. In each
of these topical modules, households were asked to report the type of care and weekly cost of child
care for each of the three youngest children under age 15. These data have been used to measure
child care costs in many previous studies, such as Anderson and Levine (2000).
       We construct three measures of household child care costs for children up to age three. These
include the (unconditional) average cost of care, the cost of care conditional on having a positive
cost, and the share of children for whom there was zero cost. In cases were child care costs were
reported for multiple children, we assigned the average cost of care to each child. We then collapsed
these three measures to the state-level using SIPP weights. We dropped households in states that
are not individually identified in the SIPP.58

Marital histories         To examine post-birth marriage rates in Section 3.1, we use the reported
marital and fertility histories in Wave 2 of the 1990, 1993, 1996, 2001, 2004, and 2008 panels, and
Wave 1 of the 2014 panel. Importantly, each of these surveys asks about year of first birth and year
of first marriage, which allow us to identify mothers that were never-married at first birth. The
survey also asks about subsequent marriages, which allows us to determine the share of mothers
that remain never-married in each year after birth.




  57
     See Abowd and Stinson (2013) for a discussion of possible sources of discrepancies between self-reported earnings
and administrative records.
  58
     These states include: Maine, Vermont, Iowa, North Dakota, South Dakota, Alaska, Idaho, Montana, and
Wyoming.


                                                         90
D        Appendix to Section 4
Elasticity calculation To translate our impacts on employment into an elasticity of employment
to labor earnings, we need to scale the 5.9% change in employment by the percent change in average
EITC benefits between early- and late-exposed mothers. We calculate this latter change, we using
EITC benefit schedule for early- and late-exposed mothers weighted by the post-birth earnings
distribution of late-exposed never-married mothers (see Appendix Figure A.6), and assign non-
workers either (i) the change in benefits in the phase-in region; (ii) the average change in benefits
in the phase-in and flat regions; or (iii) the average change in benefits among all workers, in a
similar spirit to Kleven (2019). This produces a 10.9%, 9.9% and 8.2% change in average EITC
                                                                   5.9               5 .9
benefits, respectively, and a range of elasticities between 0.54 ( 10.9 ) and 0.72 ( 8.2 ).


Heterogeneity by child care costs and state-level EITCs In these analyses, we use observed
variation across states in child care costs or work incentives. Because these features of states are
not randomly assigned, we view this evidence as only suggestive.
       First, we examine whether impact of work incentives varies with childcare costs. The predicted
sign of this interaction is ambiguous: additional income from the EITC could be particularly
important for the employment of mothers with high costs of care, or could be most effective in
areas where mothers have access to low-cost care. Using the SIPP, we construct three state-level
measures of early child care costs for children: the average weekly cost of child care, the average
weekly cost conditional on paying for care, and the share of children with zero care costs (e.g.,
using relatives for care).59 , 60
       Appendix Table A.9 shows that early-exposure has a larger impact on employment in higher cost
areas (columns 2­3), but also in areas with a higher share of children receiving free care (column
4). While the latter result may seem unintuitive, we suspect that this may reflect greater use of
relatives for child care in areas with higher costs. In support of this, we find a positive correlation
between all of our child care cost measures. Thus, these results are potentially consistent with a
larger impact of work incentives in high-cost areas. However, we acknowledge that it is difficult to
interpret our current measures of childcare costs.
       Second, we consider whether the impacts of the EITC reform are larger in states that have
a supplementary EITC.61 Columns (1) and (3) of Appendix Table A.10 show that, on average,
post-birth employment does not vary with the presence of a state EITC supplement (column 1) or
with the generosity of the supplement (column 3). This may reflect the small number of EITC's
during the early 1990s, or the lack of salience of these benefits. However, we find that early-exposed
mothers' employment increases more in states that have an EITC supplement (column 2) or have
  59
     We have slightly fewer observations for these analyses because the SIPP does not identify the state of residence
for households in small states.
  60
     See Appendix C.3 for further information on the SIPP data.
  61
     We obtain information on state EITC supplements from https://users.nber.org/~taxsim/state-eitc.html.
Supplementary EITC's are typically set as a percentage of the federal EITC; thus, a mother living in a state with a
supplement is eligible for a more generous credit, and can expect a larger increase in her credit after a federal reform.



                                                           91
a more generous EITC supplement (column 4). This is consistent with early-exposed mothers'
responding to the generosity of work incentives after the EITC reform.




                                               92
E     Appendix to Section 6
Role of growth in hours in medium-run results                We now ask: how much of the growth
in the earnings advantage from the short-run to the medium-run (7% to 17%) can be explained
by the growth in weekly hours over that time? As a back-of-the-envelope estimate, we scale up
our short-run impacts on earnings by the medium-run growth in labor supply to get a "predicted
effect" on medium-run earnings. This yields that early-exposed mothers' earnings advantage would
                                                                                            (5.5-3.4)
be expected to grow from 7% to 11.3% based on growth in any employment [7% · (1 +               3.4   )],
and to 10.7% based on growth in weekly hours [7% · (1+ (3.32- 2.16)
                                                            .16     )]. As a fraction of the 10% actual
change, this implies that 37% to 43% of the earnings growth from the short-run to the medium-run
can be explained by changes in hours of work. Hence, 63% of the medium-run earnings growth
could be due to wage growth (e.g., due to higher wages associated with full-time work).

Impacts on "high earnings" and "high experience" We begin by providing further justi-
fication and detail about the variables that we use in this analysis. As discussed in the text, we
measure "high earnings" using an indicator for being in the top 25% of the earnings distribution
of all mothers, defined in each year since first birth. We use this measure because early exposure
has a larger and more precise effect on being in the top 25% of earnings in the long-run than being
in the top 75% or top 50% of the earnings distribution (see Panel A of Appendix Table A.20).
Thus, we consider this to be the best proxy for the impacts of early exposure. As also discussed
in the text, we measure "high experience" using an indicator for whether a mother worked in the
first three years after her first birth. To construct this variable, we create a measure of "potential
experience" which is equal to one's actual total experience for   0, increases by one in each year
for 1    3, and increases by 1 in each year that a mother works for  > 4. We then define a
mother as having "high experience" if her actual experience is equal to her potential experience.
    Next, we describe the calculation justifying our claim that the share of low-experience mothers
with high earnings does not change with early exposure. To calculate the share of early-exposed
mothers with "low-experience", we sum from Appendix Table A.21 the mean share of never-married
women with low experience (0.021 + 0.310) and the impact of early exposure on being low experi-
ence (-.009 + 0.127). This gives 19.5%. We then calculate the share of early-exposed mothers with
"high earnings and low experience" as the mean share of this group plus the effect of early expo-
sure (0.02-0.009), which is 1.2%. The ratio of these two numbers gives that 6.2% of early-exposed
mothers with low experience have high earnings. Among all never-married mothers, this ratio is
          0.02
6.3% ( 0.02+0 .31 ) based on the means in Appendix Table A.21. Thus, this ratio is not higher for
early-exposed mothers.
    Finally, we consider the sensitivity of our results to instead measuring "high experience" using
an indicator of whether an individual is in the top 75% of the experience distribution of all mothers,
defined in each year since first birth. We focus on the top 75% of experience because Appendix
Table A.20 shows that early exposure has a larger and more precise effect on being in the top 75%
of experience in the long-run than being in the top 25% or top 50% of the experience distribution.


                                                  93
On average, this is a higher threshold for "high experience": it includes just 58% of never-married
mothers, compared to 67% using the "worked 3 years after first birth" variable.
   In line with our main results, Appendix Table A.22 shows that we also find increases in the
probability of being "high earning and high experience" and no effect on being "high earning and
low experience" with this measure. We also find no change in the share of low experience mothers
with high earnings (using the calculation described above). Interestingly, as a share of the additional
early-exposed mothers that have high experience (the sum of columns 1 and 3), 40 to 63% end up
being "high earning" across the DD and DDD. This is much higher than the share in our main
results (20%), which is consistent with the fact that this is a higher threshold of experience.




                                                  94
F     Appendix to Section 7
F.1    Decomposition of EITC benefits
    In this section we show how we can decompose simulated EITC benefits into the mechanical
and behavioral effects described in Section 7. First, we introduce a bit of notation for convenience.
    For each year from first birth  , the mean EITC credit for early- and late-exposed mothers can
be written as a weighted sum of benefits in the phase-in region, i.e., earnings times the phase-in
credit rate (yi · rpt ); benefits in the flat region, i.e., the maximum benefit (M ), and the benefits
in the phase-out region, i.e., the maximum credit minus the difference between earnings minus the
minimum earnings for the phase-out times the phaseout credit rate (M - (yi - y ) · ro ). The weights
for this sum are the share of mothers in each region. For example, for early-exposed mothers:
                                                                                               
                                1 
                     Eearly =               yi · rp +         M+                     ~) ·ro 
                                                                          (M - (yi - y
                                                                                            
                                N
                                  
                                      i p               i f         i o
                                                                                define as zo
                                  Np             Nf     No
                                =    · rp · yp +    ·M+    (M - ro · zo )
                                  N              N      N
                                       Phase-in           Flat              Phase-out

    To differentiate between early- and late-exposed mothers, we denote the EITC parameters (rp ,
y
~, ro , M ) for early-exposed mothers, and as (rp , y
                                                    ~ , ro , M ) for late-exposed mothers. Thus, the
mean EITC benefit for late-exposed mothers is:
                                                                                               
                               1 
                     Elate =               yi · rp +          M +         (M - (yi - y
                                                                                     ~ ) · ro 
                               N
                                      ip               if           i o

                                   Np             Nf      N
                               =      · rp · yp +    · M + o (M - ro · zo )
                                   N              N       N
                                      Phase-in           Flat               Phase-out

    For simplicity, we set these as the EITC parameters corresponding to t = 1994 +  or t = 1989
+  , for early- and late-exposed mothers, respectively. These will be slightly different than the true
EITC parameter experienced by a mother, but is a convenient assumption for our decomposition.




                                                            95
   Using a standard Oaxaca-type decomposition strategy, we can write the difference in EITC
benefits between early- and late-exposed mothers as a function of two parts. The first "behavioral"
difference gives the difference in EITC benefits based on the gap in labor supply, holding constant
the early-exposed EITC schedule. The second "mechanical" difference gives the difference in EITC
benefits based on the gap in generosity, holding constant the late-exposed labor supply.

                 Eearly - Elate =
                                        Np                         Np        Np
                                    (      · yp ) · (rp - rp ) + (    · yp -    · yp ) · rp
                                        N                          N         N
                                              Mechanical                 Behavioral
                                         Nf                     Nf    Nf
                                    +         · (M - M ) + (       -   )·M
                                         N                      N    N
                                              Mechanical          Behavioral
                                     N                 No No
                                    + o · (M - M ) + (   -   )·M
                                     N                 N   N
                                              Mechanical         Behavioral
                                       N                          No       N
                                    - ( o · zo ) · (ro - ro ) - (    · zo - o · zo ) · ro
                                       N                          N        N
                                                Mechanical                 Behavioral

   Thus, the overall treatment effects that we estimate in Section 7 give the sum of the "behavioral"
and "mechanical" elements in this equation. Then, the "behavioral" treatment effect is the sum
of the "behavioral" terms, and the "mechanical" treatment effect is the sum of the "mechanical"
terms.




                                                           96
F.2       Calculation of Average Tax Rate
       In Section 7, we estimate the effect of early exposure to the EITC expansion on federal income
tax revenue. This requires an estimate of the average tax rate for the additional dollars earned by
early-exposed mothers in the short-, medium-, and long-run. In this section, we explain how we
calculate this tax rate.62
       The average tax rate, avg, paid on the additional earnings of early-exposed mothers in each
year from first birth  is a function of the additional share of women at each level of earnings
multiplied by the taxes owed at each level of earnings. In particular, if we discretize the earnings
distribution, avg, is:
                                                        j   j, · zj · fj,
                                           avg, =
                                                             j zj   · fj,
       where j denotes a discrete value of earnings. For our purposes, j will be a bin of earnings. j,
is the average tax rate for the bin with average earnings equal to zj ; and fj, is the difference in
the earnings density between early and late-exposed mothers for bin j . Our goal is to estimate an
average avg for the short-, medium-, and long-run.
       First, we use the coefficients from our distributional regressions (i.e., Figures 3, A.7 and A.13)
to generate estimates of fj, . Recall that the distributional regressions give estimates of the
difference in the cdf of earnings between early- and late exposed mothers for the short-, medium-
, and long-run.63 In particular, we have estimates of P r(Y > y )early - P r(Y > y )late for y 
{0, 2500, ...100000}. We can use these estimates to obtain fj, for $2,500 bins of earnings. To do
so, we take the difference between the distributional estimates for two sequential y . For instance,
the change in the density of earnings between $5,000 and $7,500 is equal to the difference between
the change in the cdf at y = 7500 and y = 5000.64
       Second, we obtain an estimate of j, for each bin from NBER TAXSIM (Feenberg and Coutts,
1993). In particular, we obtain j,t for calendar year t as the "Income Tax Before Credits" (for a
head of household with one dependent) divided by zj . We calculate this for each zj in each calendar
year. We then take averages over calendar years to obtain j, .
       Third, combining the inputs from the previous two steps, we calculate avg for the short-,
  62
     Another approach would be to calculate taxes directly for each mother using TAXSIM, however TAXSIM is not
available to be used from the SSA data center.
  63
     We use the same estimates for all  within the short-, medium-, and long-run.
  64
     E.g.,

[P r(Y > 5000)early - P r(Y > 5000)late ] - [P r(Y > 7500)early - P r(Y > 7500)late ]


  = [Pr(Y>5000)early - P r(Y > 7500)early ] - [P r(Y > 5000)late - P r(Y > 7500)late ]

  = Pr(7500  Y > 5000)early - P r(7500  Y > 5000)late

  = f7500>y>5000




                                                            97
medium, and long-term. For instance, for the long-run, this is equal to:

                                                      =19
                                         -run         =10   j   j, · yj · fj,
                                    long
                                    avg       =         =19
                                                        =10      j   yj · fj,

    where j denotes $2,500 bins of earnings.65 We obtain average tax rates that range from 0­0.04,
0.05­0.07, and 0.13­0.14, for the short-, medium-, and long-run, respectively, using the DD and
DDD distributional estimates. We use the minimum of the tax rate for each period to calculate
tax revenue: 0, 0.05, and 0.13.
    Note that because we only calculate tax rates for late-exposed mothers, our estimated increase
in tax revenue does not take into account any changes in the progressivity of the tax schedule over
time (i.e., between early- and late-exposed mothers.) The advantage of holding tax rates fixed is
that it allows greater transparency into these calculations.




  65
     Since we estimate our distributional regressions over groups of  , in practice we only have one value of fj, for
the short-, medium-, and long-run (each).


                                                         98
F.3       Government Transfers
       In Section 7 we estimate the impact of work incentives on government transfers using information
on self-reported income from various government programs from the CPS. In particular, we analyze
government transfers to a woman's family from the following 5 programs, and total benefits as the
sum of benefits from these five categories:66
   1. Food stamps: household value of food stamps (hfdval )
   2. Welfare: family value of welfare (fpawval )
   3. Disability: family disability income (fdisval )
   4. Medicaid: family fungible value of Medicaid (ffngcaid )
   5. Housing subsidy: family market value of housing subsidy (fhoussub )

       Several caveats apply to this analysis. First, program participation is increasingly underreported
in the CPS, which implies that early-exposed mothers are likely to underreport transfers more than
late-exposed mothers (Meyer et al., 2015). Second, married mothers have much lower rates of
program participation than never-married mothers, which makes them a less useful comparison
group for these outcomes. Third, we expect welfare reform to mechanically lead to a reduction in
benefit dollars. Because we do not have controls for the potential duration of benefits or dollar
amounts, our estimates will likely partly reflect this mechanical change. Finally, the value of housing
subsidy is missing for the 1991 CPS, and the value of Medicaid is missing for the 1991 and 2012+
CPSs. The missing data in 1991 makes it such that we have little information on late-exposed
mothers in the first couple of years after birth, and that the differential effects for early-exposed
mothers are estimated only in post-birth years 3 and 4. The missing data after 2011 makes it such
that we have little information on early-exposed mothers in the long-run, and that their differential
effects are estimated only in some of the long-run years.
       For these reasons, we interpret our estimates of the impact of early-exposure on transfers in
Appendix Table A.25 with caution. The reasoning above suggests that these estimates are likely
to be an upper bound on the (absolute) decline in transfers, which leads us not to incorporate this
into our baseline MVPF estimates.




  66
    We use household information for food stamps, as family food stamp information is not collected in the 1991
CPS. Note that we observe 1 unique woman in 99.9% of households, so the risk of double counting food stamp receipt
because of multiple treated women in the same household is minimal.


                                                       99
