                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           REVIVING THE SALTER-SWAN SMALL OPEN ECONOMY MODEL

                                   Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
                                        Martín Uribe

                                      Working Paper 27447
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27447


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We thank Jeffrey Frankel for commissioning this work for the 2020 ISOM conference. We thank
for comments Jeffrey Frankel, Tommaso Monacelli and participants at the 2020 ISOM
conference. Ken Teoh provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Reviving the Salter-Swan Small Open Economy Model
Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 27447
June 2020
JEL No. B27,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper provides microfoundations to the Salter-Swan policy framework, a graphical
apparatus designed to ascertain the exchange-rate and fiscal stance of a policymaker with internal
and external economic targets. The environment is an infinite-horizon small open economy
producing tradable and nontradable goods that takes world prices and world interest rates as
given and is populated by optimizing households and firms. The economy is subject to terms-of-
trade and interest-rate shocks. The internal target of the government is the unemployment rate and
the external target is the current account. Downward nominal wage rigidity and financial frictions
serve as the rationale for meaningful policy intervention.


Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, MC 3308
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
stephanie.schmittgrohe@columbia.edu

Martín Uribe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
martin.uribe@columbia.edu
1         Introduction
This paper provides microfoundations to the Salter-Swan policy framework. The Salter-
Swan policy framework is a graphical apparatus for policy analysis in small open economies.
In this apparatus, the targets of the policy maker are the internal and the external balance
of the country. Internal balance means that the economy achieves full employment and price
stability. External balance means that the country runs neither excessive current account
deficits nor large current account surpluses. The instruments available to the policymaker
are the exchange rate and fiscal policy.
   The theoretical framework underlying the Salter-Swan policy theory is the tradable and
nontradable goods model (also known as the Australian or dependent economy model) in
the tradition of Swan (1955), Meade (1956), Salter (1959), Corden (1960), and Dornbusch
(1974).1 The key insight of the tradable and nontradable goods model is the distinction
between adjustment in aggregate demand and adjustment in its composition, the so called
expenditure switch, when the economy is buffeted by exogenous aggregate disturbances, and
the pivotal role played by the relative price of nontradables in facilitating the expenditure
switch.
   The following example illustrates the adjustment mechanism in the tradable and non-
tradable goods model: Suppose the country interest rate premium increases. This generates
a contraction in domestic absorption as households and firms substitute future for current
spending. Given the relative price of nontradables in terms of tradables (the real exchange
rate), the demand for tradables and nontradables falls. The increased gap between tradable
output and tradable absorption can be exported. However, the increased gap between supply
and demand of nontradables cannot be exported by definition. Thus, market clearing in the
nontradable sector requires a decline in the relative price of nontradables. The fall in the
relative price of nontradables causes a re-composition of aggregate expenditure away from
tradables and toward nontradables and a re-composition of aggregate output in the opposite
direction.
        Note that in the adjustment mechanism invoked by the tradable and nontradable goods
model, the terms of trade (the relative price of exportables in terms of importables) plays no
role. In fact, the model assumes that this variable is exogenous. Indeed, in the traditional
international trade literature, this is the definition of a small open economy, one that can
view the terms of trade as exogenous because it is too small to have any monopoly power.
The insight that in a small open economy macroeconomic adjustment does not material-
    1
    For a historical analysis of the development of the dependent economy model, see Metaxas and Weber
(2016).



                                                  1
ize through changes in the terms of trade represented a fundamental departure from the
established view at the time of the creation of the Salter-Swan framework.
    Although the tradable and nontradable goods model is widely adopted in modern open
economy macroeconomics,2 the key feature that differentiates it from alternative theories of
the small open economy continues to be the role played by the relative price of nontradables
and the terms of trade in the macroeconomic adjustment process. Specifically, since the
seminal work of Gal´
                   i and Monacelli (2005), a strand of the small open economy literature
assumes that all goods are tradable and that the terms of trade are endogenous due to the
existence of market power of the small open economy in a subset of world markets. An
implication of this modeling strategy is that devaluations affect the small open economy's
terms of trade. Recent empirical work by Gopinath et al. (2019) documents that since the
emergence of the U.S. dollar as the dominant invoicing currency, the response of the terms
of trade to domestic exchange rate changes has become increasingly muted.
       The main contribution of this paper is to show that the internal and the external balance
schedules of the Salter-Swan policy framework continue to exist in a micro-founded general
equilibrium version of the nontradable and tradable goods model. Specifically, the theoretical
environment presented in this paper extends the small open economy model developed in
Schmitt-Groh´ e and Uribe (2016) to incorporate government spending, production in the
tradable sector, and financial frictions. Meaningful roles for exchange-rate and fiscal policy
are motivated by two frictions present in that model: downward nominal wage rigidity and
financial constraints. The paper characterizes the adjustment and policy response to terms-
of-trade and interest rate shocks.
       Employment, which is the internal target of the government, is affected by both, the
exchange rate and government spending. Devaluations stimulate labor demand by lowering
real wages, and public consumption has an effect on the labor market through an expansion
in the demand for nontradables. Since both devaluations and public spending raise the
demand for labor, a government that aims to avoid both unemployment and overheating
will, all other things equal, move these two instruments in opposite directions. The resulting
negative relationship between the nominal exchange rate and government spending captures
the internal balance schedule of the Salter-Swan policy framework.
   The current account, which is the external target of the government, is also affected
by devaluations and government spending. By lowering real wages, devaluations boost em-
ployment and output in the traded sector, which tends to improve the current account.
   2
     Textbook treatments at the graduate level include Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996, Chapter 4); Frankel (2011,
section 3); V´egh (2013, Chapter 4); and Uribe and Schmitt-Groh´    e (2017, Chapters 8 and 9). Abundant
references to academic papers using this framework can be found in these books.



                                                     2
At the same time, the increase in tradable output has a positive income effect on tradable
consumption, which tends to deteriorate the current account. However, the net effect is
positive, because, as dictated by the intertemporal approach to the current account, the
marginal propensity to consume out of current income is less than one. An increase in gov-
ernment spending, by elevating domestic absorption, has a direct negative effect on the trade
balance. But, indirectly, it also lowers domestic absorption via a negative wealth effect on
consumption. The direct effect dominates, however, because, as mentioned, the marginal
propensity to consume out of disposable income is small. The fact that devaluations and
government spending have opposite effects on the current account implies that if the objec-
tive of the government is to keep the current account at a given target level, then these two
policy variables must move in opposite directions. This prediction of the model gives rise to
an external balance schedule like the one in the Salter-Swan policy framework.
   The intersection of the internal balance and the external balance schedules determines
the desired policy mix for the nominal exchange rate and the level of government spending.
At these values of the policy instruments, the current account and the level of employment
achieve their respective target levels. The resulting apparatus allows for the analysis of the
government policy reaction to internal and external aggregate disturbances. The contribution
of the present paper is to derive the internal and external balance schedules of the Salter-
Swan model as the outcome of a micro-founded dynamic general equilibrium model of a
small open economy.
   One undesirable prediction of the Salter-Swan framework is that the government must
respond to an exogenous worsening of external borrowing conditions with a fiscal expansion
so as to avoid too large a current account surplus. However, in policy debates, fiscal expan-
sions are typically summoned to stimulate domestic demand and not for the sole purpose
of lowering current account surpluses. This counterfactual implication of the Salter-Swan
model is a consequence of the assumption that the government has an ad hoc fixed target
for the current account balance. To overcome this limitation, in an extension, the paper
adds an extra layer of microfoundations to the Salter-Swan model by introducing financial
frictions in the form of a collateral constraint on external borrowing of the type often used
in the sudden stop literature (Mendoza, 2002; Uribe, 2006; Korinek, 2011; Bianchi, 2011;
Benigno et al., 2013 and 2016; Schmitt-Groh´    e and Uribe, 2017 and 2020). In the presence
of collateral constraints the external objective becomes one whereby the government dislikes
current account deficits but does not mind current account surpluses. In this version of the
model, a worsening of external borrowing conditions does not put the country off its ex-
ternal balance since sudden stops generate current account reversals even in the absence of
government intervention. However, it does put it off its internal balance, since absent policy


                                              3
intervention, it causes involuntary unemployment. A currency depreciation, by eroding real
wages, turns out to be a sufficient instrument to restore internal balance.
   The remainder of the paper is organized in eight sections. Section 2 presents the model.
Section 3 characterizes the equilibrium. Sections 4 and 5 derive the internal balance and the
external balance schedules, respectively. Section 6 analyzes the policy response to terms-of-
trade shocks using the derived microfounded Salter-Swan diagram. Section 7 analyzes the
policy response to interest rate shocks. Section 8 uses the new Salter-Swan framework to
study how the policy response changes when external borrowing is subject to a collateral
constraint. Section 9 closes the paper with a discussion of the results.


2     The Model
Consider an open economy that produces and consumes tradable and nontradable goods.
Suppose that the economy is small in the sense that it takes as given the foreign price of
the tradable good and the world interest rate. In both sectors, output is assumed to be
produced with labor. Also, labor is assumed to be perfectly mobile across sectors. Short-run
adjustment is hindered by the presence of downward nominal wage rigidity, as in Schmitt-
Groh´e and Uribe (2016). The government can affect the allocation of resources via fiscal and
exchange-rate policy. These are the basic ingredients of the Salter-Swan model.
    For expositional convenience, we consider a perfect foresight economy that suffers a vari-
ety of temporary domestic and external shocks, including terms-of-trade shocks, productivity
shocks, and country-spread shocks. We assume that one period after a purely temporary
shock wages adjust flexibly to ensure full employment.


2.1    Households
The economy is populated by identical infinitely-lived households with preferences described
by the utility function
                                                          1-
                                                         ct  -1
                                                     t          ,
                                               t=0
                                                           1-

where ct denotes consumption,   (0, 1) denotes the subjective discount factor, and  > 0
denotes the intertemporal elasticity of consumption substitution.
    Consumption is assumed to be a composite of tradable and nontradable goods, with a
CES Armington aggregator,
                                                                                        1
                                                           1
                                                        1-                      1- 1   1- 1
                     ct =   A (c T    N
                                 t , ct )      a (c T
                                                    t )        + (1 -   a)(cN
                                                                            t )
                                                                                              ,


                                                         4
where cT      N
       t and ct denote consumption of tradable and nontradable goods, respectively,  > 0
is a parameter representing the intratemporal elasticity of consumption substitution, and
a  (0, 1) is a parameter representing the importance of tradables and nontradables in
utility. To facilitate the analysis, we assume that the intra- and intertemporal elasticities of
substitution are equal to each other,
                                                1
                                            =     ,
                                                
which implies that preferences are separable in tradable and nontradable consumption. This
restriction is empirically appealing. Existing econometric studies point to a value of  of
around 0.5 for emerging countries (see the survey by Akinci, 2011). And a value for the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution  of 2 is commonplace in quantitative business-cycle
analysis.
   Households are assumed to have access to foreign-currency denominated financial instru-
ments that allow them to borrow or lend at the world interest rate r > 0. They are endowed
with ¯
     h hours each period, which they supply to the labor market inelastically. However,
                                       ¯ hours. Let ht  h
households may not be able to sell all h                 ¯ be the hours actually worked in
period t. The sequential budget constraint of the household is then given by

                                                                    dt+1
                     PtT cT     N N
                          t + Pt ct + Et dt + Tt = Wt ht + t + Et        ,
                                                                    1+r

where PtT denotes the domestic price of an internationally traded good imported by the
household, PtN denotes the price of nontradable goods, Et denotes the nominal exchange
rate defined as the domestic-currency price of one unit of foreign currency, Wt denotes the
nominal hourly wage rate, dt denotes foreign-currency denominated debt due in period t,
and t denotes profits received from the ownership of firms.
   The law of one price holds for tradable goods, which is a key assumption of the Salter-
Swan framework. This assumption is also empirically plausible for most countries, espe-
cially since the emergence of the U.S. dollar as a dominant currency for invoicing of trade
(Gopinath, et al., 2019). Letting PtT  denote the world price of the tradable good expressed
in foreign currency, we then have that

                                         PtT = Et PtT .

A second important characteristic of the Salter-Swan model is that the economy is small.
This implies that PtT  is exogenous to the domestic economy. For simplicity, we normalize
it to unity, PtT  = 1, which implies that the domestic price of the imported tradable good



                                               5
equals the nominal exchange rate,
                                                PtT = Et .

Dividing the right- and left-hand sides of the sequential budget constraint by the nominal
exchange rate, we can write

                                                                  dt+1
                            cT       N
                             t + pt ct + dt + t = wt ht + t +          ,                         (1)
                                                                  1+r

where pt  PtN /Et denotes the relative price of nontradables in terms of tradables, wt  Wt /Et
denotes the real wage rate expressed in units of tradables, and t and t denote tax payments
and profits also in units of tradables. The variable 1/pt is often referred to as the real
exchange rate because it determines the relative price of a unit of consumption in the foreign
country in units of consumption in the domestic country.
    The household chooses sequences {ct , cT     N         
                                            t , ct , dt+1 }t=0 to maximize its lifetime utility func-
tion subject to its sequential budget constraint and to a no-Ponzi-game constraint of the form
limt (1 + r)-t dt  0. Because preferences are strictly increasing in consumption, at the
optimum the no-Ponzi-game constraint holds with equality,

                                        lim (1 + r)-t dt = 0.                                    (2)
                                       t


The first-order conditions associated with the household's optimization problem are the
budget constraint (2) and
                                          A 2 (c T    N
                                                 t , ct )
                                     pt =                                           (3)
                                          A 1 (c T    N
                                                 t , ct )

and                                              
                                         cT
                                          t+1
                                                    =  (1 + r).                                  (4)
                                          cT
                                           t

To avoid an inessential trend in consumption of tradables, we assume that the subjective
and market discount rates are equal to each other,

                                            (1 + r) = 1.

This assumption and the Euler equation (4) imply that consumption of tradables is constant
over time. So we can write
                                                cT    T
                                                 t = c ,

where cT is a constant to be determined in equilibrium.




                                                    6
2.2    Firms
Firms in the traded and nontraded sectors use labor as the sole input. The production
technologies take the form
                                          T
                                         yt = AT      T
                                               t FT (ht )

and
                                         N
                                        yt = AN      N
                                              t FN (ht ),                                    (5)
       i
where yt , hi    i
            t , At , and Fi, for i = T, N , denote output, labor input, a productivity shock, and
the production function in the traded and nontraded sectors, respectively. The production
functions are assumed to be increasing and strictly concave.
                                        T
   The internationally traded output, yt  , is assumed to be exported at the price PtX . We
assume that the law of one price holds for the exported tradable good, that is,

                                          PtX = Et PtX ,

where PtX  denotes the international price of the exported tradable good expressed in foreign
currency. The country is assumed to be a price taker in the market for the exported good.
   The country's terms of trade, which we denote by px t , is given by the ratio of export to
import prices, that is,
                                              PtX   PtX 
                                        px
                                         t        =      .
                                              PtT   PtT 
The country takes px
                   t as exogenous.
   The problem of the firm is to chose employment to maximize profits, which are given by

                          px  T      T         N      N          T    N
                           t At FT (ht ) + pt At FN (ht ) - wt (ht + ht ).


The optimal demand for labor equalizes the value of the marginal product of labor to the
wage rate in each sector,
                                        px  T      T
                                         t At FT (ht ) = wt                                  (6)

and
                                       pt AN      N
                                           t FN (ht ) = wt .                                 (7)

These two expressions are standard sectoral demands for labor. The higher the real wage is,
the lower the demand for labor in each sector will be. Also, the higher the relative price of
exportables (nontradables) is, the higher the demand for labor in the exportable (nontraded)
sector will be.



                                                 7
2.3    The Monetary and Fiscal Authorities
The monetary authority sets the nominal exchange rate, Et . The fiscal authority levies lump-
sum taxes, t , and consumes imported tradable goods and nontradable goods. We assume
that the government consumes these two goods in fixed proportions. Specifically, public
consumption of nontradables is denoted gt and public consumption of tradables gt , where
 > 0 is a parameter. We assume that the government starts with no debt and maintains
a balanced budget each period, so its sequential budget constraint, expressed in units of
tradable goods, is given by
                                         t = gt ( + pt ).


2.4    Market Clearing
In equilibrium, the market for nontradable goods must clear, that is,

                                         cN         N
                                          t + gt = yt .                                     (8)

In addition, employment cannot exceed the time endowment. Letting

                                         ht  hT    N
                                              t + ht                                        (9)

denote employment in period t, we have that ht must satisfy

                                               ht  ¯
                                                   h.

   Combining the sequential budget constraints of the government and the household, we
have that external debt evolves according to

                                                               dt+1
                                  cT              x T
                                   t + gt + dt = pt yt +            .
                                                               1+r

The household is assumed to start period 0 without any debt, d0 = 0. Then, substituting
this expression repeatedly into itself and using the transversality condition (2) yields
                                                        t
                              T r                1
                           c =                              (px  T
                                                              t yt - gt ).                 (10)
                               1+r       t=0
                                                1+r

This expression says that each period domestic consumption of traded goods equals the
annuity value of the stream of current and future expected disposable tradable income. It
represents the backbone of the intertemporal approach to the current account.


                                                 8
3     Equilibrium
To fix ideas, consider the effects of a purely transitory deterioration in the terms-of-trade,
px           x       T
 t . (Since pt and At are both exogenous and always appear multiplying each other, we
could equivalently interpret the shock as a drop in labor productivity in the export sector,
AT
 t .) Specifically, suppose that before period 0 the terms of trade were at a steady-state
level px                                                        x     x
       ss , and that in period 0 they unexpectedly drop to p < pss . Suppose further that
in period 1 px                                  x
               t returns to its long-run value pss and stays at that level thereafter. In period
0, agents understand that the fall in the terms of trade is purely transitory. Suppose that
prior to period 0, the economy was in a steady state with full employment. Since there are
no shocks after period 0 and the nominal wage is assumed to adjust flexibly when period 0
is over, we have that in period 1 the economy reaches a steady state with full employment.
The focus of the analysis is the effect of the terms-of-trade deterioration on employment and
the current account in period 0. To facilitate notation we drop the time subscript to denote
values prevailing in period 0 and denote steady-state values after period 0 with the subscript
ss. Recall that the nominal wage rate in period 0, W , is predetermined. This will be the
source of imbalances when shocks hit the economy. We assume that government spending is
nil before and after the shock, gt = 0, for t = 0, and we normalize the productivity factors
in the traded and nontraded sectors to unity, AT    N
                                               t = At = 1, for all t.
    Combining the household's optimality condition, (3), the firm's optimality conditions
(5)-(7), and the market clearing conditions, (8) and (9), in period 0, we obtain

                                      A2(cT , FN (h - hT ) - g )
                                 p=                              ,                         (11)
                                      A1(cT , FN (h - hT ) - g )

                                               W/E
                                       p=                ,                                 (12)
                                            FN (h - hT )
and
                                       px FT (hT ) = W/E .                                 (13)

The intertemporal resource constraint (10) and the fact that the economy is in a full-
employment steady state starting in period 1 imply that

                              r      r x               1 x
                      cT +       g=     p FT (hT ) +      p FT (hT
                                                                 ss ).                     (14)
                             1+r    1+r              1 + r ss

Finally, because the economy is in a full-employment steady state starting in period 1, we




                                                9
have that hT
           ss is determined by the expression


                            A 2 (c T , F N (¯
                                            h - hT
                                                 ss ))    px       T
                                                           ss FT (hss )
                                                       =                 .                       (15)
                            A 1 (c T , F N (¯
                                            h - hT
                                                 ss ))   F N (¯
                                                              h - hTss )


Equilibrium conditions (11)-(15) form a system of five equations in five unknowns, cT , p, h,
hT , and hT                            x
          ss , given the prices W and p , and the policy variables E and g . To ensure that
labor demand in period 0 does not exceed labor supply in equilibrium, it must be the case
that 0 < hT < h  ¯
                 h. Since we are considering an adverse shock, namely, a fall in px , which,
absent a policy change would require a fall in nominal wages to achieve full employment, and
since the nominal wage is assumed to be downwardly rigid, we take W to be predetermined.


4    Internal Balance
Because the aggregator function is concave and the production functions are increasing and
concave, equation (15) implies that hT                                        T
                                     ss is a strictly decreasing function of c , which we write
as
                                         hT     T    T
                                          ss = Hss (c ).
                                                           -

Intuitively, because tradable and nontradable goods are normal goods, a higher steady-state
level of tradable consumption must go hand-in-hand with higher consumption of nontrad-
ables. The only way in which the economy can produce more nontradables is by employing
more hours in the nontradable sector, which in turn requires reducing employment in the
traded sector, as the economy operates at full employment in the steady state.
   Combining this expression with equilibrium conditions (13) and (14) yields the following
equation determining the equilibrium level of tradable consumption:

                    r      r x                  -1        W/E             1 x
            cT +       g=     p FT         FT                       +               T
                                                                             p FT (Hss (cT )).
                   1+r    1+r                              px           1 + r ss

Solving for cT , we can write
                                    cT = C T (W/E , g , px ).                                    (16)
                                                     -      -   +

The negative sign below the real wage might sound counterintuitive, for it says that an
increase in hourly earnings causes a fall in the consumption of tradable goods. This inter-
pretation, however, does not take into account that equation (16) is an equilibrium object.
An increase in the real wage, W/E , reduces employment in the tradable sector and therefore
tradable output as well, which in turn reduces the amount of tradable consumption that can
be supported in equilibrium. Given the nominal wage, W , a depreciation of the domestic

                                                     10
           Figure 1: The Demand for Labor Derived from the Demand for Goods


                    p




                                                         D(h; W/E , g , px )
                                                                 -   + +



                                                                h



currency (an increase in E ), by reducing the real wage, boosts private consumption of trad-
ables. An increase in public consumption of tradables, g , crowds out private consumption
of this type of good, because, given the real wage, the supply of tradables is fixed. Notice
however, that this crowding out effect is relatively small. To see this note that equation (14)
implies that the marginal propensity to consume out of a transitory increase in private trad-
able income (i.e., the increase in cT in response to a unit increase in y T - g ) is small and
given by
                                                                                   -1
                                      r       1 x
    marginal propensity to consume =     1-      p F (hT )H T (cT )                     < r.   (17)
                                     1+r    1 + r ss T ss ss

This is a standard result in the intertemporal approach to the current account: Households
use the current account to finance transitory disturbances in tradable income, which allows
them to smooth tradable consumption over time. Finally, an appreciation of the terms of
trade, that is, an increase in px , raises the value of tradable output in terms of imported
goods (both directly and indirectly by inducing an increase in employment), which in turn
elevates the level of tradable consumption that can be supported in equilibrium.
    Using equations (13) and (16) to eliminate hT and cT from equation (11) yields

                                                              W/E
                        A2 C T (W/E , g, px ), FN h - FT -1    px
                                                                      -g
                  p=                                                           ,               (18)
                                                              W/E
                        A1 C T (W/E , g, px ), FN h - FT -1    px
                                                                      -g


                                              11
which we can write more compactly as

                                     p = D(h; W/E , g , px ).                              (19)
                                            -    -    + +


Figure 1 depicts this relationship in the space (h, p). The function D is a complex equilibrium
condition, but it primarily captures the demand for labor derived from the demand for
nontradable goods (with the second occurrence of the word `demand' determining the use of
the letter D in denominating the function): an increase in the relative price of nontradables,
p, causes a reduction in the demand for nontradables, which, given the real wage, induces
firms to cut the demand for labor.
  Consider now the intuition behind the negative sign underneath the real wage rate,
W/E . As discuss earlier, an increase in real labor costs depresses both the demand for
tradable goods, cT , and employment in the tradable sector, hT . The former effect lowers
the demand for nontradables, and the latter increases the supply of nontradables (because,
holding constant h, a fall in hT implies an increase in hN ). Both effects put downward
pressure on the price of nontradables.
    The relationship between government spending, g , and the relative price of nontradables,
p, holding constant h, is in principle ambiguous, but most likely positive. On the one hand,
an increase in the public demand for nontradable goods reduces one for one the supply of
nontradable goods disposable for private consumption, y N - g ,--the second argument of the
numerator and denominator of the right hand side of equation (18)--elevating the price of
nontradables that clears the market. This is a direct effect. On the other hand, an increase
in (nonproductive) government consumption makes households poorer, which reduces the
demand for consumption goods,--the first argument of the numerator and denominator of
the right hand side of equation (18)--thereby depressing the price of nontradables. This
effect is indirect and, as we argue next, small. Recall that the crowding out effect of a tran-
sitory increase in government spending on tradable consumption is given by the marginal
propensity to consume (equation 17), which is less than r. Also, typically government spend-
ing is concentrated on goods with a significant nontraded component, such as administrative
services, education, and health, and not on tradable goods (small  ). Thus, the most likely
scenario is one in which the partial derivative of the function D with respect to g is positive.
For the remainder of the paper, we will assume that this is indeed the case.
   Finally, the function D(h; W/E , g, px ) is increasing in px . A terms of trade appreciation
makes households richer, which boosts the demand for consumption and puts upward pres-
sure on the relative price of nontradable consumption goods. Furthermore, a rise in the
terms of trade drives up employment in the traded sector, reducing, holding constant total


                                                12
employment, the number of hours available for the production of nontradables. This in turn
results in a reduction in the supply of nontradable goods, which requires an increase in the
equilibrium relative price of nontradables.
   Now use equation (13) to eliminate hT from equilibrium condition (12). This yields

                                                 W/E
                                 p=                             ,                          (20)
                                                          W/E
                                      FN h - FT -1         px


which, in compact form, can be written as

                                      p = S (h; W/E , px ).                                (21)
                                             +        +   -


We denote this function S because it primarily reflects the demand for labor derived from the
supply of nontradable goods. Figure 2 depicts the relationship between total employment,
h, and the relative price of nontradables, p, implied by this function. Given the real wage,
W/E , and the terms of trade, px , employment in the traded sector is fixed (equation (13)).
Thus, an increase in total employment h must be fully allocated to the nontradable sector.
To voluntarily employ this increased supply of labor, firms require an increase in the price
of nontradables.
   An increase in the real wage shifts the function S up and to the left. This is so for two
reasons. First, if the cost of labor increases, firms require a higher price to continue hiring
the same number of hours. Second, an increase in labor costs reduces employment in the
traded sector, which, given total employment, increases the number of hours employed in
the nontraded sector. This requires an increase in the price for firms in the nontraded sector
to be willing to absorb the labor coming from the tradable sector. Finally, an improvement
in the terms of trade, an increase in px , induces an increase in employment in the traded
sector, which reduces, given h, the availability of hours in the nontraded sector. For firms
in the nontraded sector to be willing to cut employment, the price of the good they produce
must fall.
   In equilibrium, the demand for labor derived from the demand for nontradable goods
and the demand for labor derived from the supply of nontradable goods must equal each
other, as the market for nontradables must clear. The situation is depicted in Figure 3. The
equilibrium occurs at point A. As the figure is constructed, at point A the economy operates
at full employment (h = h¯ ) and the equilibrium real exchange rate is p0 . As we will see next,
however, full employment need not obtain in equilibrium because the economy suffers from
nominal wage rigidity.
   Consider the effect of a temporary decline in the terms of trade. Specifically, suppose that

                                                 13
      Figure 2: The Demand for Labor Derived from the Supply of Goods


               p
                                                  S (h; W/E , px )
                                                          +       -




                                                          h




Figure 3: Equilibrium Determination of Employment and the Real Exchange Rate


           p

                                              S (h; W/E , px )
                                                     +    -




          p0                         A


                                                     D(h; W/E , g , px )
                                                              -       + +




                                 ¯
                                 h                   h




                                         14
Figure 4: Equilibrium Response of Employment and the Real Exchange Rate to a Deterio-
ration in the Terms of Trade


                 p                                        S (h; W/E , px )

                                                          S (h; W/E , px )
                                                                 +    -




                p0                           A
                p               B
                                                                 D(h; W/E , g , px )
                                                                           -   + +


                                                      D(h; W/E , g, px )
                            h            ¯
                                         h                       h

                                       Note. px < px.


the relative price of exportables in terms of importables, px , falls to px < px . In response
to this shock, the D and S schedules both shift to the left, as shown in Figure 4. The new
equilibrium occurs at point B . The negative disturbance causes involuntary unemployment
in the amount ¯h - h . The reason is that because the nominal wage is downwardly rigid
and the monetary authority keeps the nominal exchange rate fixed, the real wage stays at its
pre-shock level, which causes firms in the traded sector to cut employment in response to the
exogenous decline in the world price of the good they produce. In addition, at the pre-shock
real wage and relative price of nontradables, firms in the nontraded sector are unwilling
to hire the displaced workers. Inspection of equations (18) and (20) (the primitives of the
schedules D and S , respectively) reveals that the shift in the D schedule is larger than
the shift in the S schedule, so that, as shown in Figure 4, p falls (or the real exchange
rate depreciates). Thus the dominant effect is that the negative terms-of-trade shock makes
households poorer, inducing them to cut consumption, which in turn depresses the relative
price of the nontraded good. Because of downward nominal wage rigidity and the central
bank's keeping the exchange rate unchanged, the real wage is unchanged. Facing lower
prices and unchanged marginal costs, firms in the nontraded sector, like firms in the traded
sector, cut employment. As a result of the negative terms-of-trade shock, the economy suffers
involuntary unemployment.
   Consider now the role of exchange-rate policy in restoring full employment. Figure 5

                                                 15
      Figure 5: Effect of a Devaluation on Employment and the Real Exchange Rate


                   p                                       S (h; W/E , px )
                                                                   +       -
                                                                 S (h; W/E , px )




                               B
                  p                    C
                  p

                                                        D(h; W/E , g, px )
                                                       D(h; W/E , g , px )
                                                             -     +   +


                               h      h       ¯
                                              h                    h

                                           Note. E > E .

picks up from the equilibrium with unemployment following a deterioration in the terms
of trade depicted in Figure 4. Prior to the devaluation, the economy is at point B , where
unemployment equals h ¯ - h . Suppose that the government devalues the domestic currency
from E to E > E . This policy intervention causes the D schedule to shift up and the S
schedule to shift down. The new equilibrium is at point C , where unemployment is lower
(¯
 h-h < ¯   h - h ). The intuition why a devaluation is expansionary is as follows: In the
initial situation (point B ), the real wage is too high to clear the labor market. Unemployment
puts downward pressure on the real wage, but this variable is downwardly rigid due to the
combination of nominal wage rigidity and a given exchange rate. The devaluation lowers the
real wage fostering employment by firms in both the traded and the nontraded sectors. As
Figure 5 is constructed, the economy continues to have involuntary unemployment after the
devaluation. However, a sufficiently large devaluation would have restored full employment.
Beyond this level, devaluations have no additional real effects and cause wage and price
inflation.
    The effect of a devaluation on the relative price of nontradables, p, is in principle ambigu-
ous, because the downward shift in the S schedule tends to make nontradables less expensive,
whereas the upward shift in the D schedule has the opposite effect. However, the movement
in the S schedule is likely to dominate, so that the relative price of nontradables is likely to


                                                  16
Figure 6: Effect of an Increase in Government Spending on Employment and the Real
Exchange Rate


                  p                                     S (h; W/E , px )
                                                                +       -




                                    C
                 p
                              B
                  p


                                                          D(h; W/E , g , px )
                                                    D(h; W/E , g , px )
                                                           -    +   +


                              h     h      ¯
                                           h                    h

                                        Note. g > g .


fall (i.e., the real exchange rate is likely to depreciate). The reason why the shift in the D
schedule is small is that, although the devaluation causes an expansion in the demand for
nontradables via an income effect stemming from a positive effect of the devaluation on the
production of tradable goods, y T , the marginal propensity to consume out of a transitory
increase in tradable income is small, less than r (see equation (17)).
    Another policy instrument available to the government to reduce unemployment is gov-
ernment spending, g . As before, suppose that the initial situation is one in which, due to a
deterioration in its terms of trade, the economy is experiencing involuntary unemployment,
as at point B in Figure 6. Suppose that the government increases public consumption from g
to g > g . The fiscal expansion shifts the D schedule up, but leaves the S schedule unchanged.
The new equilibrium is at point C , with lower unemployment (hours worked increase from
h to h ) and a more appreciated real exchange rate (the relative price of nontradables in-
creases from p to p > p ). All of the increase in employment occurs in the nontraded sector.
Recall that employment in the traded sector depends only on the real wage and the terms
of trade (equation 13), both of which are unchanged. Firms in the nontraded sector expand
employment incentivized by an increase in the relative price of the good they produce, p. In
turn, p increases because government spending puts pressure on the aggregate absorption of


                                               17
nontradables.
    The increase in the demand for labor brought about by the fiscal expansion does not
result in nominal wage inflation, because, as the figure is drawn, the economy continues to
suffer unemployment, h < h   ¯ . A sufficiently large fiscal stimulus, all other things equal,
could create a demand for labor larger than h ¯ , which would cause nominal wages to rise.
   Unlike in the classic IS-LM model, in the present model government spending crowds out
private consumption. In fact, it crowds out both tradable and nontradable consumption.
Tradable consumption falls because the higher taxes required to finance the elevation in
public spending have a negative wealth effect. Nontradable consumption falls for the same
reason and because of the increase in the relative price of nontradables.
   Comparing the exchange-rate policy and the fiscal policy responses to the unemployment
caused by the deterioration in the terms of trade, we note that, while both policies are
effective at reducing unemployment, the former induces a depreciation of the real exchange
rate (a fall in p) and the latter an appreciation (an increase in p).
    Summing up, we have established that the equilibrium level of employment, given by the
solution for h of the equilibrium condition

                              D(h; W/E , g, px ) = S (h; W/E , px )

depends positively on the nominal exchange rate, E , the level of government spending, g ,
and the terms of trade, px . We can write this equilibrium relationship as

                                       h = H (E , g , px ).
                                                + + +


To avoid clutter, we do not include W in this expression because throughout the analysis
that follows the downward nominal wage rigidity is assumed to be binding.
   Consider now the government-spending and exchange-rate combinations, (g, E ), that
                               ¯ . This relationship is implicitly given by the equation
guarantee full employment, h = h

                                       ¯ = H (E , g ; px ).
                                       h

Solving for E , we obtain
                                         E = I (g ; px ).                                (22)
                                                 - -

This is the microfounded version of the Internal Balance schedule in the Salter-Swan model.
It is depicted in Figure 7 as a downward sloping relationship in the space (g, E ). Because
devaluations and increases in government spending both foster employment, the Internal


                                               18
                            Figure 7: The Internal Balance Schedule


                        E




                                               Inflation



                                 Unemployment

                                                             I (g ; px )

                                                                       g



Balance schedule is downward sloping.
   For pairs (g, E ) below the Internal Balance schedule, the economy suffers from involuntary
unemployment. For policy mixes above the schedule, there is full employment and further
economic stimulus leads to excessive price and wage inflation.
   Consider now a terms-of-trade deterioration (a fall in px ). This shock shifts the Internal
Balance schedule up, as shown in Figure 8. This is because, holding policy constant, a
terms-of-trade decline causes unemployment. As a result, for a given nominal exchange
rate, the government needs to increase government spending to achieve full employment.
Alternatively, for a given level of government spending, the government must devalue the
currency to return to full employment.


5    External Balance
The current account in period 0, denoted ca, is given by the difference between tradable
output, y T , and domestic absorption of tradable goods, that is,

                                      ca = y T - cT - g.

Debt service is nil in period 0, due to the assumption that the country starts with no
external debt (d0 = 0), so in period 0 the current account is equal to the trade balance.



                                              19
      Figure 8: The Internal Balance Schedule and a Negative Terms-of-Trade Shock


                      E




                                                                         I (g ; px )
                                                                  I (g ; px )
                                                                         -

                                                                             g

                                            Note. px < px .


Using equations (13) and (16) we can write the equilibrium current account balance as

                                     -1     W/E
                   ca = px FT   FT                      - C T (W/E , g, px ) - g.        (23)
                                             px

Recalling that the marginal propensity to consume tradable goods out of a transitory increase
in tradable income is smaller than r (equation (17)), we have that the current account is
unambiguously increasing in the exchange rate, E , and the terms of trade, px , and decreasing
in government spending, g . The intuition is as follows: with downward nominal wage rigidity,
a devaluation reduces the real wage, fostering employment and output in the traded sector.
The increase in tradable output has a positive income effect on tradable consumption, but
smaller than the increase in output itself, so the trade balance and the current account
improve. An increase in government consumption of tradables reduces the current account
one-for-one. It also causes a negative wealth effect that depresses private consumption of
tradables, but this effect is too small to offset the direct effect, and the current account
deteriorates. An increase in the terms of trade increases the value of traded output and
induces higher domestic consumption of tradables. However, the former effect dominates
the latter, so that the current account improves. We can therefore write these relationships
more compactly as
                                          ca = CA(E , g , px ).                          (24)
                                                     + - +




                                                   20
                           Figure 9: The External Balance Schedule


                       E
                                                             X (g ; px )

                                 Excessive Current
                                 Account Surplus


                                                Insufficient Current
                                                Account Surplus




                                                                      g



   As we did with the Internal Balance schedule, we now ask what are the combinations
of fiscal and exchange-rate policy that guarantee a desired level ca for the current account.
From equation (24), we have that these pairs are implicitly given by

                                      ca = CA(E , g, px ).

Solving for E yields
                                        E = X (g ; px ).                                  (25)
                                                + -

This expression is a microfounded version of the External Balance schedule in the Salter-Swan
model. It is depicted in Figure 9. It is upward sloping because an increase in government
spending deteriorates the current account, which requires a depreciation to restore the desired
level of external balance.
   A negative terms-of-trade shock (a fall in px ) shifts the External Balance schedule upward,
as shown in Figure 10. This is because, holding policy variables constant, the decline in
the terms of trade worsens the current account, requiring either a depreciation or a cut in
government spending to restore external balance.




                                              21
     Figure 10: The External Balance Schedule and a Negative Terms-of-Trade Shock


                       E                                 X (g ; px )
                                                              X (g ; px )
                                                                      -




                                                                         g

                                       Note. px < px .




             Figure 11: The Four Regions of Exchange-Rate and Fiscal Policy


                       E
                                                              X (g ; px )
                                                                      -
                                          Region 1


                                            A
                               Region 4              Region 2


                                          Region 3
                                                              I (g ; px )
                                                                     -

                                                                         g

Notes. Region 1: Overheating and excessive current account surplus. Region 2: Overheating and
insufficient current account surplus. Region 3: Unemployment and insufficient current account
surplus. Region 4: Unemployment and excessive current account surplus.



                                             22
             Figure 12: Policy Response to a Negative Terms-of-Trade Shock


                     E                                  X (g ; px )
                                                             X (g ; px )
                                                                     -
                                         B


                                         A


                                                                    I (g ; px )
                                                             I (g ; px )
                                                                    -

                                                                        g

                                      Note. px < px .


6     Determination of the Policy Mix
With the Internal and External Balance schedules in hand, we can determine the fiscal
and exchange-rate policy mix that achieves the employment and current-account targets of
the government. Figure 11 provides a graphical representation of the determination of the
policy mix. It represents the microfounded version of the celebrated Salter-Swan diagram.
The desired policy mix occurs at point A, where the I and X schedules intersect. The two
schedules divide the policy space (g, E ) into four regions. Region 1, located above the I
and X schedules is characterized by overheating on the internal front and an excessively
large current account balance on the external front. Region 2, located above the I schedule
and below the X schedule, features overheating and an insufficient current account balance.
Region 3, located below the I and X schedules, is characterized by involuntary unemployment
and a current account balance below target. And in region 4, located below the I schedule
and above the X schedule, the economy suffers unemployment and a current account balance
larger than desired.


6.1    Policy Response to Terms-of-Trade Shocks
The Salter-Swan apparatus is useful for ascertaining how the policymaker should react to
exogenous disturbances buffeting the economy. Consider the case of a negative terms-of-


                                             23
trade shock, as depicted in Figure 12. The policy stance is originally at point A. The
deterioration in the terms of trade shifts the I and X schedules up. The new policy mix that
achieves the government objectives is at point B . If the government does not make changes
to the exchange-rate or fiscal policy, then, after the shock, point A is in Region 3, where the
economy suffers from involuntary unemployment and the current account balance is below
target. Moving to point B requires a devaluation, but it is unclear how the fiscal authority
should react. The intuition behind this prediction of the model is that the devaluation
addresses the two problems faced by the policymaker: It fosters employment in both the
traded and nontraded sectors (by reducing real labor costs) and improves the current account
(by inducing an increase in tradable output and discouraging consumption of tradables). An
expansion in government spending has conflicting effects. On the one hand, it promotes
employment, by increasing the demand for nontradables. On the other hand, it worsens the
external balance, by expanding domestic absorption. As a result, the fiscal intervention to
achieve external and internal balance in response to a terms of trade deterioration can be
either positive or negative. We conclude that according to the Salter-Swan framework, a
terms-of-trade deterioration calls unambiguously for a nominal depreciation of the domestic
currency but does not have a clear prescription for the fiscal policy response.


7    Policy Response to Country-Spread Shocks
Country spread shocks have been shown to be an important driver of the business cycle in
small open economies (Neumeyer and Perri, 2005; Uribe and Yue, 2006). An increase in the
country spread increases the cost of external funds of the small open economy. Thus, the
interest rate rt is the sum of the world interest rate and the country spread. To analyze the
policy response to a temporary increase in the country spread, let rss be the steady-state
interest rate (t > 0) and r the interest rate in period 0. Suppose that

                                             r > rss

and that
                                        (1 + rss ) = 1.

With a time-varying interest rate, the household's Euler equation, (4), becomes
                                             
                                      cT
                                       t+1
                                                =  (1 + rt ).
                                       cT
                                        t




                                                24
Because the interest-rate is constant after period 0, we have that consumption of tradables
reaches a steady state in period 1. Let cT and cT  ss denote consumption of tradables in
period 0 and in periods t > 0, respectively. Then, the equilibrium conditions are given by
equations (11)-(13) and
                                                   
                                         cT
                                          ss
                                                      =  (1 + r),                         (26)
                                         cT
                              1 1 + rss T                1 1 + rss T
                     cT +              css + g = y T +            y ,                     (27)
                            1 + r rss                  1 + r rss ss
and
                             A 2 (c T        ¯    T
                                                           px       T
                                    ss , FN (h - hss ))     ss FT (hss )
                                             ¯          =                 ,               (28)
                             A 1 (c T             T
                                    ss , FN (h - hss ))   F N (¯
                                                               h - hTss )

which form a system of six equations in six unknowns, cT , cT             T        T
                                                              ss , p, h, h , and hss , given
predetermined W , and the monetary and fiscal policy choices E and g , respectively.
   By an analysis similar to the one carried out in section 4, it is possible to show that
private absorption of tradables is decreasing in the interest rate r, so we can write

                                    cT = C T (W/E , g , px , r ).
                                                      -    -   + -


This, in turn, implies that the D function, given in equation (19), is also decreasing in r,

                                    p = D(h; W/E , g , px , r ).
                                               -      -    + + -


By contrast, the S function, given in equation (21), is independent of the interest rate. The
Internal Balance equation is then implicitly given by the solution to

                             D (¯
                                h; W/E , g, px , r) = S (¯
                                                         h; W/E , px ).

Solving this expression for E yields

                                          E = I (g ; px , r ).
                                                      - - +


An increase in the interest rate shifts the Internal Balance schedule up and to the right. The
reason is that an increase in r depresses domestic absorption, which requires a depreciation
of the domestic currency (an increase in E ), if full employment is to be restored. The
depreciation reduces the real wage, creating incentives for firms to expand employment and
output. The depreciation also induces an expenditure switch away from tradables and toward
nontradables, which allows firms in the nontraded sector to sell their increased production.


                                                      25
             Figure 13: Policy Response to an Increase in the Country Spread


                    E
                                                               X (g ; px , r )
                                                                       - -
                                                                        X (g ; px , r )


                                         A           B
                   E0

                                                                      I (g ; px , r )
                                                               I (g ; px , r )
                                                                      - +


                                         g0          g                   g


                                          Note. r > r .

   Let's now analyze how the interest rate enters in the External Balance schedule. Because
tradable consumption, cT , is decreasing in the interest rate, and tradable output, y T , is
independent of the interest rate, we have that the current account schedule, ca, is increasing
in r. So we can write equation (24) as

                                     ca = CA(E , g , px , r ).                              (29)
                                                 + - + +


Setting the current account to its target level, ca, and solving for the nominal exchange rate,
E , we obtain the External Balance schedule,

                                        E = X (g ; px , r ).
                                                 + - -


An increase in the interest rate shifts the External Balance schedule down and to the right.
The intuition is that holding constant the exchange rate and government spending, an in-
crease in the interest rate improves the current account, so an appreciation of the exchange
rate is required to bring the current account balance down to its target level.
    Consider now the effect of an increase in the country spread, which, as mentioned earlier,
is equivalent to an increase in the interest rate r. Specifically, suppose that the interest rate
increases from r to r > r. Figure 13 illustrates the policy adjustment. The initial position is
at point A. As discussed, in response to the increase in the interest rate the Internal Balance


                                                26
schedule shifts up and the External Balance schedule shifts down. Holding policy constant,
the increase in r produces a decline in demand and hence unemployment and an increase
in the current account balance. Thus, in the absence of a policy response to the increase
in the country spread, the economy remains at point A, which is now in Region 4, where
the economy suffers involuntary unemployment and an excessive current account surplus.
To return the economy to its internal and external targets, given by point B , government
spending must increase unambiguously. The intuition is that an increase in g increases
employment in the nontraded sector and reduces the current account surplus. By contrast,
the response of the exchange rate is ambiguous. The reason is that a depreciation causes
conflicting effects on the two target variables, for it fosters employment (a movement in the
desired direction), but improves the current account (a movement in the wrong direction).


8     The Salter-Swan Framework Augmented with a Col-
      lateral Constraint
An empirically unsatisfactory prediction of the Salter-Swan policy framework is that in re-
sponse to an increase in the interest rate, the government must increase government spend-
ing to prevent the current account surplus from exceeding its ad-hoc target for this variable.
The analysis in the present section suggests that a possible solution to this problem is to as-
sume that policymakers do not care equally about current-account deficits and surpluses. It
seems empirically reasonable to assume that governments are concerned with current-account
deficits, but not so much with current account surpluses. Seldom do we hear of a country
suffering from an increase in the external costs of funds announcing a fiscal expansion with
the sole aim of reducing a current account surplus.
    In this section, we study how exchange-rate policy and fiscal policy adjust in response to
external shocks when the government faces asymmetric constraints on its external balance.
To this end, we assume that the economy is subject to an external borrowing constraint of
the form
                                    dt+1
                                          px     T
                                              t yt ,
                                   1+r
where  > 0 is a parameter regulating the stringency of the borrowing limit. The larger
 is, the more the country can borrow. This constraint can be interpreted as a collateral
constraint in the spirit of the sudden-stop literature (see, for example, Mendoza, 2002; Uribe,
2006 and 2007; Korinek, 2011; Bianchi, 2011; Benigno et al., 2013 and 2016). Its rationale is
that foreign lenders have the ability to seize a fraction  of the country's exportable output
in case of default. So px   T
                         t yt is the maximum level of debt supportable without default risk.



                                              27
   As in Uribe (2006, 2007) it is assumed that, although individual agents understand
that the constraint exists, they do not internalize it and behave as if they did not face a
collateral constraint. The government, however, internalizes the collateral constraint and
employs exchange-rate policy and fiscal policy to avoid sudden stops, defined as a situation
in which an unexpected negative shock causes the collateral constraint to bind. For analytical
convenience, the present version of the collateral constraint is one in which foreign lenders do
not observe individual incomes but only the aggregate level of tradable output. As a result,
they limit the total amount of credit to the country to a fraction  of its aggregate tradable
output. Also for analytical convenience, we assume that nontradable income cannot be used
as collateral. The results presented in this section are robust to relaxing this assumption.
   Because we are considering a purely temporary shock in period 0 and the economy reaches
a perfect-foresight steady-state in period 1, the collateral constraint is economically relevant
only in the initial period. In addition, because the country is assumed to start period 0 with
a zero net foreign asset position (d0 = 0), we have that the debt assumed in period 0 equals
the negative of the current account, that is, d/(1 + r) = -ca, where, as before, we drop time
subscripts to denote variables determined in period 0. Thus, the collateral constraint can be
written as
                                         -ca   px y T .
                                                                                         W/E
Using equilibrium condition (29) and the fact that in equilibrium y T = FT FT -1          px
                                                                                                  ,
and rearranging terms, we can write the collateral constraint as

                                                         -1   W/E
                        CA(E , g, px , r) + px FT   FT                0.
                                                               px

The left-hand side is decreasing in g and increasing in E , px , and r. So we can write the
collateral constraint compactly as

                                        E  X (g ; px , r )                                     (30)
                                                + - -


This inequality is the external balance schedule relationship when the country faces a col-
lateral constraint, as opposed to an ad-hoc target for the current account as assumed in the
original Salter-Swan framework. Besides the fact that this external balance relationship is
microfounded, an important difference is that now the external balance relationship takes
the form of an inequality. Any exchange rate, E , above the threshold X (g ; px , r) is consistent
with the satisfaction of the collateral constraint. This implies that the policymaker must
change policy when faced with too low current balances but need not intervene when faced
with too high current account balances, that is, in the collateral constraint economy the

                                               28
Figure 14: Policy Response to an Increase in the Interest Rate in the Collateral Constrained
Economy


                    E
                                                            X (g ; px , r )
                                                                    - -
                                                                     X (g ; px , r )
                    E                      C


                   E0                      A            B

                                                                   I (g ; px , r )
                                                            I (g ; px , r )
                                                                   - +


                                         g0         g                 g


                                          Note. r > r .

policy maker no longer cares equally about current account deficits and surpluses.


8.1    Policy Response to an Interest Rate Increase
Consider now the policy reaction to an interest-rate increase. Figure 14 analyzes the situa-
tion. Suppose that initially the collateral constraint holds with equality, so that the policy
mix is at point A in the figure. An increase in the interest rate from r to r > r causes a shift
upward in the Internal Balance schedule, as usual. Also as usual, the schedule X (g ; px , r)
shifts down and to the right.
   Holding policy constant (point A), the increase in r improves the current account and
leaves tradable output unchanged. Therefore, the collateral constraint, ca > px y T , becomes
slack, so the policy reaction is not constrained by external-balance considerations. (Point A
lies above the schedule X (g ; pr , r ).) By contrast, at point A internal balance is compromised,
as the increase in the interest rate causes unemployment. (Point A lies below I (g ; px , r ).)
    The new policy mix must be on the new internal balance schedule and above the schedule
X (g ; px , r ). Thus any policy mix on the new internal balance schedule located northwest
of point B achieves the objectives of the government. In particular, contrary to what hap-
pens when the government has an ad-hoc external balance target (ca = ca), an increase in
government spending is no longer necessary to achieve internal and external balance. The


                                               29
Figure 15: Policy Response to Decrease in the Interest Rate in the Collateral Constrained
Economy


                       E                                  X (g ; px , r )
                                                               X (g ; px , r)



                                    B        A



                                                               I (g ; px, r)
                                                          I (g ; px, r )
                                                                            g

                                          Note. r < r .

government can restore full employment and satisfy the collateral constraint by depreciating
the currency and keeping government spending unchanged (point C in the figure). In this
case the purpose of the depreciation (the increase in the exchange rate from E 0 to E ) is not
to improve the external accounts but to boost employment by means of a reduction in the
purchasing power of wages (which lowers firms' labor costs).


8.2    Policy Response to an Interest Rate Decrease
The policy reaction is asymmetric with respect to increases and decreases in the interest
rate. To see this consider a fall in the external cost of funds from r to r < r. This causes
the Internal Balance schedule to shift down and the schedule X (g ; px , r) to shift up as shown
in figure 15.
   At the original policy combination, the economy would suffer inflationary pressures and a
worsening of the current account, which would make the collateral constraint be violated as
point A lies above I (g ; px, r ) and below X (g ; px , r ). The policy combination that achieves
the internal and external goals of the government is any point on the new internal balance
schedule, I (g ; px , r ), northwest of point B . Thus, the policymaker unambiguously must cut
public spending, as it contributes to fending off both overheating and a deterioration of
the current account. By contrast, the response of the exchange rate is ambiguous, as it has


                                               30
conflicting external and internal effects. A devaluation would make it possible to increase the
current account enough to satisfy the collateral constraint, but doing so would exacerbate
the overheating problem.
    Summing up, in an economy in which the external balance objective is micro-founded
via a collateral constraint, the government need not respond to interest-rate increases with
expansionary fiscal policy. Exchange-rate policy by itself can achieve the government's in-
ternal and external objectives. By contrast, the government must respond to interest-rate
declines with a decisive cut in public spending to avoid overheating.


9     Discussion and Conclusion
A central distinction between the Salter-Swan policy framework and more recent approaches
to stabilization policy has to do with the assumed government objectives. In the Salter-
Swan framework, the government has targets for aggregate activity and the current account.
Accordingly, the fulfillment of these two objectives requires the use of two policy instruments
(Tinbergen, 1952), which in this particular framework are the nominal exchange rate and
government spending. In this context, government spending is a useful instrument even
under the assumption that it is fully unproductive. This property is rooted in a classical
Keynesian tradition.
   By contrast, in more recent theories of stabilization policy the government is assumed
to have a single objective, namely, the maximization of the lifetime welfare of households.
This assumption can give rise to opposite results from those implied by the Salter-Swan
framework, especially for the role of public spending. Specifically, it can be shown that in
the model studied in this paper, full employment at all times is optimal. Further, since the
economy possesses a single distortion taking the form of downward nominal wage rigidity,
exchange rate management suffices to bring about full employment. Thus, if government
spending is unproductive, it becomes optimal for the government to set it equal to zero at
all times. Even if government spending was assumed to be productive--e.g., by entering
in the utility function or as an efficiency factor in the firm's production technology--its
determination would not be connected to achieving a target level of the current account,
and therefore will in general have different cyclical properties than those implied by the
microfounded Salter-Swan policy framework developed in the present paper.
    An important role of any theoretical policy framework is to communicate the workings
of the economy, and, in particular, the economic consequences of policy interventions, to
policymakers. If the policymaker's preoccupations regarding macroeconomic stability are
limited to unemployment and the price level, then the welfare-based framework is the most

                                              31
effective way of communication. This is because, as shown by Woodford (2003), there is a
mapping between the representative household's lifetime utility function and a traditional
loss function that includes the output gap and inflation. However, if, as is typically the case
in small open economies, the government is also concerned with the evolution of the current
account, the Salter-Swan framework, which explicitly takes into account targets for this
variable, in addition to the traditional inflation-unemployment tradeoff, is likely to provide
a more effective means of communication.
   The original Salter-Swan framework takes as given that the policy maker has an exoge-
nous target for the current account. We show that this assumption is problematic as it
produces the counter-factual prediction that in response to an adverse country spread shock
the government must expand fiscal policy not because it is indispensable to ensure full em-
ployment but because it is the only way to avoid too large a current account surplus. A
contribution of the present paper, above and beyond providing micro-foundations for the
Salter-Swan framework, is to integrate it with the modern sudden stop literature to endoge-
nize the current account target. This task was achieved by introducing a collateral constraint
whereby external debt is limited by a fraction of aggregate output. The integrated model
fixes a fundamental problem of the Salter-Swan framework as a fiscal expansion ceases to
be necessary to achieve the country's external objectives in response to an adverse country
spread shock.




                                              32
References
        ¨
Akinci, Ozge, "A Note on the Estimation of the Atemporal Elasticity of Substitution Be-
   tween Tradable and Nontradable Goods," manuscript, Columbia University, February
   2, 2011.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R.
   Young, "Financial Crises and Macro-Prudential Policies," Journal of International Eco-
   nomics 89, 2013, 453-470.
Benigno, Gianluca, Huigang Chen, Christopher Otrok, Alessandro Rebucci, and Eric R.
   Young, "Optimal Capital Controls and Real Exchange Rate Policies: A Pecuniary Ex-
   ternality Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics 84, December 2016, 147-165.
Bianchi, Javier, "Overborrowing and Systemic Externalities in the Business Cycle," Ameri-
   can Economic Review 101, December 2011, 3400-3426.
Corden, W. Max, "The Geometric Representation of Policies to Attain Internal and External
   Balance," Review of Economic Studies 28, October 1960, 1-22.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Real and Monetary Aspects of the Effects of Exchange Rate Changes,"
   in Robert Z. Aliber, ed., National Monetary Policies and the International Financial
   System, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1974, 64-81.
Frankel, Jeffrey, "Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets," in Benjamin M. Friedman and
   Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, North Holland, Amsterdam,
   2011, 1439-1520.
Gal´
   i, Jordi, and Tommaso Monacelli, "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a
  Small Open Economy," Review of Economic Studies 72, July 2005, 707-734.
Gopinath, Gita, Emine Boz, Camila Casas, Federico J. D´
                                                      iez, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and
   Mikkel Plagborg-Moller, "Dominant Currency Paradigm," NBER Working Paper No.
   22943, March 2019.
Korinek, Anton, "Excessive Dollar Borrowing in Emerging Markets: Balance Sheet Effects
   and Macroeconomic Externalities," University of Maryland, July 2011.
Meade, James, "The Price Mechanism and the Australian Balance of Payments," Economic
  Record 32, November 1956, 239-256.
Mendoza, Enrique G., "Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop," in
   Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey A. Frankel (Eds.), Preventing Currency Crises in Emerg-
  ing Markets, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 2002, 335-392.
Metaxas, Phillip, and Ernst Juerg Weber, "An Australian Contribution to International
   Trade Theory: The Dependent Economy Model," Economic Record 92, September 2016,
   464-497.


                                           33
Neumeyer, Pablo A., and Fabrizio Perri, "Business Cycles in Emerging Markets: The Role
  of Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics 52, March 2005, 345-380.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, Foundations of International Macroeconomics,
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
Salter, Wilfried E.G., "Internal and External Balance: The Role of Price and Expenditure
   Effects," Economic Record 35, August 1959, 226-238.
Schmitt-Groh´
            e, Stephanie, and Mart´
                                  in Uribe, "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity, Currency
   Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy 124, October 2016,
   1466-1514.
Schmitt-Groh´
            e, Stephanie, and Mart´
                                  in Uribe, "Is Optimal Capital-Control Policy Counter-
   cyclical In Open-Economy Models With Collateral Constraints?," IMF Economic Review
   65, August 2017, 498-527.
Schmitt-Groh´
            e, Stephanie, and Mart´
                                  in Uribe, "Multiple Equilibria in Open Economies with
   Collateral Constraints," Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming, 2020.
Swan, Trevor W., "Longer-Run Problems of the Balance of Payments," in Heinz Wolfgang
  Arndt and W. Max Corden, eds., The Australian Economy: A Volume of Readings,
   Cheshire, Melbourne, 1963, 384-95. [Paper presented to section G of the Congress of the
   Australian and New Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science, Melbourne,
   1955.]
Tinbergen, Jan, On the Theory of Economic Policy, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1952.
Uribe, Mart´
           in, "On Overborrowing," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
   96, May 2006, 417-421.
Uribe, Mart´
           in, "Individual Versus Aggregate Collateral Constraints and the Overborrowing
   Syndrome," NBER working paper 12260, May 2007.
Uribe, Mart´
           in, and Stephanie Schmitt-Groh´
                                         e, Open Economy Macroeconomics, Princeton,
   NJ: Princeton University Press, 2017.
Uribe, Mart´
           in and Z. Vivian Yue, "Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives
   Whom?," Journal of International Economics 69, June 2006, 6-36.
V´
 egh, Carlos A., Open Economy Macroeconomics in Developing Countries, Cambridge, MA:
   MIT Press, 2013.
Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices, Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                           34
