                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       POLITICAL POWER, ELITE CONTROL, AND LONG-RUN DEVELOPMENT:
                          EVIDENCE FROM BRAZIL

                                       Claudio Ferraz
                                       Frederico Finan
                                    Monica Martinez-Bravo

                                      Working Paper 27456
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27456


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Alberto Alesina, Tim Besley, Robin Burgess, Ernesto Dal
Bó, Melissa Dell, Fernando Bizzarro, Francisco Gallego, Oded Galor, Frances Hagopian, Nathan
Nunn, Gerard Padro-i-Miquel, Rohini Pande, James Robinson, Rodrigo Soares, Francesco
Trebbi, and participants at various seminars and conferences for comments and suggestions. We
would also like to thank Marianna Almeida, Olatz Roman and Didac Martí for excellence
research assistance during this project. We thank financial support for this project from the
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (grant ERC2018-092849). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Claudio Ferraz, Frederico Finan, and Monica Martinez-Bravo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Political Power, Elite Control, and Long-Run Development: Evidence from Brazil
Claudio Ferraz, Frederico Finan, and Monica Martinez-Bravo
NBER Working Paper No. 27456
June 2020
JEL No. D72,N46,O43

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes how changes in the concentration of political power affect long-run
development. We study Brazil's military dictatorship whose rise to power dramatically altered the
distribution of power of local political elites. We document that municipalities that were more
politically concentrated prior to the dictatorship in the 1960s are relatively richer in 2000, despite
being poorer initially. Our evidence suggests that this reversal of fortune was the result of the
military's policies aimed at undermining the power of traditional elites. These policies increased
political competition locally, which ultimately led to better governance, more public goods, and
higher income levels.

Claudio Ferraz                                    Monica Martinez-Bravo
Vancouver School of Economics                     CEMFI
University of British Columbia                    Casado del Alisal, 5
6000 Iona Drive                                   28014 Madrid, Spain
Vancouver, BC V6T 1L4                             mmb@cemfi.es
Canada
claudio.ferraz@ubc.ca

Frederico Finan
Department of Economics
University of California
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ffinan@econ.berkeley.edu
1     Introduction

How political power is distributed and maintained within a society lies at the core of most theories
of why institutions affect economic development.1 The central idea is that when political power is
narrowly distributed, the political elites adopt extractive institutions to concentrate economic rents
and use clientelistic practices to sustain their political power (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006a;
Baland and Robinson, 2008; Anderson et al., 2015). Thus, when shocks to the balance of political
power occur, they can alter the political equilibrium and affect long-run economic development
(Acemoglu et al., 2005). But whether this prediction holds true empirically has been difficult to
substantiate. It is hard enough to identify and quantify changes in the distribution of political power,
let alone assess their effects over time.

In this paper, we study how changes in the concentration of local political power affect long run
development using historical data from Brazil.2 Throughout much of Brazil's political history, local
politics was dominated by family-based oligarchies. These traditional elite families controlled most
of the economic resources and alternated power at the municipal and state levels.3 But in 1964,
Brazil transitioned to a military dictatorship that would last for 21 years and disrupt the balance
of power of the traditional elites. During their regime, the military-led governments adopted a
technocratic approach to policy making and implemented a series of economic and political reforms
designed to weaken the traditional elites, who the military viewed as an obstacle towards building
a strong national state necessary for economic development (O'Donnell, 1979; Skidmore, 1988;
Hagopian, 1996). These reforms ushered in a new class of local politicians to compete in local
elections that the military continued to hold in order to legitimize their power. As a result, political
competition increased at local level both during and after the dictatorship.

We exploit the dictatorship as a shock to the political power of traditional elites and present the first
systematic large-scale evidence on how changes to political power affect long-run development.4
To estimate these relationships, we assemble several original historical datasets at the local level,
including data on the identity of all the mayors from the states of Ceará, Minas Gerais, and Paraíba
for the period of 1947 to 2000. Using the surname of these mayors, we identify who belonged to
the same political dynasty and construct a measure of political concentration; namely, a Herfindahl

    1 See  North and Weingast (1989), Sokoloff and Engerman (2000), Acemoglu and Robinson (2012).
    2 We   adopt Acemoglu and Robinson (2006b, p.173) definition of political power: "a measure of how influential a
particular group (or individual) is in the political arena when there is conflict over which policy should be implemented."
     3 See for example Leal (1977), de Carvalho (1982).
     4 Related work that examine long-term effects of institutions include Banerjee and Iyer (2005), Nunn (2008), Dell

(2010), and Naritomi et al. (2012).

                                                            1
index of the share of terms that each family governed a municipality. We also collected election
data during this period and digitized five decades worth of agricultural and population censuses.

We begin our analysis by documenting a striking "reversal of fortune". Prior to the dictatorship, mu-
nicipalities that were more politically concentrated were also less economically developed. Consis-
tent with historical accounts, these places tended to be more rural, less populated, and more reliant
on the agricultural production of crops such as sugar and cotton. After the dictatorship, however,
we see a reversal in the relationship between political concentration pre-dictatorship and economic
development, as measured by per capita income in 2000. Thus, despite being poorer at the be-
ginning of our sample period, the municipalities that were relatively more politically concentrated
before the dictatorship became relatively richer some 60 years later. This relationship is robust to
the inclusion of a number of additional controls that are likely to have affected long-run economic
development, such as geographic characteristics, initial demographic differences, soil quality, the
structure of agricultural production, initial differences in political ideology, and land inequality.


What explains the reversal? We argue that the reversal reflects changes in local-level political
competition that occurred when the military tried to centralize authority out of the hands of the
traditional elites. The military targeted more politically-concentrated municipalities and promoted
entry of new candidates in those regions. This led to an increase in political competition that
persisted over time. This, in turn, translated into better governance, higher provision of local public
goods, and consequently higher incomes.5 To substantiate this argument, we present empirical
evidence consistent with every part of the causal chain. In particular, we show that municipalities
that were initially more concentrated before the dictatorship become more politically competitive
in the long run. We also find that higher levels of initial political concentration are associated with
relatively lower contemporaneous levels of illiteracy and infant mortality rates. Moreover, these
municipalities also exhibit relatively lower levels of corruption as detected by Brazil's random
audit program.


How did the military undermine the political power of local elites? Once the military assumed
control, it transformed Brazil's multi-party system into a two-party system that forced politicians
to decide between a pro-government party (ARENA) or a moderate opposition party (MDB). At
the same time, the military wanted to bring in new politicians who they could trust (Sarles, 1982;
    5 SeeLizzeri and Persico (2004) for a theory that links political competition to better governance and provision of
public goods and Arvate (2013) who finds that electoral competition in Brazil's municipalities improves education and
health outcomes.

                                                          2
Power, 2000). But by promoting their own candidates, they risked losing the elections by having
the traditional elites, who were still politically powerful at the local level, join the opposition party.
To avoid this possibility, the military created a new balloting system called the sublegenda. This
system allowed multiple candidates to compete under the same party: the candidate with most
votes, from the most voted party, was elected mayor. With the sublegenda system, the military
could accommodate their loyalists and the traditional elites all under ARENA's party umbrella
(Soares, 1982). Although this policy was introduced nationwide, it was implemented unevenly
across municipalities. An important contribution of our study is that we provide empirical evidence
on the implementation of this key policy across municipalities.

If, as the historical accounts suggest, the military introduced the sublegenda system to break the
monopoly of power of traditional elites without risking electoral defeats, then we should expect
places that were initially more politically concentrated to use the system more often. This is pre-
cisely what we find. Moreover, when we estimate the effects by party, the results only appear for
the ARENA party. We also find that traditional elites competed against new contestants more often
in politically-concentrated municipalities during the dictatorship.

In addition to these de jure electoral reforms, the economic policies of the military also sought to
reduce the de facto economic power of the traditional elites. Starting in the late 1960's, the mili-
tary prioritized the modernization of the agricultural sector. Part of their strategy was to promote
the emergence of a new class of agricultural producers that were more efficient and could increase
agricultural exports (Graham et al., 1987; Houtzager, 1998). These new producers presented a di-
rect challenge to the oligopolies that traditional elites typically controlled. A key policy to support
the modernization and creation of new agricultural businesses was the use of subsidized credit.
Between 1970 and 1980, the amount of credit available to farms increased 22-fold. Our results
indicate that municipalities where power was more concentrated prior to the dictatorship received
relatively more government credit. We find no such relationship for the allocation of private credit.
Moreover, we find evidence that the military economic policies led to the emergence of new agri-
cultural businesses. Municipalities that were more politically concentrated prior to dictatorship
experienced a large increase in the number of farms, relative to municipalities with lower levels of
political concentration.

We interpret these economic policies as an additional channel by which the military was able to
diminish the political power of traditional elites. However, these policies do provide support for
an alternative interpretation to the reversal. The development gains of the politically concentrated
municipalities may have been due to the modernization efforts in the agricultural sector as opposed


                                                    3
to the increase in political competition. Nevertheless, there are several reasons why this alterna-
tive explanation is unlikely. We do not find that initial political concentration is correlated to the
mechanization of agriculture or to sectoral composition of employment, which are typically asso-
ciated with modernization of the agricultural sector. Furthermore, our main findings on the reversal
of income levels are robust to controlling for the changes in agricultural inputs and in sectoral
composition.

Our paper relates to a large body of work in economics and political science on the importance
of political competition for economic performance (Becker, 1958; Stigler, 1972; Becker, 1983;
Wittman, 1989; Przeworski and Limongi, 1993; Powell, 2000). Studies have shown that compet-
itive elections are associated with the entrance of high-quality challengers (Carson et al., 2007;
Galasso and Nannicini, 2011) and improvements in the responsiveness of politicians (Besley and
Case, 2003; Griffin, 2006; Aidt and Eterovic, 2011; Besley et al., 2010). Although our study also
highlights the virtues of political competition, our focus ­ in contrast to much of the empirical
literature ­ is not party competition, but rather on competition across political families. This is
relevant because in many developing countries, political parties are weakly institutionalized and
the real fight for political power occurs between families, ethnic groups, or local chiefs. In this
respect, our paper is closely connected to Acemoglu et al. (2014) who use the colonial organization
of the chieftaincy in Sierra Leone to study the impact of local political competition on long-term
economic outcomes. They show that localities with fewer ruling families have worse development
outcomes today. Different from their work, however, we study how changes in a country's political
regime can affect political competition, and thus long-run development, locally.6

Our paper also contributes to the literature on political dynasties. While dynasties have been doc-
umented and studied in various settings (Dal Bó et al., 2009; Querubin, 2016; Geys, 2017), we
have limited empirical evidence on the consequences of political dynasties for economic outcomes.
Besley and Reynal-Querol (2017) use data on hereditary leaders across countries and find that eco-
nomic growth is actually higher in polities with hereditary leaders when executive constraints are
weak. George (2020) uses historical data on legislators in India to examine effects of dynastic pol-
itics on selection and performance in office. He finds that descendants from previous politicians

    6 Our study also relates to a historical literature that shows how large macro-level events can affect long-run out-
comes through changes in the political equilibrium. For example, Acemoglu et al. (2011) show that the occupation of
German territories by the French revolutionary armies led to various radical institutional reforms and the emergence of
a new class of political elites that increased economic growth. Martinez-Bravo et al. (2017) study how democratization
affected the persistence of old-regime elites in Indonesia. They find that when these elites faced elections sooner in
the democratic transition, they were less likely to persist in power, which led to lower elite capture and better develop-
ment outcomes. Dittmar and Meisenzahl (2020) show that shocks to religious and political competition induced by the
Protestant Reformation drove the adoption of institutions that support public goods across German cities in the 1500s.

                                                            4
perform poorly in office and are negatively selected relative to other politicians. He also finds that
localities dominated by dynastic politicians are poorer and have worse public good provision. We
contribute to this literature by documenting how regime changes can disrupt political dynasties at
the local level, promote competition, and affect long-term economic development.

We have organized the rest of the paper as follows. The next section outlines our argument and
provides supporting historical evidence. Section 3 describes the data and our measure of the con-
centration of political power. In Section 4, we describe our main findings. Section 5 concludes the
paper.



2    Our Argument and Historical Background

We hypothesize that Brazil's transition to a dictatorship in 1964 had long-lasting effects on the dis-
tribution of political power at the local level. Places that were more politically concentrated prior to
the dictatorship became increasingly more competitive locally. We further argue that the change in
the distribution of political power was the result of several political and economic reforms imple-
mented by the military dictatorship. These reforms weakened the power of the traditional political
families, vis-a-vis new local entrants who had the support of the military. As Brazil eventually
transitioned back to a democracy, the increase in political competition not only led to more po-
litical contestation during the democratic period, but also to less corruption, better public goods
provision, and ultimately higher income levels for its citizens. In this section, we provide some his-
torical accounts consistent with our argument. The next subsection discusses how political power
was distributed prior to the dictatorship. We then describe Brazil's transition to the military dicta-
torship and the set of political and economic reforms that affected the political power of the local
elites. Finally, we briefly describe Brazil's transition back to democracy and the importance of
local governments for the distribution of public goods and welfare of its citizens.


Local politics prior to the dictatorship

After 12 years under the rule of Getúlio Vargas, Brazil democratized in 1945. It marked the
first time Brazil held relatively free and fair elections that featured secret ballot and political par-
ties at the national level. The three major political parties included: Partido Social Democrático
(PSD), a center-left populist party founded by the political elites who had supported Vargas; União
Democrática Nacional (UDN), a party comprising mostly of the political elites who had lost power

                                                   5
under the Vargas regime; and Partido Trabalhista Brasileiro (PTB), which had its origins in the
urban labor movement and did not include members from the regional oligarchies.

Despite the emergence of national parties, powerful traditional families continued to dominate pol-
itics at the local level. These families were often large landowners that cultivated cash crops, such
as sugar and cotton, in large plantations that employed many workers. They exploited their eco-
nomic resources to create extensive clientelistic networks that allowed them to occupy key political
offices. As Fausto (1989) states: "Productive resources were controlled by a tiny minority; there
was an almost total absence of public or private social welfare ... Protection, in the form of land,
financial assistance or employment, was exchanged for a guarantee of loyalty which, depending on
individual cases, meant being prepared to defend the [political boss] physically, or obey his wishes
at the ballot box".

The traditional families controlled more than the distribution of local resources. Their family net-
works, in effect, supplanted political parties locally. As Lewin (2014) write, family ties "underlay
the base of a politician's network of kin and political friends. From it he [the politician] constructed
the core of his personalistic political following, a family-based group that organized and delivered
his votes locally, defended his partisan interests in his home município, and served him loyally
as officeholders or bureaucratic appointees... By spanning different levels of government, family-
based networks offered the political ligatures binding the ruling oligarchy together. In addition,
family-based networks bound the oligarchy's leadership stratum to family-based groups in the mu-
nicípios (...) virtually every state political party was associated with either the rule of one family or
one individual's personalistic domination." (Lewin, 2014, p.287)

Political parties were highly decentralized and relatively undisciplined organizations. As a result,
the party affiliations of traditional families were not determined by ideological or programmatic
differences, but rather by local rivalries (Hagopian, 1996; Mainwaring, 1999). Clientelism shaped
party competition and in most local elections, electoral coalitions were formed based on personal
and tactical considerations. These family networks would also extend over generations: "If a politi-
cian's father, father-in-law, or uncle was a political figure of some import, the young candidate "in-
herits" the personal votes of his or her political progenitor and progressively fills the seats vacated
by the elder politician." (Hagopian, 1996, p. 131)

In sum, the distribution of local political power ran along familial lines. Traditional families were
able to maintain large clientelistic networks with their economic power and access to state re-
sources. Although political parties existed, they lacked programmatic content or organizational
significance. In the analysis to follow, we will define political concentration at the family level as


                                                   6
opposed to the party level.


Brazil's Transition to a Dictatorship

In March 1964, the military initiated a coup d'état on the presidency of João Goulart. The military's
coup was largely a response to a set of redistributive and populist policies that the political elites felt
would undermine their political and economic interests (Skidmore, 1988).7 Most elites expected a
caretaker military regime that would quickly devolve power to the main oligarchic parties. Instead,
the military decided to retain power for more than 20 years. The main motivation for the military to
do so was twofold: to industrialize and to reorganize a political system that they viewed as corrupt
and clientelistic, and thus a major obstacle to economic growth and political stability (Stepan,
1973).8

To meet these objectives, military leaders felt it imperative to concentrate political power in the
hands of the federal executive and away from the traditional families. As Soares (1982) writes:
"The política coronelista [a powerful person that controlled politics locally] was never to the liking
of the Brazilian military, all forms of local power were seen as detrimental to a strong national state,
which the military groped for since the Old Republic. In 1965, when the opportunity presented
itself, they tried to impose a party system that would leave no room for local family politics". This
led the military to implement several political and economic reforms that profoundly impacted
intergovernmental relations and redefined the traditional political elites' relationship with the state
(Roett, 1999).


Political Reforms Shortly after assuming power, the military instituted a series of executive de-
crees, known as Institutional Acts, aimed at expanding the power of the executive over the legisla-
tive power. The laws allowed the government to purge dissidents, suspend the political rights of
    7 João  Goulart's raise to power in 1961 was highly unexpected. Goulart was a left-wing politician affiliated to PTB.
He won the vice-presidency in a separate ticket election from the presidency which was won by Jânio Quadros, an
UDN politician. The presidency of Quadros was characterized by a high degree of political instability and he resigned
just 8 months after taking office. Goulart was considered a dangerous politician by most Brazilian elites due to his
strong ties to leftist movements. During his term he tried to implement a number of policies that were considered a
threat to the economic interests of several groups, such as land reform or enfranchisement of illiterate people.
     8 There is still some debate among historians about the military's motives to modernize the economy and limit the

power of traditional elites. On the one hand, some argue that their corporate interests may have been more aligned
with those of industrial elites and new entrepreneurs that had more to gain from the modernization of agriculture and
the reduction of corruption. On the other hand, the threat of communism and a potential revolution is also described as
a reason for trying to break clientelism and the power of traditional elites (Soares, 1979; Hagopian, 1996; Houtzager,
1998).

                                                           7
any citizen, and cancel the mandates of elected politicians. The president was also empowered to
pass constitutional amendments and expenditure bills with only a simple majority from congress
(Skidmore, 1988).

One of these acts abolished all existing parties and set up new rules for forming new parties. Effec-
tively, the law transformed a multi-party system with 13 parties in 1964 into a two-party system,
which forced politicians to decide between the pro-government party (ARENA) and the opposi-
tion party (MDB) (Skidmore, 1988). Most politicians from the conservative parties UDN and PSD
joined ARENA, including 65 percent of elected federal legislators (Power, 2000, p. 55).

This act was then followed by a decree that replaced the direct election of governors with indirect
elections by state legislatures, which in effect gave the military power to name the heads of state
governments. The decree also abolished direct elections for mayors of state capitals and designated
national security cities, and gave state governors the power to appoint these mayors. The remaining
municipalities, which constituted the vast majority, continued to hold local, competitive elections.
The military saw these elections as way of legitimizing their government (Hagopian, 1996).

These institutional changes induced significant changes in the distribution of political power across
Brazil. To control the state executive, and thus the political elites within a state, the military leaders
appointed to prominent government positions, technocrats with non-political backgrounds and only
minimal links to the traditional political groups. For example, of the 22 governors selected in 1970,
50 percent of them were technocrats and non-political, compared to 1966 when only two state
governors were technocrats (Samuels and Abrucio, 2000). As Jenks (1979, pp. 221-222) describes:
"By the 1970 elections, President Médici already had men personally loyal to him in key positions
in the ARENA national directorate and state directorates. At the beginning of the 1971 legislative
session, he was able to select men to fill the ARENA congressional leadership positions as well
... Médici controlled ARENA at the national and state levels, recruiting the party leadership and
increasing the centralization of authority under the President."9 A similar point is made by Sarles
(1982) "In general, the military gave ARENA leadership positions to members of the traditional
political elite, who maintained their old party organizations and ties within the new government
party. At times, however, the military presidents attempted to create a completely different kind of
political party, free of clientelism and traditional political bargaining. President Médici's "political
renewal" strategy for ARENA, for example, had a clear corporatist orientation... As a result, he
selected technocrats and political unknowns for top cabinet positions and many governorships." In

    9 Emílio
           Garrastazu Médici was one of the 5 presidents that served during the military dictatorship. He governed
between 1969 and 1974.

                                                        8
the state of Santa Catarina, for example, the appointment of the governor Colombo Salles in 1971
by the military regime was aimed at reducing the political power of local oligarchies and fostering
political renewal at the municipal and state-levels (de Souza Carreirao, 1988, pp.174-175).

Despite the military's efforts to introduce new leadership, traditional elites remained powerful with
their large clientelistic networks and their ability to mobilize votes at times of elections. This
created a problem for the military because even though they wanted to promote their own candi-
dates, they could not afford to let the traditional elites join the opposition party, and potentially
risk electoral defeats. As a result, the military introduced the sublegenda voting system, which al-
lowed them to accommodate both their loyalists and the traditional elites all under ARENA's party
umbrella (Soares, 1982).

The sublegenda was a balloting mechanism whereby each party could nominate up to three party
tickets for the mayor and senate elections. The votes for the party would be the sum of the votes
of each ticket or sublegenda. The winner would be the candidate with the largest vote count of the
most voted party. For example, ARENA could have candidates running for mayor as ARENA 1,
ARENA 2, and ARENA 3. The military saw this system as a way to keep within the same party,
factions that were hostile to one another (Power, 1997).

Even though the sublegenda system was implemented to help guarantee victories for ARENA in
local elections, it also fostered political competition. As Samuels and Abrucio (2000) explain it:
"ARENA began to split into two factions: one led by politicians with little popular support and
few links to state elites, but with extensive links to the military high command, and another led
by traditional state elites who had developed careers prior to 1964." By allowing for intra-party
competition in municipalities that previously would have been dominated by one or two families,
the sublegenda facilitated the entry of new political players that would compete against traditional
elites (Schmitter, 1973; Hagopian, 1996; Machado Madeira, 2006).


Economic Reforms The dictatorship marked a period in which Brazil sought to industrialize
through an import substitution strategy that among other things, prioritized the modernization of
the agricultural sector. The military implemented several interventions in the rural areas that in-
cluded the provision of highly subsidized agricultural credit aimed at the purchase of fertilizers and
tractors, the provision of agricultural extension services, and investment in infrastructure such as
roads (Graham et al., 1987). To carry out these policies, the state had to develop capacity in the
rural areas to avoid the traditional elites from capturing this new injection of state resources. "The
agrarian project therefore represented a direct challenge to local authority ­ it entailed gaining a


                                                  9
degree of control over labor, land, and capital in the countryside ... It sought to centralize author-
ity out of the hands of the oligarchies by enacting new legislation and created new bureaucratic
machinery in rural areas to circumvent existing state and local governments." (Houtzager, 1998)
By appointing to these key local positions technocrats who wanted to break away from old-style
politics and build their own political base, the military excluded traditional politicians from state
patronage, while also introducing new economic and political players who were the beneficiaries
of the economic reforms (Sarles, 1982).

In sum, the military's efforts to centralize and exclude the traditional families from state resources
and largesse, while also attempting to maintain electoral legitimacy, affected the distribution of
political power both nationally and locally. At the local level, the introduction of the sublegenda
system and the redistribution of economic resources away from the traditional families increased
political competition in places that had been ruled by only a few or, in many cases, a single political
family.


Democratic Transition, Decentralization, and Political Competition

Brazil's democratic transition was the slowest of all the transitions in Latin America. It started
in 1974 when the newly-elected president Ernesto Geisel announced his project for a gradual and
secure political liberalization, but it was only completed in 1985 with the (indirect) election of a
civilian president.

Many scholars have argued that the peaceful democratization process was a negotiated transition
between the military government and state-level elites and that it had negative consequences for
Brazil's democracy because it generated a significant level of political continuity. As such, it al-
lowed for the persistence of many incumbents of the authoritarian regime (Mainwaring, 1986;
Abrucio, 1998) and for the large influence of traditional elites in the design of the political institu-
tions (Hagopian, 1996).

However, the new democratic period that emerged since 1985 has also seen the quality of Brazil-
ian democracy improve in several dimensions. The enfranchisement of illiterate citizens in 1985
resulted in 55 percent of the population going to the polls in the presidential election of 1989
compared to only 22 percent in 1960. Brazilian politics has also become significantly more com-
petitive. While during the 1946-1964 period two parties had the most influence, after 1985 the low
barriers to entry allowed a large number of parties to compete and contest power in both local and
national elections, including parties that represented the interests of the poorest individuals such as


                                                  10
the Worker's Party (PT) (Weyland, 2005, p. 96-98).

The new democratic constitution, promulgated in 1988, increased the financial resources available
to municipalities as it improved the capacity of municipalities to raise revenue, increased intergov-
ernmental fiscal transfers and allowed for more discretion over expenditures (Willis et al., 1999).
Local governments were given significant political autonomy: they were free to develop munici-
pal constitutions and allowed significant discretion over land and urban legislation. Municipalities
were also given the responsibility (or co-responsibility) for the delivery of social services such
as health, transportation and primary education with an increase in earmarked transfers to fulfill
these duties. Finally, local governments were free to institutionalize channels of direct popular par-
ticipation into public affairs, such as the participatory budgeting adopted by many municipalities
(Baiocchi, 2006). The provision of education and health services at the local level has made polit-
ical selection and political competition at that level a key ingredient for the supply of high quality
public services in Brazil.10



3      Data

Our data covers three states and spans the period 1940-2000. We digitized several historical records,
including agricultural censuses, population censuses, and election results prior and during the mil-
itary dictatorship. In this section, we describe the main data sources and present some descriptive
statistics. We provide a more detailed description of our data in Section 6.1 of the Appendix.


Political Concentration

We collected data on the identity of all the mayors that held office from 1947 to 2000 for the states
of Ceará, Minas Gerais, and Paraíba. We selected these states based on their data availability. Ap-
pendix Table A1 illustrates the structure of our data for two municipalities. For each municipality
and each election year, we have the name of the winning mayor and his/her party affiliation.11 Prior
to 1972, municipalities held elections in different years. Appendix Table A2 tabulates the number
of elections that took place each year by state. For a subset of municipalities and periods, we also
    10 See Arvate (2013) for evidence on the relationship between political competition and the quality of public services

in Brazil.
    11 We will use the party affiliation of politicians to infer the adoption of sublegendas during the military dictatorship.

If a sublegenda was used, the party name is followed by a number indicating the sub-ticket of the candidate. We discuss
this measure in more detail in Section 4.3.

                                                             11
have information on vote shares and the identity of losing candidates. We will describe these data
in more detail as they become relevant.

As we described in Section 2, political power in Brazil has been historically organized around
familial lines. Thus, we use our data on the identity of the mayor to infer their family network.
Specifically, we assume that mayors belong to the same family if they share at least one common
surname. It is common in Brazil for individuals to have at least two surnames. The first surname is
the mother's family name and the second belongs to the father's family name.12 Column 4 of Table
A1 indicates the family number that identifies family links based on common surnames within a
municipality.13

The two examples shown in Table A1 are illustrative. In the municipality of Carandaí, in Minas
Gerais, a member of the Pereira family had been power from the municipality's first election in
1947 up until the start of the dictatorship. During the dictatorship, the municipality elected mem-
bers from three new families (Amaral, Teixeira de Carvalho, Corsino de Oliveira) in addition to a
member of the Pereira family. Although the Pereira family survived the transition, political com-
petition in Carandaí increased during the dictatorship. Panel B shows the history of mayors for
the municipality of Campos Sales, in Ceará. Prior to the military dictatorship, two families alter-
nated power. But during the dictatorship, only one of these families managed to hold office, as
several new families came to power. These examples illustrate how different municipalities may
have experienced different changes in the distribution of political power after the introduction of
the dictatorship.

To measure political concentration before the military dictatorship, we construct a Herfindahl index
based on the share of terms governed by the same political family. Specifically we compute the
Herfindahl index, Hmt , for municipality, m, during period t as:

                                                                                                2
                                 Number of elections family i has been in powerimt
                   Hmt =                                                                            .
                            i              Total number of electionsmt


The value of the Herfindahl index for the two municipalities shown in Table A1 is 1 for Carandai, as
one single family was in power during all pre-dictatorship years, and 0.5 for Campos Sales because
two families alternated power.
   12 Most of the surnames of local mayors are not common. It is unlikely that two mayors that do not belong to the
same family would share a surname. Nevertheless, we conduct a number of robustness checks for frequent surnames.
See section 6.2 in the Appendix.
   13 A number of research assistants manually coded the family identifier variable and visually inspected the data to

detect mistakes.

                                                         12
Table 1 provides summary statistics for this variable. The average political concentration for the
municipalities in our sample prior to the dictatorship was 0.325, which implies that the effective
number of traditional elites during this period (i.e. 1/Hmt ) was 3.08 families. However, this num-
ber masks a considerable amount of heterogeneity. In Figure 1, we present the histogram of our
measure of political concentration prior to dictatorship. The values range from 0.16 to 1, which is
equivalent to a range of six families evenly sharing power versus one.

In the next rows of Table 1, we present other measures of concentration of political power. We
compute the average reelection rate of families for the three different periods.14 It is important to
note that during this period, the same mayor could only be elected to a single term. Before the
dictatorship, 8.9% of local elections reelected the same family. During the dictatorship period this
measure fell to 8.2% and it was 9.1% after the dictatorship.

The table also provides information on elite persistence across the regimes. In 73 percent of munic-
ipalities, at least one traditional family survived the transition to a dictatorship, and in 44 percent
of our municipalities, a family was able to survive both transitions in and out of the dictatorship.


Additional data

Outcomes variables One of our main outcomes of interest is the log of income per capita in a
municipality from the 2000 population census. This is our preferred measure of long-run develop-
ment. We complement this measure with other variables from the population census, such as years
of schooling, literacy and infant mortality rates. We also add data from Brazil's electoral commis-
sion to measure political competition during the 2000 municipal elections. With these data, we
compute a Herfindahl index of vote shares for both the mayor and city council elections. To these
outcomes, we also add a measure of local corruption using audit data from Brazil's federal audit
program conducted between 2005-2010. Following Avis et al. (2018) we use the number of irreg-
ularities classified by auditors as either moderate or severe. Our final set of outcomes come from
four decades (1960-1985) of agricultural censuses. We use these data to measure any changes to the
agricultural sector during the dictatorship. Importantly, we observe the number and sizes of farms
over time, as well as several agricultural inputs, including fertilizer, tractors, and electrification.
These variables are summarized in Panel B of Table 1.




  14 For   each municipality, we compute the likelihood that a family is reelected from one election to the next.

                                                           13
Control variables Brazil had large regional differences in economic development even prior to
the dictatorship. To account for these differences, we digitized the 1940 agricultural and popula-
tion censuses. From which, we construct several important socio-economic characteristics of the
municipality, such as population size, employment rate, share of workers in the agricultural sec-
tor, average production of farms, and share of land devoted to large-scale production. One issue
that arises when using historical data is that municipalities will split over time. When they do, we
assign to the newer municipality the 1940 value of the municipality from which it originated. We
then adjust our standard errors by clustering on the municipalities that existed in 1940.

Our control variables are summarized in Panel C of Table 1. The average population in 1940 is
30,625 inhabitants, with 39 percent of employment in agriculture. Literacy rates during this period
were quite low, with over 72 percent of the adult population unable to read or write. On average,
19 percent of the population was black. Approximately 38 percent of the municipalities had a
mayor from the UDN party (which later became a principal part of the military party) prior to the
dictatorship, whereas only 13 percent of municipalities had a mayor from the PTB party. We also
present summary statistics for rental prices in 1940. This variable measures the monthly rent of
tenants, and we use it to proxy for income during that period. As we will show below, the variable
strongly predicts current day income per capita.



4    Results

In this section, we present our main empirical specification and results. We begin by documenting
the relationship between pre-dictatorship levels of political concentration and long-run develop-
ment. To quantify the relationship, we estimate the following econometric model:


                         yi j = 0 + 1 pol_concentrationi j +  j + Xi j  + i j                     (1)

where yi j indicates an outcome of interest (e.g. income per capita in the year 2000) for municipality
i in state j. The variable pol_concentrationi j measures the level of political concentration before
the military dictatorship. It is decreasing in the number of families sharing power during the period.
The vector, Xi j , includes a number of municipal-level controls that we describe below. Our stan-
dard errors are clustered at the district level according to the municipal boundaries in 1940. This
addresses the possibility of correlated shocks to municipalities that split during our study period.

The main coefficient of interest is 1 . It captures the marginal effects of an increase in the level

                                                 14
of political concentration on our outcomes of interest. For this coefficient to have a meaningful
interpretation, we need to control for all the determinants of long-run development that correlate
with political concentration. We examine its correlates in Table 2. Each row reports the OLS
estimate of regressing pre-dictatorship political concentration on the variable indicated in each
row separately, while also controlling for state fixed effects. We also report standardized-beta
coefficients and corresponding p-values in columns 3 and 4, respectively.

Political concentration is correlated with a number of geographic and demographic characteristics
measured in 1940. On average, politically-concentrated municipalities tended to be closer to the
equator and less populated. They also had a greater share of the population working in agriculture
and lower rental prices, suggesting that standards of living were lower in politically concentrated
municipalities.

Political concentration is also associated with higher 1940 levels of production of sugar and cotton,
which according to historical accounts were important sources of economic power among the tra-
ditional elites. We do not, however, find a robust correlation between land inequality in 1940 and
political concentration. It is worth noting that our data on land inequality are only available for a
subset of municipalities and are likely measured with error.15

Overall, the correlates presented in Table 2 paint a picture consistent with the historical accounts:
traditional elites were more concentrated in more backward areas that relied on the agricultural
production of crops such as sugar and cotton. In our main specifications, we will incorporate many
of these covariates at baseline to mitigate endogeneity concerns.


4.1     Concentration of Political Power and Long-Run Economic Development

In this section, we provide evidence that the association between initial political concentration and
economic development changed with the military dictatorship. In Figure 2a, we present a binned
scatter residual plot between log rental prices in 1940 and levels of political concentration before
the military dictatorship.16 Although the 1940 census did not measure income per capita, rental
prices are a good proxy for a municipality's level of economic development during this period.17
   15 The  land Gini measure is computed using data on the number of farms per a given land size interval. Even though
the 1940 census used 13 intervals, for reasons of anonymity it usually did not report the number of farms with holdings
larger than 10,000 hectares.
    16 We partial out both variables using distance to the state capital. This allows us to control by the geo-spatial

distribution of economic activity.
    17 Appendix Table A3 presents pairwise correlations between log rental prices, literacy rates, and share of the pop-

ulation working in agriculture, all measured from the 1940 census. Rental prices correlate strongly with each of these

                                                          15
The figure shows a steep negative association indicating that political power prior to the dictatorship
was more concentrated in the poorer regions.

Figure 2b presents a similar residual plot to Figure 2a, but with log income per capita in 2000
on the vertical axis. The contrast is striking. Whereas Figure 2a depicted a negative relationship
between economic development and political concentration, in Figure 2b per capita income in
2000 is positively correlated with political concentration pre-dictatorship. Despite being poorer at
the beginning of our sample period, municipalities that were more politically concentrated before
the dictatorship become relatively richer 60 years later. This relationship appears even though
rental prices in 1940 and income per capita in 2000 are on average positively correlated (point
estimate =0.143, robust standard error=0.011). In the Figure 3 of the Appendix, we present a
figure analogous to Figure 2a, but using the share of the population working in non-agricultural
sectors as a proxy for economic development in 1940. We find a similar negative association with
pre-dictatorship political concentration.

We investigate the robustness and magnitude of these results in Table 3. In columns 1 and 2, we
regress our main proxies of economic development in 1940 on the measure of political concen-
tration pre-dictatorship. For these specifications, we include basic geographic and demographic
controls (longitude, latitude, distance to the state capital, log population, share of protestants, share
of black population, and share of foreigners; all measured in 1940). The point estimate in column
1 implies that all else equal, municipalities that had one family in power pre-dictatorship had 40%
lower rental prices in 1940 relative to a municipality where 3 traditional families shared power.18
In column 2, we also find a strong negative association between political concentration and the
share of population working in non-agricultural sectors. In column 3, we examine whether the
contemporaneous association between standards of living and political competition is also present
in the post-dictatorship period. Here, we also find a negative correlation: municipalities where
a single family holds power after the dictatorship have 17% lower income per capita relative to
municipalities where 3 families share power.

In columns 4 and 5, we document the reversal in standards of living anticipated by Figure 2a.
Municipalities more politically concentrated before the dictatorship, despite being poorer prior to
the dictatorship, ended up having higher income levels in the year 2000. In the context of our

other commonly used proxies for economic development. The correlation between log rental price and the share of
population working in agriculture is 0.55, whereas the correlation between log rental prices and literacy rates is 0.46.
   18 The average measure of political concentration pre-dictatorship in our sample is 0.35, which corresponds to 3

families sharing power. The change in political concentration between the average municipality and one where a single
family in power is equivalent to 0.65 units. When multiplied by the estimated coefficient in column 1 we obtain -0.41,
which approximately corresponds to a 40% reduction in rental prices.

                                                          16
previous example, the coefficient in column 4 implies that in municipalities where a single family
was in power pre-dictatorship have 7.6% higher income per capita relative to municipalities where
3 families shared power during that period.

Of course, a natural concern is that this reversal could be driven by differences across regions in
their economic and demographic characteristics. In Column 5, we add to our previous controls
several 1940 socio-economic characteristics, including log rental prices. This regression, which is
our main specification in later tables, includes state fixed effects, latitude, longitude, distance to the
state capita, log population, literacy rate, share of blacks, share of protestants, share of foreigners,
share of agricultural employment, and a quartic of log rental prices. After controlling for these
variables, the point estimate becomes larger in magnitude and statistical significance.

In Table 4, we present some additional robustness checks that augment our baseline specification
with additional controls. Column 1 shows the estimates of our preferred specification (Table 3,
column 5) estimated on the sample for which we have information on the additional controls in-
cluded in columns 2, 3, and 4. Column 2 controls for soil quality in the municipality to account
for the possibility that municipalities with higher political concentration are endowed with higher
quality lands. In column 3, we control for the amount of sugar and cotton production per farm in
1940. This alleviates the concerns that production in sugar and cotton may have been conductive
for economic development at a certain point in time. In column 4, we add political controls. In
particular, we include indicators for whether the UDN or PTB were in power prior to the dictator-
ship. These controls allow us to account for any ideological differences that might impact the types
of policies adopted by more politically concentrated places. Finally, we include a Gini coefficient
for land inequality as measured in 1940 in column 5. These data are only available for 848 of the
municipalities in our sample. When our preferred specification is estimated on this sample, the
point estimate on political concentration is 0.228, which is the same as what we obtain when the
land gini is included as a control. This result mitigates the concern that land inequality may have
had a positive impact on development outcomes.19 Overall, these results suggest that our estimates
are robust to the inclusion of a number of additional controls that may have affected economic
development.




   19 Forinstance, in their study of landownership in the state of Cundinamarca, Colombia, Acemoglu et al. (2008)
show that the land Gini as measured in the 19th century is positively correlated with better development outcomes.
Note that our results are similar even when we include higher order terms of land inequality as controls.

                                                       17
4.2        Political Competition and Quality of Governance

In this section, we show that the initially concentrated municipalities become more politically com-
petitive over time. We argue that this increase in political competition and its subsequent impact
on the quality of governance is a principal reason why these municipalities fared better in the long
run.


Changes in Political Competition To investigate the extent to which political concentration per-
sisted as Brazil transitioned in and out of the dictatorship, we estimate variants of Equation 1 using
different measures of political competition as the dependent variable. Each regression includes the
controls from our baseline specification presented in column 5 of Table 3. Column 1 of Table 5
presents the correlation between political concentration before and during the dictatorship. Had
political concentration persisted during the transition to a military regime, then we should see a
correlation close to 1. Instead, the point estimate is 0.088 (robust s.e.= 0.037). In column 2, we
use political concentration post-dictatorship as a dependent variable and find an even smaller, sta-
tistically insignificant point estimate of 0.036 (robust s.e.=0.037). These results indicate that the
level of political concentration pre-dictatorship is no longer predictive of which municipalities have
higher levels of political concentration post-dictatorship. This also indicates that political concen-
tration experienced larger declines in the municipalities that were more politically concentrated
prior to the dictatorship, relative to those that were more competitive.20

Next, we examine whether political concentration prior to the dictatorship is associated with a
reduction in the ability of political dynasties to perpetuate their power. In particular, we compute
the reelection rates of incumbent families from one election to the next. During our study period,
mayors were not allowed to serve two consecutive terms. Families circumvented this limitation by
having another family member contest the subsequent election. For each municipality, we compute
the average family reelection rates across our three different time periods. Columns 3 to 5 show
the results when these variables are used as dependent variables. Prior to the dictatorship, political
concentration was highly correlated with the likelihood the family would get re-elected. However,
this association decays over-time. During the post-dictatorship period, municipalities that had high
levels of initial political concentration no longer exhibit higher levels of family re-election rates.

In columns 6 and 7, we explore alternative measures of political competition in the post-dictatorship
period. In particular, we compute the Herfindahl-Hirschman political concentration index in local
   20 Ifwe use as dependent variable the change in political competition, the point estimate is -0.95 (s.e.=0.04). These
results are available upon request.

                                                          18
elections by summing the squares of the vote shares of each candidate in a municipality. To be
consistent with our proxies for long-run economic development, we measure political competition
during the 2000 local elections.21 This measure, which varies between 0 (more competition) and
1 (less competition), has the advantage that it can distinguish between elections that have the same
number of candidates but differ in the candidates' level of electoral support and hence competi-
tiveness. We find that the municipalities that were politically concentrated prior to the dictatorship
became more politically competitive in the long run. The magnitude of the effects is consistent with
the magnitude of our effects on the reversal of income. Municipalities where a single family was
in power have a 7.7% lower level of political concentration for mayor and 26% for local councilor,
relative to municipalities where 3 families shared power during that period.


Political Competition or Elite Identity? An important question is whether our effects are driven
by the increase in political competition or because non-traditional elites are now being elected to
office. We explore this question in columns 8 and 9. We regress the share of non-traditional
families that held office during the dictatorship (column 8) or post-dictatorship (column 9) on our
pre-dictatorship measure of political concentration. As we can see from the mean of the dependent
variables, the share of non-traditional elites increases over time. But, these families were not more
likely to hold office in more politically-concentrated places in either period. Although our estimates
are not measured with a lot precision, these findings do favor the "change in political competition"
interpretation, rather than a change in elite identity.


Governance Thus far, we have shown that as Brazil transitioned in and out of a dictatorship,
places that were more politically concentrated before the dictatorship fared better in the long run.
We also argue that this can be explained, in part, by the fact that these places also became more
competitive politically. While political competition has been shown to improve economic outcomes
in other contexts (e.g. Besley et al. (2010), Acemoglu et al. (2014)), it nevertheless raises the ques-
tion as to what are the mechanisms. In Table 6, we investigate the relationship between political
concentration prior to the dictatorship and local governance. If our findings on long-run develop-
ment are in fact driven by political competition, then we would expect to find these traditionally
concentrated places to have more responsive local governments. In columns 1 and 2, we estimate
the effects for literacy rates and infant mortality, two human development outcomes that are highly
influenced by the provision of local public goods. We find that higher levels of initial political

   21 Specifically,   our dependent variable is  s2
                                                  i where si denotes candidate i's vote share in the 2000 municipal elec-
tions.

                                                            19
concentration are associated with significant improvements in these two outcomes. In column 3,
we examine the incidence of corruption by using as a dependent variable the number of irregu-
larities detected by Brazil's random audit program. This program randomly selects municipalities
to undertake a detailed audit of their municipal government accounts. Consistent with the higher
provision of public goods, the results indicate that municipalities with high levels of initial political
concentration exhibit lower levels of irregularities linked to corrupt activities.22


4.3    How did the Military's Undermine the Political Power of the Traditional
       Elites?

One of the key political reforms introduced during the dictatorship was the sublegenda voting
system. This system allowed multiple candidates to contest the elections under the same party
umbrella. While the sublegenda system was allowed in all municipalities, it was not adopted in all
of them. In this section, we investigate how political concentration affected the decision to adopt a
sublegenda.

We measure the adoption of sublegendas by the name of the party of the winner of the election.
When candidates run under a sublegenda the party affiliation appears with a numerical subindex
(i.e., "1", "2", or "3"). One concern with this measure, however, is if a party ran under a sublegenda
but lost to a party that did not use one. In this case, our indicator would be incorrectly coded as
a zero. Fortunately, for the states of Ceará and Paraíba, we can cross-validate our measure using
information on all contestants (not just the elected ones). For example, during the 1972 elections,
the correlation coefficient between the presence of a sublegenda as measured by the winner versus
all candidates was 0.83 for races won by ARENA and 0.65 for races won by MDB.

In Appendix Table A4, we provide some descriptive statistics on the elections that took place during
the dictatorship for our sample. Column 1 shows the average number of elections per election year.
On average, about 1,000 municipalities held elections each election year, which is approximately
the number of municipalities in our sample. Column 2 shows that ARENA won 87% of the local
elections. Column 3 indicates that 49% of elections adopted the sublegenda system. Columns 4 and
5 indicate that the share of elections with sublegendas conditional on ARENA and MDB victories
were 51% and 33%, respectively. ARENA's frequent use of the sublegenda system is consistent
with the military's desire to accommodate both new local candidates and traditional elites all under


  22 The   sample is smaller due to the limited number of audits.

                                                          20
ARENA's party umbrella. Under this system, ARENA was able promote competition from non-
traditional elite candidates while not alienating the traditional elites.

In Table 7, we test whether political concentration prior to the dictatorship is associated with the
adoption of the sublegenda system. Our hypothesis is that the ARENA party was more likely to use
sublegendas in the municipalities with higher levels of concentration. In these places, the traditional
elites were more powerful and the use of the sublegenda would allow ARENA to facilitate entry of
new contestants who would compete against traditional elites. In columns 1 to 3, we re-estimate
Equation 1 using as a dependent variable an indicator for whether the winning mayor was running
within a sublegenda in the election years 1972 or 1976. We focus on those elections because all
municipalities held elections in those years. In column 1 of Table 7, we find that higher levels
of political concentration are associated with greater use of a sublegenda: municipalities where a
single family was in power pre-dictatorship have 19% higher likelihood of adopting the sublegenda
voting system relative to municipalities where 3 families shared power during that period. Columns
2 and 3 suggest that this result is driven by the ARENA party. The effects for MDB party are small
and insignificant.

In Appendix Table A5, we also provide suggestive evidence that the use of sublegenda was effective
at increasing the vote share of ARENA. We regress the vote shares for the ARENA party during the
1972 and 1976 municipal elections on an indicator for whether different parties run a sublegenda.
For these results we focus on the sample for which we have full information on the identity and
party of all contestants.23 We find that a party's use of sublegenda is strong correlated with vote
shares. For example, during the 1976 elections, an ARENA sublegenda is associated with a 20
percentage point increase in vote shares for the ARENA party, even after controlling for vote share
in the previous 1972 elections. In places where the MDB used a sublegenda, vote share for the
ARENA party is associated with a 13 percentage point decline.

In Table A6, we provide additional evidence on the effect of political concentration on the identity
of who contested the municipal elections. We focus on the ARENA party since we have tighter
predictions for the military-backed party. We also focus on the 1976 election, but the results for
the 1972 election are similar. Furthermore, we focus on the sample of municipalities for which
we have information on all candidates. Panel A indicates that municipalities with higher political
concentration were less likely to have only traditional elites contesting elections and more likely
to have non-traditional elites contesting vis-a-vis traditional elites. As shown before, these regions
   23 Hence, we focus on the municipalities of Ceará and Paraíba. There are 340 municipalities in this sample. The
main results of the paper similar when the sample is restricted to these municipalities, albeit less precisely estimated.
The results are available upon request.

                                                          21
were more likely to have sublegendas in the ARENA party. Hence, this is consistent with sublegen-
das facilitating contestation between traditional and non-traditional elites. Panels B and C provide
suggestive evidence that these results are driven by the higher likelihood of having sublegendas.
In Panel B the sample is restricted to municipalities where ARENA adopted a sublegenda. The
results are similar to those in Panel A, albeit stronger. In contrast, Panel C indicates that there are
no significant effects on municipalities in which ARENA did not hold a sublegenda.

In sum, our results suggest that the sublegenda system was instrumental in reducing the hold on
power of traditional elites and promoting political competition at the local level. Our results are
consistent with historical accounts and resonates with the argument proposed by (Power, 1997):

      The institution that politicians chose of their own free will ­ the sublegenda ­ is one that
      decentralizes power, maximizes the freedom of the individual politicians, and permits
      the "cohabitation" of strange bedfellows.[...] The irony here is that reforms likely to
      strengthen parties and promote accountability under democracy were actually imposed
      by an authoritarian regime.


Agricultural Credit The military also wanted to modernize agriculture and transform Brazil into
a major agro-business exporter. Their strategy was twofold: to rupture the ties between the state
and the traditional elites whose inefficient farms had become reliant on preferential access to state
resources and to make credit abundantly available to new economic elites who were more sympa-
thetic to the military's political agenda (Houtzager, 1998). In line with this argument, we should
expect to see an emergence of new economic elites and more credit targeted to places that were
more politically concentrated prior to the dictatorship. We test this using data from the agricultural
censuses. We first analyze the allocation of government credit to the agricultural sector. During
the military dictatorship, there was a large expansion of credit: between years 1970 and 1980 the
average loan per farm increased 22-fold in real terms.

In Table 8, we estimate whether this expansion of government credit was targeted to more politi-
cally concentrated municipalities. We focus on outcomes measured in 1980 and report results for
outcomes measured in 1970 in Appendix Table A7. Column 1 indicates that municipalities where a
single family was in power pre-dictatorship received 43% more government credit in 1980 relative
to municipalities where 3 families shared power during that period. In column 2, we do not see a
similar effect for private credit, suggesting that the demand for credit was not necessarily higher in
more politically concentrated municipalities.

Next, we examine if the influx in credit was associated with the emergence of new agricultural

                                                  22
enterprises. Because these municipalities are predominately rural, we use the number of farms in
the municipality as a proxy for economic competition. In column 3, we see that municipalities
where a single family was in power pre-dictatorship have 42% more farms in 1980 relative to
municipalities where 3 families shared power during that period. One might be concerned that
this result reflects the introduction of small landholders, who are unlikely to compete with the
traditional elites. But as column 4 indicates, average farm size is not decreasing over the period
suggesting that the increase in the number of farms represents the cultivation of new lands.


4.4    Alternative Mechanism: Agricultural Modernization

Overall, our results suggest that the political and economic policies of the military increased polit-
ical competition in municipalities that were more politically concentrated prior to the dictatorship
and that this increase in competition led to more economic development. An alternative interpre-
tation, however, is that the military's attempt to modernize agriculture had a direct effect on the
long-run development of these places, independent of its impact on the political process.

To test this, we use data from the agricultural censuses to measure usage of fertilizers, tractors, and
electricity, which were important indicators of modernization during this period. Columns 1 to 3 of
Table 9 report the correlation between political concentration pre-dictatorship and usage of various
agricultural inputs measured in 1980.24 We find no effects on the main measures of agricultural
mechanization: tractors per farm and availability of electricity. There is a small increase in the
share of farms that use fertilizer, but the effect size is small: a one standard deviation increase in
political concentration is only associated with 3% increase in the share of farms that use fertilizer.

In columns 3 to 6, we investigate whether more politically concentrated municipalities experienced
larger shifts in employment away from agriculture into other sectors, which would also be an in-
dication of modernization in agriculture. The results indicate that political concentration is not
associated with changes in the size of the agricultural or manufacturing sectors. There are some
small increases in employment in the service and commerce sectors. However, the magnitude of
the effects is modest and the relative size of these sectors is small (less than 8% of the economy
both sectors combined). Hence, it is unlikely that these changes could account for the reversal in
standards of living presented in Table 3.

To further explore agricultural modernization as a mechanism, we re-estimate the effects of political
concentration on income per capita in 2000, controlling for changes in agricultural inputs and
  24 See   Appendix Table A8 for similar results when measuring inputs in 1970.

                                                         23
sector composition. In doing so, we are including bad controls--i.e. covariates that are potentially
endogenous to our main regressor of interest--, but we should expect our estimates on political
concentration to be underestimates given the positive correlation we documented in Table 9. We
present the results of this robustness check in Table 10. Column 1 reproduces our baseline result for
the sample for which we have measures of agricultural modernization. In column 2 we incorporate
as controls the changes in agricultural inputs between 1960 and 1980. In column 3 we add as
controls changes in sectoral employment between 1970 and 1980. Our main estimate remains
large and statistically significant even when including these demanding controls. This suggests that
agricultural modernization does not seem to be a quantitatively-relevant alternative mechanism for
our main results.



5    Conclusions

We study how changes in the concentration of political power affect long-run economic and politi-
cal development. To identify these effects, we analyze the impacts of Brazil's military dictatorship
on the distribution of power of local traditional elites. We show that the municipalities that were
more politically concentrated before the dictatorship exhibited better development outcomes in the
long run, despite being poorer initially. This "reversal of fortune", we argue, was the result of an in-
crease in local political competition that occurred when the military sought to reorganize a political
system they viewed as a threat to political stability. Their reforms centralized authority out of the
hands of the traditional oligarchs, and as a consequence, ushered in a new class of political actors.
Even though these reforms were introduced at a national scale, their implementation was targeted
towards municipalities where political power was concentrated in the hands of a few families.

Our results highlight how institutional transformations that emerge from large-scale regime transi-
tions can disrupt the balance of power and change the political equilibrium even at local levels. In
the case of Brazil, this political shock broke up local political monopolies and promoted entry of
new contestants, which ultimately led to better governance and higher levels of long-run economic
development. And while our empirical evidence is specific to Brazil, our finding that more political
competition leads to better economic outcomes does provide general lessons applicable to other
contexts.

It is important to note, however, that we do not interpret our results as suggesting that the effects
of the dictatorship for Brazil as a whole were positive. Our regression estimates can only speak
to the relative comparison between more versus less politically concentrated municipalities. We

                                                  24
do not have a counterfactual of municipalities ruled under full democracy. Also, like many other
dictatorships in Latin America, there were several cases of corruption, killings and torture that
generated significant negative consequences for the population.

Finally, a natural question that emerges is why did the new local politicians not entrench them-
selves? After all, as Michels (1911) argues in his seminal book, there is an "Iron law of oligarchy"
where the new elites that emerge after institutional changes still face the same incentives to imple-
ment similar dysfunctional policies. The answer, we believe, lies in the coexistence between old
and new elites at the local level. The military decided to keep local elections in an effort to maintain
a democratic appearance. Thus, they could not entirely eliminate the traditional families from local
power as they needed their support and clientelistic machines to win elections. In this setting the
entry of a more diverse set of politicians resulted in an increase in political competition, rather than
a replacement of one elite by another.

Our findings paint a more optimistic picture than the one depicted by Acemoglu and Robinson
(2008), in which changes in political institutions are undone by the investment of elites in de facto
political power. Hence, understanding in what contexts changes in institutions can affect political
competition, reduce clientelism, and improve public service delivery remains an important agenda
for future work.




                                                  25
References
Abrucio, F. L. (1998). Os Barões da Federação: Os governadores e a redemocratização brasileira.
  Hucitec, USP, São Paulo.

Acemoglu, D., Bautista, M. A., Querubin, P., and Robinson, J. (2008). Economic and Political
  Inequality in Development: The Case of Cundinamarca, Colombia. In Helpman, E., editor,
  Institutions and Economic Performance, chapter 05. Harvard University Press.

Acemoglu, D., Cantoni, D., Johnson, S., and Robinson, J. A. (2011). The Consequences of Radical
  Reform: The French Revolution. American Economic Review, 101(7):3286­3307.

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., and Robinson, J. (2005). Institutions as a fundamental cause of long-
  run growth. In Aghion, P. and Durlauf, S., editors, Handbook of Economic Growth, volume 1,
  Part A, chapter 06, pages 385­472. Elsevier, 1 edition.

Acemoglu, D., Reed, T., and Robinson, J. (2014). Chiefs: Economic development and elite control
  of civil society in sierra leone. Journal of Political Economy, 122(2):319 ­ 368.

Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. A. (2006a). Economic Backwardness in Political Perspective.
  American Political Science Review, 100(1):115­131.

Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. A. (2006b). Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy.
  Number 9780521855266 in Cambridge Books. Cambridge University Press.

Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. A. (2008). Persistence of Power, Elites, and Institutions. American
  Economic Review, 98(1):267­293.

Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J. A. (2012). Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity
  and Poverty. Crown, New York, 1st edition.

Aidt, T. and Eterovic, D. (2011). Political competition, electoral participation and public finance in
  20th century latin america. European Journal of Political Economy, 27(1):181­200.

Anderson, S., Francois, P., and Kotwal, A. (2015). Clientelism in indian villages. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 105(6):1780­1816.

Arvate, P. R. (2013). Electoral competition and local government responsiveness in brazil. World
  Development, 43:67 ­ 83.

Avis, E., Ferraz, C., and Finan, F. (2018). Do government audits reduce corruption? estimating the
  impacts of exposing corrupt politicians. Journal of Political Economy, 126(5):1912­1964.


                                                 26
Baiocchi, G. (2006). Decentralization as Opportunity Structure: Inequality and Innovation in
  Brazil, pages 53­80. MIT Press.

Baland, J.-M. and Robinson, J. A. (2008). Land and Power: Theory and Evidence from Chile.
  American Economic Review, 98(5):1737­1765.

Banerjee, A. and Iyer, L. (2005). History Institutions and Economic Performance: The Legacy of
  Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India. American Economic Review, 95(5):1190­1213.

Becker, G. (1983). A theory of competition among pressure groups for political influence. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98(3):371­400.

Becker, G. S. (1958). Competition and democracy. The Journal of Law and Economics, 1:105­109.

Besley, T. and Case, A. (2003). Political Institutions and Policy Choices: Evidence from the United
  States. Journal of Economic Literature, 41(1):7­73.

Besley, T., Persson, T., and Sturm, D. M. (2010). Political Competition, Policy and Growth: Theory
  and Evidence from the US. Review of Economic Studies, 77(4):1329­1352.

Besley, T. and Reynal-Querol, M. (2017). The logic of hereditary rule: theory and evidence.
  Journal of Economic Growth, 22(2):123­144.

Carson, J. L., Engstrom, E. J., and Robesrts, J. M. (2007). Candidate quality, the personal vote, and
  the incumbency advantage in congress. American Political Science Review, 101(2):289­301.

Dal Bó, E., Dal Bó, P., and Snyder, J. (2009). Political dynasties. Review of Economic Studies,
  76(1):115­142.

de Carvalho, J. M. (1982). Political Elites and State Building: The Case of Nineteenth-Century
  Brazil. Comparative Studies in Society and History, 24(3):378­399.

de Souza Carreirao, Y. (1988). Eleições e sistema partidário em Santa Catarina (1945-79). Master's
  thesis, Ciencias Sociais, UFSC, Florianopolis, SC.

Dell, M. (2010). The Persistent Effects of Peru's Mining Mita. Econometrica, 78(6):1863­1903.

Dittmar, J. E. and Meisenzahl, R. R. (2020). Public Goods Institutions, Human Capital, and
  Growth: Evidence from German History. Review of Economic Studies, 87(2):959­996.

Fausto, B. (1989). Society and politics. In Bethell, L., editor, Brazil: Empire and Republic,
  1822­1930, chapter 6, pages 217­256. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.



                                                 27
Galasso, V. and Nannicini, T. (2011). Competing on good politicians. American Political Science
  Review, 105(1):79­99.

George, S. E. (2020). Like Father, Like Son? The Economic Effects of Political Dynasties.

Geys, B. (2017). Political Dynasties, Electoral Institutions and Politicians' Human Capital. Eco-
  nomic Journal, 127(605):474­494.

Graham, D. H., Gauthier, H., and de Barros, J. R. M. (1987). Thirty years of agricultural growth
  in brazil: Crop performance, regional profile, and recent policy review. Economic Development
  and Cultural Change, 36(1):1­34.

Griffin, J. D. (2006). Electoral competition and democratic responsiveness: A defense of the
  marginality hypothesis. Journal of Politics, 68(4):911­921.

Hagopian, F. (1996). Traditional Politics and Regime Change in Brazil. Cambridge University
  Press, New York and Cambridge.

Houtzager, P. P. (1998). State and unions in the tranformation of the brazilian countryside 1964-
  1979. Latin American Research Review, 33(2).

Jenks, M. S. (1979). Political Parties in Authoritarian Brazil. PhD thesis, Duke University.

Leal, V. N. (1977). Coronelismo: The Municipality and Representative Government in Brazil.
  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Lewin, L. (2014). Politics and Parentela in Paraiba: A Case Study of Family-Based Oligarchy in
  Brazil. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Lizzeri, A. and Persico, N. (2004). Why did the elites extend the suffrage? democracy and the
  scope of government, with an application to britain's "age of reform". The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 119(2):707­765.

Machado Madeira, R. (2006). Vinhos antigos em novas garrafas: a influência de ex-arenistas e
 ex-emedebistas no atual multipartidarismo brasileiro. PhD thesis, Universidade Federal do Rio
 Grande do Sul.

Mainwaring, S. (1986). The transition to democracy in brazil. Journal of Interamerican Studies
 and World Affairs, 28(1):149­179.

Mainwaring, S. P. (1999). Rethinking Party Systems in the Third Wave of Democratization: the
 Case of Brazil. Stanford University Press, Stanford, California.


                                                28
Martinez-Bravo, M., Mukherjee, P., and Stegmann, A. (2017). The Non-Democratic Roots of Elite
 Capture: Evidence From Soeharto Mayors in Indonesia. Econometrica, 85(6):1991­2010.

Michels, R. (1911). Political Parties. The Free Press, New York.

Naritomi, J., Soares, R. R., and Assunção, J. J. (2012). Institutional Development and Colonial
  Heritage within Brazil. The Journal of Economic History, 72(2):393­422.

North, D. and Weingast, B. (1989). Constitutions and commitment: The evolution of institutions
  governing public choice in seventeenth-century england. The Journal of Economic History,
  49(4):803­832.

Nunn, N. (2008). The Long-term Effects of Africa's Slave Trades. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 123(1):139­176.

O'Donnell, G. (1979). Tensions in the bureaucratic-authoritarian state and the question of democ-
  racy. In Collier, D., editor, The New Authoritarianism in Latin America, Princeton, NJ. Princeton
  University Press.

Powell, G. (2000). Elections As Instruments of Democracy: Majoritarian and Proportional Visions.
  Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.

Power, T. J. (1997). Parties, puppets and paradoxes: Changing attitudes toward party institutional-
  ization in post-authoritarian brazil. Party Politics, 3(2):189­219.

Power, T. J. (2000). The Political Right in Postauthoritarian Brazil: Elites, Institutions, and De-
  mocratization. The Pennsylvania State University Press.

Przeworski, A. and Limongi, F. (1993). Political Regimes and Economic Growth. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 7(3):51­69.

Querubin, P. (2016). Family and Politics: Dynastic Persistence in the Philippines. Quarterly
  Journal of Political Science, 11(2):151­181.

Roett, R. (1999). Brazil: Politics in a Patrimonial Society. Praeger Publishers, Westport, CT.

Samuels, D. and Abrucio, F. L. (2000). Federalism and democratic transitions: The "new" politics
  of the governors in brazil. Publius, pages 43­61.

Sarles, M. J. (1982). Maintaining political control through parties: The brazilian strategy. Com-
  parative Politics, 15(1):41­72.




                                                29
Schmitter, P. C. (1973). The "portugalization" of brazi? In Stepan, A., editor, Authoritarian Brazil:
  Origins, Policies, and Future, New Haven, CT. Yale University Press.

Skidmore, T. E. (1988). The Politics of Military Rule in Brazil, 1964-1985. Oxford University
  Press, Oxford.

Soares, G. A. D. (1979). Military authoritarianism and executive absolutism in Brazil. Studies in
  Comparative International Development, 14(1).

Soares, G. A. D. (1982). The Brazilian political system: New parties and old cleavages. Luso-
  Brazilian Review, 19(1).

Sokoloff, K. L. and Engerman, S. L. (2000). Institutions, Factor Endowments, and Paths of Devel-
  opment in the New World. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3):217­232.

Stepan, A. (1973). Authoritarian Brazil: Origins, Policies, and Future. Yale Univeristy Press, New
  Haven, CT.

Stigler, G. (1972). Economic competition and political competition. Public Choice, 13(1):91­106.

Weyland, K. (2005). The Growing Sustainability of Brazil's Low-Quality Democracy, page 90­120.
 Cambridge University Press.

Willis, E., da C.B. Garman, C., and Haggard, S. (1999). Latin american research review. American
 Economic Review, 34(1):7­56.

Wittman, D. (1989). Why democracies produce efficient results. Journal of Political Economy,
 97(6):1395­1424.




                                                 30
                                               500       400
                                Number of Municipalities
                                   200       300
                                               100
                                               0




                                                               .2   .3         .4      .5       .6      .7        .8   .9   1
                                                                         Political Concentration Pre-Dictatorship




      Figure 1: Distribution of Pre-Dictatorship Political Concentration across Municipalities

Notes: This figure shows the histogram of municipalities by their level of political concentration pre-dictatorship,
which is measured by the Herfindahl index based on the share of terms governed by the same political family.




                                                                                        31
                                   Log Rental Prices 1940 (residual)
                                                                       1
                                                                       .5
                                                                       0
                                                                       -.5
                                                                       -1
                                                                       -1.5




                                                                              -20         0           20           40             60
                                                                                    Political Concentration Pre-Dict (residual)


                       Income Proxy in 1940 and Pre-Dictatorship Political Concentration
                                   Log Income pc 2000 (residual)
                                                                       .5
                                                                       .3
                                                                       .1
                                                                       -.1
                                                                       -.3
                                                                       -.5




                                                                              -20         0           20           40             60
                                                                                    Political Concentration Pre-Dict (residual)


                    Income per capita in 2000 and Pre-Dictatorship Political Concentration

     Figure 2: Reversal in the Relationship between Political Concentration and Development

 Notes: The first figure shows a binned scatter residual plot between log rental prices in 1940 and levels of political
concentration pre-dictatorship. The residuals are obtained after regressing each variable on distance to the state capital.
The second figure shows a similar residual plot, but showing log income per capita in 2000 in the y-axis.




                                                                                                    32
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics

Variable                                                  Obs      Mean       Std. Dev.      Min        Max


A. Measures of Political Power:
Political concentration pre-dictatorship                  1,072      0.325        0.118      0.156           1
Average family reelection rate pre-dictatorship           1,072      0.089        0.143          0       0.750
Average family reelection rate during dictatorship        1,072      0.082        0.161          0           1
Average family reelection rate post-dictatorship          1,072      0.091        0.212          0           1
At least one family transitions pre-dict to dic-          1,072      0.731        0.443          0           1
tatorship
At least one family transitions pre-dict to               1,072      0.439        0.497           0           1
democracy

B. Socieconomic Outcomes:
Income per capita (R$ monthly) 2000                       1,072   150.367       78.261     42.162     557.435
Years of Schooling 2000                                   1,072     3.789        1.139      1.283       8.134
Literacy Rate 2000                                        1,072     0.776        0.112      0.452       0.948
Infant Mortality 2000                                       930    33.738       46.043      1.812        1000
Number of Corrupt Irregularities                            172     4.219        0.480      3.135       5.666
Herfindahl Index Mayoral Election 2000                    1,072     0.495        0.115      0.206           1
Herfindahl Index Councilor Election 2000                  1,072     0.037        0.017      0.005       0.123
Number of Farms 1970                                      1,072   992.192      977.112         22        6085
Average Size of Farms 1970                                1,072   100.812      148.009      1.743        1966
Log Government Credit Per Farm 1970                       1,063     0.479        0.428          0       2.878
Number of Tractors per farm 1970                          1,072     0.015        0.033          0       0.378
Share of farms with access to electricty 1970             1,072     0.059        0.082          0       0.699
Share of farms that use fertilizer 1970                   1,072     0.251        0.271          0       0.995

C. Covariates:
Log rental prices 1940                                    1,072      9.01          1.34       5.53      14.60
Latitude                                                  1,072    -15.00          6.79     -22.85      -2.89
Longitude                                                 1,072     42.06          3.55      34.81      50.69
Distance to state capital (km/1000)                       1,072      0.24          0.13          0       0.71
Population 1940                                           1,072    30,625        19,495      3,444    211,377
Share of Employment in Agriculture 1940                   1,072      0.39          0.08       0.02       0.66
Illiteracy Rate 1940                                      1,072      0.72          0.11       0.23       0.94
Share of Blacks 1940                                      1,072      0.19          0.09       0.04       0.59
Share of Protestants 1940                                 1,072      0.01          0.02          0       0.15
Share of foreigners 1940                                  1,072      0.00          0.01          0       0.04
Sugar production per farm 1940                            1,072      0.07          0.15          0       1.59
Cotton production per farm 1940                           1,064      2.04          3.77          0      34.46
UDN in power pre-dictatorship                             1,067      0.38          0.49          0          1
PTB in power pre-dictatorship                             1,067      0.13          0.34          0          1

  Notes: This table shows descriptive statistics for our sample of municipalities. The unit of observation is the
  municipality.
                                                     33
                   Table 2: Correlates of Pre-Dictatorship Political Concentration

                                                           Dep Var: Political Concentration Prior to Dictatorship
                                                        Coefficient       Std. Error        Beta Coef.        P-value
                                                             (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)


Geographic Covariates:
Latitude                                                   -0.004           (0.003)           -0.250             0.054
Longitude                                                  0.000            (0.003)           0.000              0.999
Distance to state capital (km/1000)                        -0.031           (0.034)           -0.035             0.266
Minas Gerais indicator                                     0.019            (0.010)           0.078              0.006
Ceara indicator                                            0.000            (0.010)           0.001              0.976

Demographic & Economic Covariates (1940):
Log population                                             -0.033           (0.007)           -0.161             0.000
Illiteracy Rate                                            0.017            (0.038)           0.017              0.587
Share of Blacks                                            0.012            (0.045)           0.009              0.744
Share of Protestants                                       -0.163           (0.249)           -0.022             0.421
Share of foreigners                                        -0.534           (0.760)           -0.025             0.443
Share of agricultural employment                           0.133            (0.048)           0.093              0.001
Log rental prices                                          -0.016           (0.003)           -0.178             0.000

Additional Covariates:
Sugar production per farm in 1940                          0.037            (0.022)           0.047              0.017
Cotton production per farm in 1940                         0.003            (0.001)           0.080              0.024
Land Gini in 1940                                          -0.009           (0.054)           -0.007             0.841
UDN in power pre-dictatorship                              -0.015           (0.008)           -0.063             0.039
PTB in power pre-dictatorship                              0.018            (0.011)           0.053              0.069

  Notes: Each row reports the OLS estimate of regressing pre-dictatorship political concentration on the variable indi-
  cated in each row separately, while also controlling for state fixed effects. The unit of observation is the municipality.
  There are 1,072 observations included in each regression, except for land gini in 1940, which is only available for
  882 municipalities (noted by ). Column 1 shows the point estimate for the regressor of interest. Column 2 shows
  the corresponding standard error. Column 3 corresponds to the standardized-beta and column 4 to the corresponding
  p-value. Standard errors are clustered at the municipalities in existence in 1940. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                                        34
                    Table 3: Political Concentration and Long-Run Development

                                          Contemporaneous Relationships                         Reversal Results
                                  Log Rental      Share of Workers       Log Income       Log Income       Log Income
                                  Prices 1940     Non-Agric. 1940         pc 2000          pc 2000          pc 2000
                                      (1)                (2)                 (3)              (4)              (5)
Political Concentration:
Pre-dictatorship                   -0.637              -0.046                                0.117           0.182
                                    (0.220)             (0.018)                              (0.070)         (0.067)
Post-dictatorship                                                          -0.257
                                                                            (0.057)
Number of observations               1072                1072                1072             1072             1072
R2                                   0.69                0.40                 0.73             0.72            0.74
Mean of Dep. Var                     9.013               .614                4.868            4.868            4.868
Geographic Controls
Demographic Controls 1940
State FE
Socio-Economic Char. 1940
  Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. Each column corresponds to a separate regression where de-
  pendent variable is displayed in the column heading. All specifications include the following controls: geographic
  controls (longitude, latitude and distance to the state capital); demographic controls in 1940 (log population, share of
  protestants, share of black population, and share of foreigners); and state fixed effects. Column 5 additionally controls
  for socio-economic characteristics in 1940 (share of non-agricultural population and a quartic on log rental prices).
  Standard errors clustered at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 688 clusters. ***
  p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                                         35
Table 4: Political Concentration and Long-Run Development: Robustness

                                           Log Income per Capita 2000
                                 (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)
Political Concentration:
Pre-dictatorship              0.185        0.176       0.170       0.188       0.228
                              (0.067)      (0.066)     (0.067)     (0.066)     (0.070)
Number of observations          1059        1059        1059        1059          848
R2                              0.74        0.75        0.74        0.74         0.71
Mean of Dep. Var                4.872       4.872       4.872       4.872        4.988
Baseline controls
State Intercepts
Soil Quality
Agriculture Production
Political Controls
Land Gini
  Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The dependent variable is log in-
  come per capita in 2000. All the specifications include baseline controls, which are
  those included in specification in Table 3, column 5. Each specification adds additional
  controls as indicated in the table. Soil quality is measured by the percentage area in a
  municipality with regular and good soil types. Agricultural Production corresponds to
  the amount of sugar and cotton produced per farm in 1940. Political Controls corre-
  spond to indicators for whether the party of the last mayor before the dictatorship was
  a member of UDN or PTB (the omitted category corresponds to PSD). Land Gini cor-
  responds to the gini coefficient of land allocation in 1940. Standard errors clustered at
  the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 681 clusters in
  columns 1 to 4 and 608 clusters in column 5. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                          36
                              Table 5: Effects on Political Competition and Share of Non-Traditional Families

                                   Political Concentration           Average Family-Level              Herfindahl Index of             Share of Non-
                                         of Families                   Reelection Rate               Candidate Concentration        Traditional Families
                                                    Post-          Pre-                    Post-      Mayor         Councilor                     Post-
                                      Dict          Dict           Dict        Dict        Dict       2000            2000            Dict        Dict
                                      (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)             (7)            (8)          (9)
     Political Concentration:
     Pre-dictatorship              0.088            0.047       0.825        0.147         0.073     -0.059         -0.015          -0.049        0.084
                                   (0.033)         (0.040)      (0.046)      (0.046)      (0.061)     (0.026)        (0.004)        (0.065)      (0.070)
37




     Number of observations          1072          1072           1072         1072        1072        1072           1072           1072         1072
     R2                              0.098         0.118          0.473        0.057       0.067       0.069          0.298          0.089        0.093
     Mean of Dep. Var.               0.339         0.43           0.089        0.082       0.091       0.495          0.037          0.709        0.807
     Baseline controls
     State Intercepts
       Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 corresponds to the Herfindahl index of political
       concentration of families for the dictatorship and post-dictatorship period, respectively. The dependent variable in columns 3, 4 and 5 corresponds
       to the average reelection rate of incumbent families for the pre-dictatorship, dictatorship, and post-dictatorship period, respectively. The dependent
       variable in columns 6 and 7 corresponds to the Herfindahl index of concentration computed using the vote shares of different parties in the 2000
       election for mayor and local council, respectively. The dependent variables in columns 8 to 9 correspond to the share of non-traditional families as
       described in the column headings. Standard errors clustered at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 688 clusters.
       *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.
                  Table 6: Effects on Local Governance

                              Literacy Rate     Infant Mortality     Num. Corrupt
                                  2000               2000            Irregularities
                                   (1)                 (2)                (3)
Political Concentration:
Pre-dictatorship                 0.028              -17.479             -0.381
                                 (0.012)             (7.721)             (0.191)
Number of observations            1072                930                  172
R2                                0.829              0.023                0.621
Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.776              33.738               4.219
Baseline controls
State Intercepts
  Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The dependent variables in
  columns 1 to 3 correspond to different measures of quality of governance described
  in the column headings. The number of observations vary because of missing infor-
  mation in the dependent variable. All the specifications include baseline controls,
  which are those included in specification in Table 3, column 5. Standard errors clus-
  tered at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 688
  clusters in column 1. There are 647 clusters in column 2 and 155 in column 3. ***
  p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                        38
Table 7: Effects on the Adoption of Sublegenda Voting System

                                          During Dictatorship
                                 Any          ARENA            MDB
                              Sublegenda     Sublegenda      Sublegenda
                                  (1)            (2)             (3)
Political Concentration:
  Pre-dictatorship              0.215           0.263            0.087
                                (0.121)         (0.128)         (0.082)
Number of observations           1045            1045            1045
R2                               0.036           0.038           0.076
Mean of Dep. Var.                0.734           0.676           0.107
Baseline controls
State Intercepts
  Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The dependent vari-
  ables are indicators for whether municipalities adopted the sublegenda
  system in the 1972 or 1976 elections. The dependent variable in column
  1 takes value 1 if a sublegenda was adopted, regardless of the party that
  adopted it. The dependent variable in column 2 (3) takes value 1 if the
  ARENA (MDB) party adopted a sublegenda in the 1972 or 1976 election.
  The number of observations vary because of missing information in the de-
  pendent variable. All the specifications include baseline controls, which
  are those included in specification in Table 3, column 5. Standard errors
  clustered at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis.
  There are 667 clusters. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                   39
Table 8: Effects on Agricultural Credit and Entry of Agricultural Businesses in 1980

                              Log Credit per Farm       Number of Farms        Average Farm Size
                                Govt      Non-Govt
                                 (1)        (2)                  (3)                    (4)
Political Concentration:
Pre-dictatorship              0.666          0.464          664.111                   -41.183
                              (0.232)       (0.314)         (227.583)                (35.607)
Number of observations         1056          1056              1072                   1071
R2                             0.311         0.230            0.329                   0.261
Mean of Dep. Var.              3.629         1.317           1023.949                102.116
Baseline controls
State Intercepts
  Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The dependent variables are obtained from the
  1980 agricultural census and are described by the column headings. The number of observations
  vary because of missing information in the dependent variables. All specifications include baseline
  controls, which are those included in Table 3, column 5. Standard errors clustered at the municipal-
  ities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 680 clusters in columns 1 and 2, and 688
  clusters in columns 3 and 4. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                                40
                                   Table 9: Effects on Agricultural Modernization in 1980

                                            Agricultural Inputs                             Sector of Employment
                                   Tractors    Electricity   Fertilizer   Agriculture     Manufacturing       Services    Commerce
                                     (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)               (6)          (7)
     Political Concentration:
     Pre-dictatorship               0.022         0.018       0.115           -0.043           0.003          0.016         0.024
                                   (0.015)       (0.025)      (0.043)        (0.042)          (0.029)         (0.008)       (0.011)
     Number of observations         1071          1071         1071            957              957             957           957
41




     R2                             0.486         0.431        0.813          0.346            0.295           0.320         0.265
     Mean of Dep. Var.              0.057         0.110        0.444          0.870            0.065           0.023         0.042
     Baseline controls
     State Intercepts
       Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The dependent variables are obtained from the 1980 agricultural census
       and are described by the column headings. The number of observations vary because of missing information in the dependent
       variables. All specifications include baseline controls, which are those included in Table 3, column 5. Standard errors clustered
       at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 688 clusters in columns 1 to 3; and 655 clusters in
       columns 4 to 7. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.
Table 10: Robustness to Controlling for Agricultural Modernization

                                      Log Income Per Capita 2000
                                       (1)          (2)          (3)
      Political Concentration:
      Pre-dictatorship              0.175        0.147        0.163
                                    (0.068)      (0.066)      (0.066)
      Modernization Variables:
       Fertilizer 1980-1960                       0.099
                                                 (0.052)
       Tractors 1980-1960                        0.782
                                                 (0.183)
       Electricity 1980-1960                     0.515
                                                 (0.109)
       Agriculture 1980-1970                                 -1.159
                                                              (0.148)
       Commerce 1980-1970                                      0.437
                                                              (0.617)
       Services 1980-1970                                     1.293
                                                              (0.740)
      Number of observations           946         946           946
      R2                              0.730       0.754         0.765
      Mean of Dep. Var.               4.923       4.923         4.923
      Baseline controls
      State Intercepts
        Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The depen-
        dent variable is log income per capita in 2000. The number of
        observations vary because of missing information in some of the
        controls for agricultural modernization. All the specifications
        include baseline controls, which are those included in Table 3,
        column 5. Standard errors clustered at the municipalities in exis-
        tence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 659 clusters. ***
        p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                     42
6     Online Appendix [For Online Publication Only]

6.1   Additional Data Description

This section provides further information on the different data sources used in this paper. We
merged the different sources using municipality names or official identifiers. We use Brazil's Sta-
tistical Office (IBGE) historical files to trace municipal splits and merges, which were frequent
during our study period. This allows us to have information on the municipal borders at the begin-
ning of our sample period, i.e., 1940, which is the level we use to cluster the standard errors.


Political concentration and electoral outcomes. We collected data on the identity of all the
mayors that held office from 1947 to 2000 in the states of Ceará, Minas Gerais, and Paraíba. We se-
lected these states because they were the only ones that had information available. We downloaded
the data from the state-level Tribunal Regional Eleitoral. For Ceará, we obtained historical infor-
mation from http://www.tre-ce.jus.br/eleicao/resultados. For Minas Gerais the infor-
mation was available from http://www.tre-mg.jus.br/eleicoes/eleicoes-anteriores-1.
For Paraíba we obtained historical information from http://www.tre-pb.jus.br/eleicoes/
eleicoes-anteriores/resultados-de-eleicoes. These data also reported the party affilia-
tion of the winner. We use this information to construct our measure of the adoption of suble-
gendas. When candidates run under a sublegenda the party affiliation appears with a numerical
subindex (i.e., "1", "2", or "3"), which indicates that there were multiple contestants within that
party. For the states of Ceará and Paraíba, the electoral results during the dictatorship also in-
cluded the names and party affiliations of all contestants. With this information we could cre-
ate a more precise measure of whether parties adopted sublegenda and the type of contestants
in each party. Furthermore, for a subset of these municipalities we also have the vote shares
obtained for each candidate. To control for the political party that was in power before the dic-
tatorship, we use indicators for whether UDN, PSD, or PTB were in power in a given munici-
pality. We combine the existing state-level Tribunal Regional Eleitoral data with the publication
TSE- Dados Estatísticos, Eleições Federal, Estadual e Municipal, Departamento de Imprensa Na-
cional, Rio de Janeiro, available for multiple years. They have been digitized and are available at
http://bibliotecadigital.tse.jus.br/. Electoral data used to calculate the Herfindahl In-
dex for Mayoral and Councilor elections in 2000 was obtained from the Tribunal Superior Eleitoral
(TSE) at http://www.tse.jus.br/eleicoes/eleicoes-anteriores/eleicoes-2000.



                                                43
Agricultural and population census. We digitized a number of agricultural, industrial, and pop-
ulation censuses between 1940 and 2000. Data from population census between 1970 to 2000 are
available from Brazil's Statistical Office (IBGE) https://www.ibge.gov.br/estatisticas.
Previous agricultural and population censuses have been digitized and are available in pdf format
at https://biblioteca.ibge.gov.br/. Our main outcome of interest (log of income in 2000)
comes from the 2000 population census. We also obtain other long-run outcomes from the 2000
population census, such as years of schooling, literacy and infant mortality rates. As key covariates
we use a number of measures from the 1940 agricultural census, such as population size, employ-
ment rate, share of workers in the agricultural sector, average production of firms, and distribution
of farm sizes, from which we construct measures of Land Gini. To check the effects on government
credit and agricultural modernization we use agricultural census data from 1960, 1970, and 1980.


Data on Corruption. Our corruption measures are obtained from audit data from Brazil's fed-
eral audit program implemented by the Office of Comptroller-General (CGU). The program, named
Programa de Fiscalização por Sorteios Públicos (Monitoring Program with Public Lotteries), con-
sists of random audits of municipal governments for their use of federal funds. The lotteries are
held publicly in conjunction with the national lottery, and all municipalities with a population of
up to 500,000 inhabitants are eligible for selection. Starting with the 20th lottery in March 2006,
the CGU began to code the information used for the reports. For each inspection order, the dataset
contains information on the sector and government program, the amount transferred to the mu-
nicipality, and a list of findings. For each finding, the auditors describe the irregularity found and
classify it as: 1) an act of mismanagement (e.g. documents were not properly filled out, or improper
storage of food supplies and medical equipment), 2) act of moderate corruption, 3) act of severe
corruption. Based on this information, we construct measures of corruption at the municipality.
Our measure of corruption is the number of irregularities classified as either moderate or severe
based on audits that were conducted over 2005-2010. See Avis et al. (2018) for a more detailed
description of these data.


Soil Quality. We use information from Brazil's Statistical Office (IBGE) that classify soil types in
9 categories according to suitability. Data available at https://www.ibge.gov.br/geociencias.
We created the variable "share of area in a municipality with regular and good soil types" by adding
up the share of areas in categories regular, regular to good, good to regular and good soil type.




                                                 44
6.2    Robustness Check for Common Surnames

Our main measure of political concentration is constructed under the assumption that two mayors
that have the same surname are members of the same family. Given the history of the municipali-
ties in our sample, this seems a valid assumption. Most mayors have quite uncommon surnames,
which is indicative of an elite status. Nevertheless, occasionally some mayors have surnames that
are common in Brazil. To verify the robustness of our measure of political concentration, we re-
constructed family identifiers ignoring common surnames. More specifically, we assigned mayors
different family identifiers if they only share a common surname, such as Silva. The most com-
mon surnames in Brazil are Silva, Santos, Sousa, and Oliveira, which have population shares of
11%, 7%, 6%, and 3% respectively.25 We coded three alternative family identifiers: i. ignoring the
surname Silva; ii. ignoring the surnames Silva and Santos; and iii. ignoring the surnames Silva,
Santos, Sousa, and Oliveira. Note that in the latter case, none of the remaining surnames used to
construct the family identifier has a population share larger than 3%. Using each alternative family
identifier we computed a new measure of political concentration pre-dictatorship.

First, we note that the pairwise correlations between our baseline measure of political concentration
and the alternative ones are, 0.91; 0.90; and 0.85, for alternative family identifiers (i); (ii); and
(iii), respectively. These correlation coefficients are large, suggesting that the measure of political
concentration used in the paper is not subject to large measurement error due to common surnames.

Second, we verify that our main results are robust to using political concentration when ignor-
ing common surnames. The results are presented in Appendix Table A9. Panel A reproduces the
baseline results in the paper to facilitate the comparison. In Panel B we recompute political con-
centration ignoring the most common surname, i.e. Silva. In Panel C we ignore the two most
common surnames, i.e. Silva, Santos. In Panel D we ignore the four most common surnames, i.e.
Silva, Santos, Sousa, and Oliveira. As we can see our results are, to large extent, robust to these
alternative ways of measuring family relationships of mayors.




  25 Source:   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_most_common_surnames_in_South_America.

                                                  45
                          Share of Non-Agricultural Employment
                                                                 .1
                                                                 .05
                                    in 1940 (residual)
                                                                 0
                                                                 -.05
                                                                 -.1




                                                                        -20         0           20          40          60
                                                                              Political Concentration Pre-Dict (residual)


      Figure 3: Reversal in the Relationship between Political Concentration and Development

Notes: This figure shows a binned scatter residual plot between share of non-agricultural employment in 1940 and
levels of political concentration pre-dictatorship. The residuals are obtained after regressing each variable on distance
to the state capital.


6.3     Appendix Figures




                                                                                              46
                              Table A1: Examples of Political Dynasties


 Political     Election Year                 Name of Elected Mayor                      Family          Party
 Regime                                                                                Identifier
   (1)               (2)                                 (3)                              (4)             (5)


                            Panel A. Municipality of Carandai (Minas Gerais)
                    1947         BENJAMIM PEREIRA BAETA                                     1           PSD
                    1954         AGONCILO PEREIRA BAETA                                     1         PSD_PSP
  Pre-dict
                    1958         ABELARD RODRIGUES PEREIRA FILHO                            1           UDN
                    1962         BENJAMIM PEREIRA BAHIA                                     1           PSD

                    1966         PEDRO AMARAL                                               2        ARENA_1
                    1970         BENJAMIM TEIXEIRA DE CARVALHO                              3        ARENA_1
Dictatorship        1972         AGUINALDO PEREIRA BAETA                                    1        ARENA_1
                    1976         BENJAMIN TEIXEIRA DE CARVALHO                              3        ARENA_1
                    1982         AGOSTINHO CORSINO DE OLIVEIRA                              4        PMDB_1

                    1988         WALDEMAR BERTOLIN                                          5           PDC
                    1992         AGOSTINHO CORSINO DE OLIVEIRA                              4            -
Democracy
                    1996         PAULO ROBERTO BARBOSA DINIZ                                6          PMDB
                    2000         MOACIR TOSTES DE OLIVEIRA                                  4           PPS

                              Panel B. Municipality of Campos Sales (Ceara)


                    1947         HELIO LIMA                                                 1           UDN
                    1950         FRANCISCO VELOSO DE ANDRADE                                2           UDN
  Pre-dict
                    1954         HELIO LIMA                                                 1           UDN
                    1962         FRANCISCO VELOSO DE ANDRADE                                2           UDN

                    1966         FRANCISCO_JAIME DE ANDRADE                                 2          MDB
                    1970         HELDER MACARIO DE BRITO                                    3         ARENA
Dictatorship        1972         JOSE IRIS DE MORAIS                                        4         ARENA
                    1976         FRANCISCO DE PAULA FORTALEZA                               5         ARENA1
                    1982         JOSE IRIS DE MORAES                                        4          PDS-1

                    1988         JOSE LOURENCO ARRAIS                                       6           PFL
                    1992         FRANCISCO DE PAULA FORTALEZA                               5           PDT
Democracy           1996         PAULO NEY MARTINS                                          7        PDT/PSDB
                    2000         JOSE LOURENCO ARRAIS                                       6        PFL/PMDB

  Notes: This table illustrates the structure of our data on mayors using as an example two municipalities: Carandai
  in Panel A and Campos Sales in Panel B. Each row shows the information of the elected mayor in the correspond-
  ing local election.

                                                       47
    Table A2: Timing of Local Elections

Year    Ceara     Minas Gerais       Paraiba      Total
 (1)     (2)          (3)              (4)         (5)


1947     184           750             213       1,147
1949      0            91               0          91
1950     170            0               0         170
1951      0             0              221        221
1952      0             0              10          10
1953      0             0              10          10
1954     164           750              0         914
1955      0             0              217        217
1958     182           750              0         932
1959      0             0              213        213
1960      0             0              20          20
1962     184           746             58         988
1963      0            221             149        370
1964      0             6              30          36
1966     184           750             73        1,007
1968      0             0              156        156
1969      0             0              71          71
1970     184           738              0         922
1972     184           726             219       1,129
1976     183           751             219       1,153
1982     184           748             219       1,151
1984      1             0               3           4
1985      12            0               0          12
1988     184           752             216       1,152
1992     184           751             220       1,155
1996     184           750             221       1,155
2000     182           744             221       1,147

Total   2,550        10,024           2,979      15,553

  Notes: This table shows the frequency of local elec-
  tions held by calendar year in the three different states
  that are part of our sample. Column 4 shows the fre-
  quency of elections when adding up the three states.




                          48
Table A3: Correlates of Rental Prices in 1940

                              Log Rental Prices 1940
                                (1)           (2)
Share of Employment
not in Agriculture 1940       9.119
                              (0.603)
Literacy Rate 1940                         5.259
                                           (0.582)
Number of observations         1072          1072
R2                             0.41           0.28
Mean of Dep. Var               9.013         9.013
Mean of Indep. Var              .614          .284
State Intercepts
  Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality.
  Each column corresponds to a separate regression
  where dependent variable is regressed on the regres-
  sor displayed and state fixed effects. The dependent is
  the log of rental prices in 1940. Standard errors clus-
  tered at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown
  in parenthesis. There are 688 clusters. *** p<0.01, **
  p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                         49
                          Table A4: Summary Statistics: Elections during the Military Dictatorship

                            Number of    Share of Elections   Share of Elections    Share of Elections    Share of Elections
                            Elections     won by ARENA        with Sublegendas      with Sublegendas      with Sublegendas
                                                                                      conditional on       conditional on
                                                                                     ARENA victory          MDB victory
                                (1)             (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)
     Average during           999.69           0.87                  0.49                  0.51                  0.33
     the military dict.
50




      By election year:
     1966                      992             0.89                  0.52                  0.56                  0.22
     1968                      154             0.64                  0.36                  0.41                  0.25
     1969                       69             0.78                  0.35                  0.44                  0.00
     1970                      909             0.90                  0.38                  0.40                  0.23
     1972                      1120            0.87                  0.45                  0.46                  0.38
     1976                      1132            0.86                  0.61                  0.63                  0.47
       Notes: This table shows a number of summary statistics regarding elections during the dictatorship period. The first row
       provides averages of each statistic across all election years. The subsequent rows report statistics by election year.
                    Table A5: Sublegenda and ARENA's Vote Share

                                 ARENA vote share 1972              ARENA vote share 1976
                                    (1)              (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)
Sublegenda                       0.119                          0.182
                                 (0.027)                        (0.030)
ARENA Sublegenda                                0.198                        0.218        0.200
                                                 (0.021)                      (0.023)      (0.022)
MDB Sublegenda                                  -0.319                       -0.196       -0.142
                                                 (0.033)                      (0.026)      (0.026)
ARENA vote share in 1972                                                                  0.345
                                                                                           (0.059)
Number of observations             277             277             277          277          274
R2                                0.187           0.461           0.220        0.455        0.553
Mean of Dep. Var.                 0.722           0.722           0.731        0.731        0.733
Baseline controls
State Intercepts
  Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The sample is restricted to the municipalities in
  Ceará and Paraíba, for which we have information on vote shares of all contestants. The dependent
  variable in columns 1 and 2 is the vote share of the ARENA party in the 1972 election. The
  dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the vote share of the ARENA party in the 1976 election.
  This information was only available for 277 municipalities. All the specifications include baseline
  controls, which are those included in specification in Table 3, column 5. Standard errors clustered
  at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 183 clusters. *** p<0.01,
  ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                                51
                 Table A6: Effects on Type of Political Contestation

                                  Type of Contestants in ARENA party 1976 Election
                           Only traditional     Only non-traditional        Traditional and
                                elites                 elites             Non-traditional elites
                                 (1)                    (2)                       (3)
                                                    Panel A. All Elections
Political Concentration        -0.393**                 -0.110                    0.502*
Pre-dictatorship                [0.184]                 [0.326]                   [0.298]

Observations                      340                     340                       340
R-squared                        0.050                   0.111                     0.088
Mean                             0.144                   0.529                     0.326

                                      Panel B. Elections with ARENA sublegenda
Political Concentration        -0.560***                -0.122                    0.682*
Pre-dictatorship                 [0.196]                [0.379]                   [0.370]

Observations                      256                     256                       256
R-squared                        0.124                   0.170                     0.099
Mean                             0.129                   0.465                     0.406

                                    Panel C. Elections without ARENA sublegenda
Political Concentration          0.186                  -0.026
Pre-dictatorship                [0.536]                 [0.575]

Observations                      84                       84
R-squared                        0.188                   0.207
Mean                             0.190                   0.726

  Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The sample is restricted to the municipal-
  ities in Ceará and Paraíba, for which we have information on all contestants. The dependent
  variables are indicators for type of political contestation in the ARENA party during the 1976
  mayoral elections. In column 1 the dependent variable takes value 1 if only traditional elites
  contested, 0 otherwise. In column 2, the dependent variable takes value 1 if only non-traditional
  elites contested. In column 3, the dependent variable takes value 1 if there was contestation
  between traditional and non-traditional candidates. Panel A present the results for all municipal-
  ities. Panel B restrict the sample to municipalities that adopted the sublegenda system within the
  ARENA party. Panel C restrict the sample to municipalities that did not adopt the sublegenda
  system within the ARENA party. All the specifications include baseline controls, which are those
  included in specification in Table 3, column 5. Standard errors clustered at the municipalities in
  existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 188 clusters in panel A, 159 in panel B, and
  57 in panel C. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.


                                               52
Table A7: Effects on Agricultural Credit and Entry of Agricultural Businesses in 1970

                               Log Credit per Farm       Number of Farms        Average Farm Size
                                 Govt      Non-Govt
                                  (1)        (2)                  (3)                    (4)
 Political Concentration:
 Pre-dictatorship              0.264         -0.019          653.002                   -30.614
                               (0.094)       (0.046)         (211.516)                (28.764)
 Number of observations         1063          1063              1072                   1072
 R2                             0.366         0.172             0.319                  0.292
 Mean of Dep. Var.              0.479         0.125            992.192                100.812
 Baseline controls
 State Intercepts
   Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The dependent variables are obtained from
   the 1970 agricultural census and are described by the column headings. The number of observa-
   tions vary because of missing information in the dependent variable. All the specifications include
   baseline controls, which are those included in specification in Table 3, column 5. Standard errors
   clustered at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 683 clusters in
   columns 1 and 2 and 688 clusters in columns 3 and 4. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.




                                                 53
                                   Table A8: Effects on Agricultural Modernization in 1970

                                             Agricultural Inputs                              Sector of Employment
                                   Tractors     Electricity    Fertilizer   Agriculture     Manufacturing       Services     Commerce
                                     (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)               (6)           (7)
     Political Concentration:
     Pre-dictatorship                -0.004        0.005       0.093           -0.043            0.019           0.011          0.013
                                    (0.006)       (0.016)      (0.046)        (0.034)           (0.026)          (0.006)       (0.009)
     Number of observations          1072          1072          1072           957               957              957           957
54




     R2                              0.329         0.522         0.676         0.362             0.284            0.308         0.303
     Mean of Dep. Var.               0.015         0.059         0.251         0.896             0.045            0.020         0.038
     Baseline controls
     State Intercepts
       Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The dependent variables are obtained from the 1970 agricultural census
       and are described by the column headings. The number of observations vary because of missing information in the dependent
       variable. All the specifications include baseline controls, which are those included in specification in Table 3, column 5. Standard
       errors clustered at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. There are 688 clusters in columns 1 to 3 and 655
       in coluns 4 to 7. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.
                              Table A9: Robustness Check for Common Surnames

                                                                    Dependent Variables:
                                    Herfindahl Index
                Log Income             Candidate               Literacy         Infant           Number of             ARENA              Log Gov
                 per Capita          Concentration              Rate           Mortality           Corrupt            Sublegenda           Credit
                   2000              Mayor (2000)               2000             2000           Irregularities           2000              1980
                     (1)                   (2)                    (3)             (4)                (5)                  (6)               (7)
                                                                 Panel A. Baseline Results
Pol Conc.
Pre-dict.         0.182***                -0.059**             0.028**         -17.479**           -0.381**             0.263**           0.666***
                   (0.067)                 (0.026)             (0.012)           (7.721)            (0.191)             (0.128)            (0.232)

Obs                 1,072                    1,072               1,072             930                172                 1,045             1,056
R-squared           0.744                    0.069               0.829            0.023              0.621                0.038             0.311

                                              Panel B. Robustness to ignoring most common surname
Pol Conc.
Pre-dict.         0.171***                -0.055**               0.017         -14.703*            -0.404**              0.239*           0.912***
                   (0.063)                 (0.027)              (0.011)         (7.702)             (0.196)              (0.127)           (0.239)

Obs                 1,072                    1,072               1,072             930                172                 1,045             1,056
R-squared           0.744                    0.069               0.828            0.022              0.622                0.037             0.315

                                             Panel C. Robustness to ignoring 2 most common surname
Pol Conc.
Pre-dict.         0.173***                -0.059**               0.018         -14.637*            -0.432**              0.245*           0.901***
                   (0.063)                 (0.028)              (0.011)         (7.674)             (0.194)              (0.127)           (0.237)

Obs                 1,072                    1,072               1,072             930                172                 1,045             1,056
R-squared           0.744                    0.069               0.828            0.022              0.623                0.037             0.315

                            Panel D. Robustness to ignoring surnames with higher than 3% population share
Pol Conc.
Pre-dict.         0.157**                    -0.052*           0.023**         -15.377**          -0.533***             0.265**           0.858***
                  (0.064)                    (0.029)           (0.012)           (7.436)            (0.188)             (0.125)            (0.250)

Obs                 1,072                    1,072               1,072             930                172                 1,045             1,056
R-squared           0.744                    0.069               0.828            0.022              0.627                0.038             0.314

  Notes: The unit of observation is the municipality. The dependent variables are the same as those described in previous tables. Panel A shows the
  baseline results for comparison. Panel B uses as main regressor a measure of political concentration coded such that mayors that share the most
  common surname (i.e. Silva) are not assumed to belong to the same political family. Panel C proceeds in a similar way ignoring surnames Silva and
  Santos. Panel D proceeds in a similar way ignoring surnames Silva, Santos, Sousa, and Oliveira. The number of observations vary because of missing
  information in the dependent variable. All the specifications include baseline controls, which are those included in specification in Table 3, column
  5. Standard errors clustered at the municipalities in existence in 1940 shown in parenthesis. See previous table notes for indications on the number of
  clusters. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *p<0.1.
                                                                    55
