                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TOWARDS A DYNAMIC DISEQUILIBRIUM THEORY WITH RANDOMNESS

                                       Martin M. Guzman
                                       Joseph E. Stiglitz

                                      Working Paper 27453
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27453


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We are grateful for the financial support of the Institute for New Economic Thinking The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Martin M. Guzman and Joseph E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Towards a Dynamic Disequilibrium Theory with Randomness
Martin M. Guzman and Joseph E. Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 27453
June 2020
JEL No. E0

                                          ABSTRACT

Most macroeconomic crises, such as the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, are associated with
endogenous large changes in beliefs and understandings about the workings of the economy.
Such downturns and crises are not consistent with the standard paradigm of a well-functioning
competitive economy, and macroeconomic equilibrium models based on that paradigm have
failed to predict the possibility of those downturns, to explain them, or even to design appropriate
policy responses. The framework assumes there are no macroeconomic inconsistencies--all plans
are realized, all budget constraints honored.

In this paper, we present a dynamic disequilibrium theory with randomness that is based on the
premise that a better way to understand deep downturns is to think of the economy experiencing a
constant evolution, marked by uncertainty, in which there is continual learning about the
economic system. Our framework explains why macroeconomic inconsistencies may arise and
investigates their consequences. We explain why decentralized market forces may be
disequilibrating. We identify the crucial departures from the Arrow-Debreu assumptions and
those underlying DSGE models, emphasizing the limitations in the assumption of equilibrium and
the absence of a coherent theory of how it is attained, the incompleteness of markets and the non-
stationarity of the stochastic processes describing the economy. We analyze the policy
implications of this alternative theory, which typically differ markedly from those of the standard
model: In particular, the consequences for the effectiveness of different monetary and fiscal
policies, and the eventual need of debt restructuring policies to restore macroeconomic
consistency.


Martin M. Guzman
Columbia University Business School
Economics Division
Uris Hall Room 126
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and University of Buenos Aires (IIEP-BAIRES)
mg3463@columbia.edu

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu
The central problem of macroeconomics is to explain the large, deep, and often persistent
downturns, accompanied by high levels of unemployment, that episodically afflict capitalist
economies. Macroeconomic crises are extreme examples of economic fluctuations. But they are
the most relevant. They are the events that teach the most about the stability properties of the
economic system, in a way that small inventory cycles do not. And they are the events that matter
the most for the lives of millions of people.

Some crises are simply the result of external shocks, for instance, a natural disaster that destroys a
large part of the country's infrastructure or an unexpected change in global conditions or a
coronavirus pandemic. But most macroeconomic crises are of a different nature; they are
associated with endogenous large changes in beliefs and understandings about the workings of the
economy. The 2008 U.S. Great Recession, the crises of Argentina in 2001 and 2018, and the Greek
crisis from 2008 and onwards are examples. In none of these cases can there be identified an
exogenous technology shock that tripped the economy from prosperity into a deep downturn. All
those events show a malfunctioning of the economic system, characterized by bankruptcies and
defaults--in some of those cases, even defaults by the sovereign government--as well as by high
and persistent unemployment. These are the kind of events that constitute the object of this study.



Such downturns and crises are not consistent with the standard paradigm of a well-functioning
competitive economy, and macroeconomic equilibrium models based on that paradigm, including
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models incorporating wage rigidities and other
frictions, are widely recognized (except by the practitioners of those models) to have failed to
predict the possibility of those downturns, to explain them, or even to design appropriate policy
responses.1 We are forced to think beyond the standard paradigm, to identify which of the many
unrealistic assumptions of those models, are the most crucial. Is it rational expectations? The
assumption of a representative agent? of the absence of asymmetric information?                                                 of perfect
competition? that the only, or the most important, shocks giving rise to fluctuations are exogenous
technology shocks--rather than those created by the market itself, like (to mention an obvious


1
 See, for instance, Colander et al. (2008), as well as the papers from the Oxford Review of Economic Policy Issue on Rebuilding Macroeconomic
Theory, including Blanchard (2018), Haldane and Turrell (2018), Hendry and Muellbauer (2018), Reis (2018), Lindé (2018), McKibbin and
Stoeckel (2018), and Vines and Wills (2018a, 2018b) for criticisms of the benchmark DSGE models, analyses of elements that macroeconomic
models should take into account, as well as a defense of at least some of the building blocks of those models for macroeconomic analysis and of
current macroeconomic modeling.



                                                                      2
example) a housing bubble? Or that the economy is always in macroeconomic equilibrium, in
which all consistency conditions are satisfied? Some advocates of DSGE models have gone so far
as to suggest that changes in any of these assumptions can easily be incorporated into a DSGE
model, and that good macroeconomics of necessity must be DSGE.2 Of course, to the extent that
anything can be incorporated into a model, it is not a model: a model has to represent a restriction
on the set of possible worlds.

As Stiglitz (2018) argued, the criticism of the DSGE approach was not that it simplified the world,
but that it made the wrong simplifications; and no Ptolemaic attempts to "fix" the model were
likely to generate one that provides real insights into deep downturns. Inherent in any DSGE
model is the assumption that they economy is always in equilibrium. But the DSGE models
themselves do not provide any theory of how that equilibrium is instantaneously attained in spite
of the sometimes large shocks which might buffet the economy; the equilibrium hypothesis looks
not only inaccurate but, especially outside of representative agent models, simply implausible; and
to hold to it requires a high level of cognitive dissonance: it requires believing that, the moment
after a crisis, like that of 2008, which showed that the economy was not on an equilibrium
trajectory, faith in the equilibrium construct is so strong as to believe that, from that date on
forevermore the economy will be on an equilibrium trajectory, never again to experience another
off-equilibrium event such as that just encountered.

This paper thus focuses on the "E" of DSGE: we argue that a better way to understand deep
downturns is to think of the economy experiencing a constant evolution, marked by high levels of
uncertainty, in which there is continual learning about the economy and the economic system.
Occasionally, something happens to make it clear that the beliefs of at least many market
participants were wrong--so wrong that there is what we call a significant macroeconomic
inconsistency, where contracts are systematically broken and plans get revised in ways that were
not fully anticipated. Before that realization, of course, market participants may have believed
that they were on an equilibrium trajectory, but it then becomes clear that they weren't. And after
that realization, the economy may not return quickly to a new "equilibrium." Indeed, we show
that there may be strong forces at play that move the economy away from equilibrium. Thus, we
argue, macroeconomic analysis needs dynamic disequilibrium theories with randomness rather


2
    For instance, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2018).



                                                                 3
than just DSGE theories. What is also needed is an analysis of real dynamics, including the forces
that might either restore the economy to some equilibrium when facing perturbations that reveal
that the economy is not in equilibrium; rather than the hypothesized dynamics along an imaginary
dynamic trajectory in which the economy is always in equilibrium ad infinitum--until it's not.
These crucial events and what happens then are not even conceivable within the ambit of the DSGE
model.

In explaining deep downturns, we thus need to understand (a) how the market economy generates
such large fluctuations in aggregate demand, disproportionate to any exogenous shocks in the "real
variables," large enough that they are associated high unemployment; and (b) the dynamics of
adjustment: why they are such that high levels of unemployment can persist.3 A dynamic
disequilibrium theory with randomness provides insights into the underlying economic processes
in ways that the DSGE models cannot.



Dynamic Disequilibrium with randomness vs. DSGE. It is, of course, natural to try to explain the
problem of unemployment focusing on the functioning of the labor market, with an emphasis on
rigidities which prevent the restoration of full employment when the demand for labor decreases.4
This view, we believe, is at best incomplete and misleading. While labor market adjustments might
work in "normal" times, they are likely to fail when there are excessively large adjustments in
aggregate demand. The hypothesis that we pursue in this paper is that to understand economic
crises and large fluctuations--both the emergence and propagation of macroeconomic
instability--one should focus on the instability of the aggregate demand rather than just on the
labor market frictions.




3
  We have not defined what this means, i.e. what would be a "quick" restoration of full employment. But clearly, the ten years it took the US
economy to come back to something like normality after the 2008 crisis (though even then the employment ratio remained markedly below what it
was before the onset of the crisis), and the long duration of the Great Depression and the Euro crisis are beyond what one would have expected of
an efficient and stable system. At the very least, the magnitude of the suffering and lost output from the slow return to normality raises the question
of whether there might be interventions that might have reduced both. General theorems concerning economic inefficiencies in the presence of
macroeconomic externalities implies that there is a presumption that there exists such interventions. The question is, can we identify them; and to
do that, we have to understand better the short run dynamics, one of the objectives of this paper. (Macroeconomic externalities are simply the
macroeconomic representations of the pecuniary and other externalities that almost inevitably arise in the presence of incomplete markets,
information imperfections, credit and collateral constraints, search, and efficiency wage effects, noted by Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986, 1988b) and
Arnott, Greenwald and Stiglitz (1994). See, for instance, Dávila and Korinek (2017), Korinek (2018a), Jeanne and Korinek (2018).
4
  Today, these distortions are typically referred to as frictions. Such frictions, of course, mark all economies, whether at or below full employment;
asymmetries of information are pervasive, and whenever they exist, markets are not (constrained) Pareto efficient (Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1986).
This paper is concerned not with these ever-present market failures, but the much deeper failures associated with crises and deep downturns.



                                                                          4
By construction, macroeconomic instability and disequilibrium are absent from the standard
benchmark frameworks of neoclassical economic theory, like the Arrow-Debreu complete markets
framework or the environment postulated by DSGE models. Arrow-Debreu theorems rely on the
assumption of the existence of a complete set of markets, which implies that nothing constitutes a
perturbation and that there are never situations in which the set of plans turn out to be inconsistent
with the set of budget constraints of the market participants--implying that there are never defaults
or bankruptcies.5 While DSGE models do not generally assume a complete set of Arrow-Debreu
securities, they generally assume that transversality conditions hold in every possible state,
implying a similar result. By contrast, the extreme macroeconomic dysfunctions with which we
are concerned are marked by defaults and bankruptcies, sometimes touching large fractions of the
economy.6

Under incomplete markets, it is not possible to check that all plans will be consistent in every state,
and it is likely that they will be revealed not to be in some state at some date. Because of the
absence of futures markets, we simply can't tell whether, given individuals' plans, there would be
market clearing in those markets, were they to have existed.

Of course, in a representative agent model, there is no problem in ascertaining the consistency of
plans--there is no need for markets, and therefore no consequence of the absence of markets. But
when agents differ, there may be no way for them to know future plans of other agents, and
therefore no way for them to know--in the absence of markets extending infinitely far into the
future--that they are consistent. DSGE models assume magically that somehow agents solve this
infinitely complicated problem without any coordination mechanism. And, even without knowing
production functions and preferences of others, they constantly resolve this problem every moment
as the economy experiences different technology shocks. Whether there is a stationary world in




5
  Of course, with representative agent models, apart from the costs of bankruptcy, defaults and bankruptcy don't matter: the individual owes money
to himself, and therefore there are no redistributive consequences of his not paying himself. Even HANK models, attempting to incorporate
distribution, don't provide a framework for analyzing the emergence and propagation of macroeconomic inconsistencies. As we note below, the
macroeconomic consequences of costly bankruptcies in a world of interdependent firms, financial institutions, and households entails the analysis
large macroeconomic externalities, typically giving rise to multiple equilibria.
6
  We've been tempted to add a "G" at the beginning: A Dynamic General Disequilibrium model with randomness. We want to emphasize that
we provide here an approach to the analysis of deep downturns that accounts for general interdependencies. Each crisis, each depression, each
deep recession is different, and has its own idiosyncratic features. The breaking of the housing bubble was different from the breaking of the tech
bubble, which in turn was different from crises at other times and places. Still, there are some commonalities among all of these, most importantly
the revelation that previous plans of at least large numbers of individuals were inconsistent with reality; and the increased uncertainty and revised
world views associated with that revelation, leading to large decreases in aggregate demand and employment.




                                                                         5
which that assumption might make sense is not our concern here7: we live in a non-stationary
world which is constantly evolving, and it is clear that in such a world the assumption of ever-
present equilibrium does not make sense.

Essential ingredients

Thus, the essential ingredients in the analysis to follow are (i) an incomplete set of markets; (ii)
individual heterogeneity; and (iii) an evolving economy where individuals are constantly learning,
about the structure of the economy and the behavior of agents within it. This learning, of course,
affects behavior, leading, in turn, to further evolution of the economic system. We'll say more
about the evolutionary and learning processes later in the paper8, but here, we need to say a bit
more about agent heterogeneity. Individuals differ in preferences, endowments, and beliefs. In a
complete set of markets, all the relevant information is conveyed through prices; but with an
incomplete set of markets, this is not so. With heterogeneity, some individuals are creditors (or
otherwise provide capital); others are debtors. There is always counterparty risk: the creditor is
never fully sure that the contract will be fully honored. The debtor may believe he will honor
contract, but whether he is willing and able to do so will depend on future contingencies--
including whether the contracts he may have made with others are honored.

Because the economy is always evolving, there is always learning9; and because of persistence of
incomplete information and information asymmetries--different individuals see and perceive
different information and process it differently, so there is persistence in differences in beliefs--
we never attain the utopia envisaged by DSGE models of common knowledge.10 Individuals are
exposed to different signals and process the information in different ways.

In the absence of economic evolution, we would presumably eventually learn fully about the
economy, but because the economy is always evolving, there is always learning; and large events-




7
  In particular, a large and important literature by Guesnerie and his co-authors (Guesnerie (1992), Evans and Guesnerie (2003, 2005)) has shown
that plausible economic systems do not exhibit what he calls eductive stability.
8
  Our work builds on a wealth of analyses of analyses of evolutionary analyses in economics, including work by Nelson and Winter (1982). For an
early review, see Dosi and Nelson (1994).
9
   Because there is always uncertainty, because the economy is always evolving (because of changes in technology and changes in beliefs, and
because those changes in technology and beliefs may induce further changes in institutional arrangements--inducing further changes in technology
and beliefs), and because the economy is so complex that, even in the absence of changes in underlying technology, there is likely to be a process
of ever-lasting learning and evolution, but even more so in the presence of such changes. See the discussion in section 3.
10
   There is a large literature detailing the stringent conditions required to achieve common knowledge, dating back to Aumann's (1976) work on
Common Knowledge. See, e.g. Milgrom and Stokey (1982) and Neeman (1996). There is compelling empirical evidence against the hypothesis of
common knowledge. See Guzman and Stiglitz (2016a).



                                                                        6
-crises and other events that reveal that pre-existing assumptions about the economy are not
valid11-- may give rise to large changes in beliefs.12

The complexity of the economy13 makes learning about the structure of the economy all the more
difficult and gives rise to complex dynamics; this, combined with differences in beliefs, can easily
give rise to situations where systemically contracts are not honored--there is a crisis. While these
are not everyday occurrences, they occur with sufficient frequency and have sufficiently adverse
consequences that understanding them is, or at least should be, the center of macroeconomists'
attention.

The limitations of market mechanisms to coordinate inter-temporally the actions and decisions of
the interacting economic decision makers onto a stable path of aggregate demand was, of course,
a central concern of macroeconomic theory in the years that followed the Great Depression.
Keynes wrote before Kenneth Arrow and Gérard Debreu's fundamental theorems of welfare
economics, and so he did not have the powerful apparatus provided by Arrow and Debreu that has
been so extensively used by the mainstream literature since the mid 1950s to pin down what
deviations from the perfect markets benchmark could lead to the observed frequent and persistent
macroeconomic dysfunctions. Unfortunately, the mainstream macroeconomics literature that
followed from the late `70s on, by assuming that the system is always in a state of macro-
consistency, simply assumed away the most important questions of the field. Under that
assumption, it became natural to find in frictions like price rigidities14 a culprit for the
malfunctioning of the economic system. While even analyses of the Great Depression documented
very large adjustments in wages and price, the single minded focus on wage and price rigidities
became increasingly untenable as policymakers in the aftermath of the Great Recession became
preoccupied with the risks of deflation, suggesting that they at least did not believe that wage and
price rigidity was the crucial issue.15 In this paper for a special issue on "Towards Better

11
   In particular, in the discussion below we focus on the macroeconomic inconsistencies revealing discrepancies between individual's plans and
what can actually be realized.
12
   With a fixed economic structure, agents' knowledge may converge to full structural knowledge. See for instance Boz, Daude, and Durdu (2011)
and Guzman and Howitt (2016). For a general analysis of the conditions under which models with learning for formation of expectations exhibit
expectational stability, see Evans and Honkapohja (2001).
13
   Battiston et al. (2016) explain how complexity gives rise to instability; and Roukny , Battiston, and Stiglitz (2018) explain that in complex
systems, it may simply impossible to ascertain systemic fragility. Dosi et al (2020) illustrate the difficulties of learning about the structure of an
ever-evolving complex economic system in the presence of changes in technology.
14
   Typically explained in an ad hoc way, such as that there are large "menu costs." Uncertainties, including those associated with the revelation of
macroeconomic inconsistencies discussed below, provide a more plausible explanation. See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1989).
15
   Greenwald and Stiglitz (1988a) present data for the Great Depression suggesting that wage and price rigidity were not the critical issue in that
episode. Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993a) explained why increased wage and price flexibility might exacerbate economic downturns. See the more
extensive discussion of Fisherian dynamics below, and the analysis of Solow and Stiglitz (1968).



                                                                          7
Macroeconomic Theory and Policy-making", we analyze what we consider to be the fundamental
premises that macroeconomic theories that intend to shed light on macroeconomics' most
important problems need to take into account, doing so in the language of modern mainstream
macroeconomics.

Outline

This paper tackles themes that we consider fundamental for a research program for
macroeconomics--an analysis that complements that of Stiglitz (2018). The rest of the paper is
organized in six sections besides this introduction and the conclusion. Section 2 describes the
benchmark models which have informed thinking about macroeconomics and macroeconomic
dysfunctions, explaining the critical role of incomplete markets and the macroeconomic
inconsistencies which result. Section 3 provides a more precise characterization of the concept of
macroeconomic inconsistencies. Second 4 asks: Is the market economy stable? Section 5 focuses
on macroeconomic uncertainty, formation of expectations and learning, and macroeconomic
forecasting.          Section 6 focuses on policy, asking: What determines the effectiveness of the
different macroeconomic policies? And are there macroeconomic interventions to stabilize the
system that are welfare-enhancing? Finally, section 7 offers the conclusions of our analysis.



     II.        Macroeconomics in traditional benchmark models

Thinking about macroeconomy dysfunctions over the past third of a century has been greatly
influenced by two benchmark models, in neither of which aggregate demand instability arises.

For the general equilibrium theorist, the Arrow-Debreu model is the loadstone for understanding
all deviations from perfection, from the ideal world with no unemployment, no credit rationing,
and in which observed fluctuations in the momentary equilibrium can be related to changes
(fundamentally, fully anticipated as one of the possible states of nature) in underlying parameters
of the economy (e.g. technology shocks). In a world of complete markets16, in which all individuals
live within their individual budget constraints in all states of nature, there cannot be

16
   A complete market is one in which there are contracts for every state of nature at every date--a complete set of Arrow-Debreu securities. There
are several other characteristics of this ideal world: perfect information, no externalities, no market power, and a costless adjustment of market
prices.
    Note that there can exist costly adjustments of physical quantities. A well-functioning economy takes such costs into account. The price system
is supposed to coordinate and take into account these adjustment costs. Impediments to the adjustment of prices means that they cannot perform
these roles, or at least not as well as assumed in traditional models.



                                                                        8
macroeconomic inconsistencies--i.e. states in which plans become inconsistent in the aggregate
with the relevant resource constraints. There are no broken contracts, as every contingent Arrow-
Debreu contract stipulates payoffs that satisfy all the resource constraints in every possible state.
The transversality conditions hold in every possible trajectory of states of nature.



     II.         1. Contrasting reality with the implications of benchmark models

The reasons why there are not a complete set of markets should be obvious. In a non-stationary
environment, there would have to be an infinite set of markets, and even if the costs of establishing
a market were small, the total costs would be disproportionate to the benefit. The assumption of
complete markets requires that market participants have full knowledge of the space of states, from
now on ad infinitum. In a deep sense, it assumes an economy in which there are no innovations.
Everything that can ever happen is considered as a possibility from the moment when the market
is completed. One has to have a market for the creation of atomic energy before the concept has
been conceived.17 18

As we have already noted, when a full set of Arrow-Debreu markets is lacking, there is no way to
be sure that plans are consistent except in very peculiar circumstances, to be delineated below;
indeed, it would take a miracle to ensure that they are consistent for all states and dates. (In general,
moreover, the discrepancies between previously formed expectations/plans and realities are such
that plans are not consistent in the aggregate). Changes in perceptions about the sustainability of
the financial relations may then switch the economy from one path in which, for instance, there is
willingness to rollover loans to another, where solvency may become an even more dubious
proposition and relatedly liquidity gets squeezed, triggering a financial crisis that includes
widespread bankruptcies and defaults.19



17
   Moreover, the states as conceived by Arrow and Debreu were supposed to be exogenous. States that are based on innovation are endogenous, so
for the AD model to apply, it has to be the case that the "arrival" of these ideas is totally exogenous, and we have to have Arrow-Debreu securities
based on the arrival of a particular (still unknown) idea at any particular date. It is in fact hard to reconcile the premise of a full knowledge of the
space of the states with evolutionary theories in which innovations are the consequence of processes (as in Dosi (1988), Nelson and Winter (1977)),
as well as with Schumpeterian creative destruction theories (as in Aghion and Howitt (1992, 2008)), all of which are related to the premise of an
evolutionary environment on which our analysis is based.
18
   It requires too either a system of enforcement with unlimited capacity but a low cost; or some other way of achieving unlimited commitment to
honor promises--the structure assumes not only that all promises can be honored, but that they will be honored.
19
   In this paper, we do not develop a full- blown theory of expectations formations, and therefore do not explain why there often appears to be a
sudden realization of macroeconomic inconsistencies (highlighted in the sudden-stop literature (Calvo (1988)), rather than a more gradual
realization, which might afford more time for adjustment, thereby avoiding a crisis. Clearly, herding behavior and the fact that beliefs are
interdependent form part of the answer (see Banerjee (1992) for an analysis of herding behavior in financial economics).



                                                                          9
While we noted earlier that the large majority of economic crises were not associated with major
changes in the underlying physical state variables--there have been no discoveries of new
technology or major war or exogenous event (famine or crop failure) that precipitated most of the
major fluctuations and macroeconomic crises over the last century in industrial economies--many
of the major macroeconomic events are characterized by large changes of the dominant social
beliefs about the future of the economy, as for instance about the returns on particular classes of
assets or about future output. These changes in beliefs, in turn, have large effects on
contemporaneous aggregate demand, which, in turn, have typically reinforced both the changes in
beliefs and the downturn.

The 2008 U.S. financial crisis, for example, was not based on a sudden negative TFP shock.20
Rather, it was based on a change of beliefs of investors and lenders, for instance, a changed
subjective distribution of changes in housing prices and, relatedly, of the likelihood of mortgages
going into default.21

So too, many of the sudden stops associated with capital flows in emerging markets are not
predictable--that's why they're called sudden stops--and, beliefs aside, typically there is no
identifiable exogenous event representing a changed "state of nature" that can account for the
dramatic behavioral changes that in turn have enormous impacts for the aggregate economy.



II.        2. Beliefs and macroeconomic consistency
Simple benchmarks are useful, but they must be used wisely, with awareness of the limitations
that their assumptions imply. While intertemporal general equilibrium models most often do
assume that markets are incomplete, they most often also impose the condition that solvency will
hold in every possible state at all dates (or equivalently that in every state of nature, no individual
can consume more than the present discounted value (PDV) of his income by borrowing and not
repaying what is owed). This is equivalent to imposing the condition that macroeconomic




20
   On the contrary, it has been shown that the behavior of productivity clearly excludes the possibility that a negative shock to technology could
have been the initial cause of the recession (Jermann and Quadrini, 2012).
21
   Similarly, in the more than thirty years since the 23 per cent fall in the in the Dow Jones on October 18, 1987 (Bernhardt and Eckblad, 2013), it
has proven impossible to identify a "real shock" that could account for the changes in valuations anywhere near this magnitude. But standard
economic theory makes clear that a change in wealth perceptions of that magnitude should lead to marked changes in aggregate demand.



                                                                        10
consistency will always hold (or that the transversality condition holds in every state of nature).
In the simplest versions, assumptions are made so that default simply cannot arise.22

In the class of models where there are defaults, a default is never the consequence of a change in
the understanding of market participants about the functioning of the economy (with the resulting
change in behavior), but simply the realization of a shock the occurrence of which everyone knew
ex-ante would result in a default. In a deep sense, then, even in variants of equilibrium models that
allow for defaults there are no problems of macroeconomic consistency. When there is a default,
someone will have a PDV of consumption larger than the PDV of her income and someone else
will experience the opposite situation, and there may be a limited impact on aggregate demand
associated with differences in, say, marginal propensities to consume out of wealth. But in those
models, this risk is ex-ante rationally anticipated and reflected in market prices. 23 It is as if there
had been an implicit bet on a (set of) state of nature occurring, and the occurrence of that event
triggers a payment. Formulated that way, there is in fact no macro-inconsistency.24

Furthermore, and most importantly, the realizations of different states of nature do not teach
anything deep about the way the economy works. There is no change in beliefs. In the extreme
case of rational expectations, all reduced-form structural parameters of the actual data generating
process are known. Former Fed chairman Greenspan's mea culpa in the aftermath of the 2008 U.S.
financial crisis provides a useful illustration of this point. In his comments at a hearing at the U.S
House of Representatives, he explained that he was "in a state of shocked disbelief" about his prior
view of the world "because I have been going for 40 years or more with very considerable evidence
that it was working exceptionally well." (Greenspan (2008))

Furthermore, in an evolving system it takes time for market participants to understand the full
implications of the ongoing changes. For instance, prior to the Great Recession market participants
seemed to have believed that the new financial products that resulted from financial innovation
had fundamentally transformed the economy. But a few short years of data under the new regime

22
   This is the case, for instance, in the representative agent model. An economy in which there is a single individual is not really an economy and
cannot be the basis of understanding a financial crisis, simply because an economy with a single individual can't have a meaningful financial
market. Some of the problems with the representative agent approach are analyzed by Kirman (1992). See also Stiglitz (1992, 2011).
 Some of the standard intertemporal models invoke collateral constraints. But collateral is required precisely because lenders are worried that
borrowers will not fulfill their contracts. Thus, intellectual consistency requires that the structure of the economy is consistent with the possibility
of defaults. In practice collateral typically does not fully compensate lenders in the event of a default: discontinuities associated with default still
are important, as we show below.
23
   See for instance Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), Arellano (2008), as well as the review of the literature of equilibrium models of sovereign default
by Aguiar and Amador (2014).
24
   See Guzman and Heymann (2015).



                                                                          11
was insufficient to provide full knowledge of the behavior of the economy in this new regime. So
market participants and regulators turned to earlier data to make inferences--inferences that turned
out to be terribly wrong. Our criticism is not that they made bad forecasts but the pervasive
cognitive dissonance:                   they simultaneously argued that the new financial products had
fundamentally changed the economy, yet they relied on data from before the advent of these
products to make their forecasts.25

But it's not just technology that's evolving. So is our system of social organization, such as the
legal frameworks and their interpretation. This means that when the inconsistencies arise, there is
often no clarity for market participants about how they will be resolved--a feature of actual market
economies that in reality plays a key role for the dynamic adjustment process. Big events like
macroeconomic crises have large consequences for our understanding of and for the workings of
the systems that determine how such inconsistencies actually get resolved.26

Accordingly, in moments of high distress in which pre-established perceptions are questioned, and
in which everyone is learning not just about how the economy works but also about how others
think that the economy works and about how the inconsistencies that get triggered or revealed after
large changes in beliefs will be resolved, uncertainty may grow and discrepancies of beliefs may
become more acute, as it becomes less clear for market participants which " model" best represents
the workings of the economy.27 The premise that the revelation of macroeconomic inconsistencies



25
   More generally, relying on rational expectations models that assume that there is no change in structure is inconsistent with the beliefs (and
profits) of those engaging in the innovation processes that drove those changes in the economy and who believed that their innovations had made
a fundamental contribution to the workings of the economy. Such cognitive dissonance is not unusual, and is more consistent with macro-modeling
based on behavioral economics than on that predicated on full rationality. Of course, the 2008 crisis and the inconsistencies which it revealed
forced most rational observers to conclude that such modelling was wrong, but there was still not enough data to know what the correct model was,
let alone to estimate all the parameters of such a model. (The fact that some did not revise their beliefs in the DSGE model may provide further
evidence of the limitations of the rational actor model.) Indeed, the symposium in which this paper appears is testimony to the fact that there is not
agreement about the underlying structure of the model, with some arguing that the behavior of the economy can be described as if such structural
uncertainty could be ignored, while others contending that such uncertainty is fundamental to understanding macroeconomic changes, at least in
certain critical periods.
26
   That is, the events themselves may alter the way the social-economic-political system functions. In the aftermath of the 2008 crisis, it was not
clear whether there would be changes in the legal and economic framework facilitating the restructuring of mortgages; it happened in some countries
(like Iceland), but not in others.
    Even when there appears to be a clear legal framework, courts may refuse to enforce the law as written, for instance when that law is viewed as
unjust. When American banks tried to enforce claims in Thailand against Thai citizens in the East Asia crisis, some judges (rightly in the judgment
of many) refused, perceiving the banks as having played a central role in the creation of the crisis in the first place. So too, American banks tried
to enforce mortgages that were not duly registered, as required by the law, and lied to the courts, in the famous robo-signing scandal. There was
accordingly ambiguity about whether such claims were enforceable, with some courts removing people from their homes even though they didn't
owe any money, while others refusing to do so, even though they did. American banks have exploited such ambiguity, refusing to honor contract
provisions guaranteeing that the mortgages that they had originated were as represented. More than a dozen years after the financial crisis, litigation
over these claims continues.
27
   In recent years, for instance, events have led many market participants to become less convinced that what was broadly understood as the
neoclassical benchmark, in which neoliberal policy prescriptions are appropriate, provides a good description of the world; but the discrediting of
the models that constituted that benchmark has not led to confidence in an alternative.



                                                                         12
increases uncertainty is no more than the recognition of a well-known principle of statistics that
taking a probability density function over another probability density function (which in the
context of macro models is essentially an exercise of integrating uncertainty about parameters),
controlling the degree of tail-spread of the given prior distribution, thickens the tails of the
subjective posterior-predictive distribution.28 When individuals have flat priors, small changes in
information can have large effects. When individuals are risk averse, more disperse posteriors can
simultaneously lead to large increases in precautionary savings and reductions in investment.29
These effects, in the context of a macroeconomy in distress, may be destabilizing.



     II.         3. Say's Law

A second traditional benchmark for economic analysis is provided by (Keynes' (1936)
characterization of) Say's law: There is never a problem with unemployment as supply gives rise
to its own demand. This can be viewed, in its simplest representation, as a one period version of
the Arrow-Debreu model. Individuals would not supply labor unless there were goods which they
wanted in exchange; the process of generating income is associated with a commensurate demand
for goods.

Say's law seems in marked conflict with what we see in modern industrial economies which often
experience large changes in aggregate demand even with low variability of supply shocks, and the
two change in ways that often result in a gap between them. Changes in aggregate demand that are
not driven by changes in aggregate supply capacity (technology shocks) are central for explaining
large fluctuations in output and employment.

There is a simple explanation for the failure of Say's Law, an aspect of to which Keynes called
attention: we live in a world with multiple periods, and individuals are willing to supply labor
today in return for goods tomorrow. Today's purchasing power can be put into a store of value
which is a non-produced good, like land or money.30 Sudden and large changes in the demand for
the store of value can result in correspondingly large changes in the aggregate demand for


28
   Weitzman (2007, 2009).
29
   This is especially so in "putty clay" models (i.e. models of real investment), where investments have to take a concrete form. In the presence of
increased uncertainty, there is an increased option value in postponing investment.
30
   Keynes focused on government-issued money, but most of the problems to which he called attention could as well have arisen in a model without
government, where there was an alternative non-produced store of value.



                                                                        13
produced goods. This paper suggests that one of the explanations for these sudden changes in the
demand for stored goods is the revelation of macroeconomic inconsistencies.



        III.       Macroeconomic inconsistencies

Credit-debt relations are promises of future transfers of resources, but those promises may or may
not be fulfilled. The economic decisions of market participants depend on the constraints they face,
and as the perceptions about the fulfillment of financial promises affect those constraints, changes
in those beliefs may have large effects on economic behaviors--with consequences for the stability
of the system. Those beliefs may change dramatically when there is change in the perceived
consistency of the structure of financial promises. Thus, a macroeconomic theory that intends to
address the most relevant macroeconomic problems needs to study the problem of macroeconomic
(in)consistency.



III. 1. Elements and definitions

Macroeconomic consistency is essentially a question of whether previously established individual
plans are consistent in the aggregate under circumstances and expectations that differ from the
ones that prevailed when those plans were formulated. Thus, the study of macroeconomic
consistency must account for the following elements:

        -      The set of pre-established plans for all market participants.
        -      The set of constraints for all market participants, which are state and beliefs-dependent.
               For example, credit constraints will depend on the lender's expectation of being repaid;
               similarly, creditors' expected wealth will depend on the perceived probability that the loans
               they have granted will be repaid.
        -      The sets of circumstances in which market participants find it desirable to adjust
               plans rather than to face a disruption of financial relations that triggers legal disputes, such
               as those associated with bankruptcies.31 There are some disturbances that create
               discrepancies between expectations and realizations that the system can absorb without



31
     As the discussion below will make clear, not all bankruptcies are associated with macroeconomic inconsistencies.



                                                                        14
           triggering a wave of bankruptcies and defaults, while sufficiently large disturbances cannot
           be similarly absorbed. We are particularly interested in the latter.

We say that plans formulated in a period  for the time range ,                                                    are consistent in the
aggregate if they satisfy all constraints for the same time range ,                                                  . In the presence of
changes to beliefs in period   ,                                  that affect the constraints, the original plans may
become inconsistent with the new set of constraints. There then obviously have to be adjustments.
Sometimes, the changes in the budget constraints are so large that there will necessarily be broken
"promises" and defaults that will force a restructuring process. When this is so for a significant
number of individuals, we say there is a macroeconomic inconsistency.32 Debt, financial, and
foreign exchange crises are moments in which such macroeconomic inconsistencies make
themselves evident.

Momentary equilibrium, disequilibrium, and equilibrium and disequilibrium trajectories

At any moment of time, the economy will display certain outcomes. We refer to that as the
momentary equilibrium. That momentary equilibrium may, of course, not satisfy the central
conditions of competitive equilibrium theory, that demand for all goods and factors equal supply.33
In particular, the momentary equilibrium may be characterized by unemployment. The standard
DSGE models with wage rigidities recognize this kind of situation, which is often referred to as a
type of "disequilibrium," but assume that market participants take this and other similar
constraints, say in the capital market, into account in formulating their plans. The "equilibrium"
in DSGE models refers to the fact that these (state contingent) plans are always realized; this paper,
and the concept of macroeconomic inconsistency, suggests otherwise: in the absence of a complete
set of markets extending infinitely far into the future, the equilibrium assumption underlying
DSGE models--that all markets in all states at all dates going infinitely far into the future clear--
is hard to justify. It is empirically falsifiable and falsified; and there has never been a theoretical
justification, outside the overly simplistic representative agent models. The most important and




32
   In the absence of a complete set of markets, it is likely that the plans of at least some individuals cannot be fulfilled--it is simply unlikely that
prices and plans are such that demands equal supplies in all markets in all states.
33
   That condition will not necessarily be satisfied even in a competitive equilibrium in the presence of imperfect and asymmetric information.
(Stiglitz, 2002a).



                                                                          15
interesting circumstances are those in which plans are not realized for large portions of the
population, giving rise to our dynamic disequilibrium with randomness analysis.34



III. 2. An illustration: macroeconomic (in)consistency in the intertemporal consumption
decision problem

Suppose that an economy consists of a representative consumer and a lender. The consumer in
period  has a time horizon of  periods ahead, and makes consumption plans at  for the time
range ,              . The consumer and the lender have common beliefs about the space of states,
described by                 ,                                                   ; that is, both agents think that in every period
                                                        , ,...   ,     , ,...,

from  to             there are  possible states and they agree about what those states are.

There are five cases of interest for our analysis of macroeconomic consistency.



Case 1. Suppose that                      ,  represents the full space of states and that markets are complete.
In this case, there will be not be a macroeconomic inconsistency at any time. At time , the
consumer will formulate state-dependent plans that satisfy the budget constraints in each possible
state, and the lender's expectation of the return in each state will be validated. The consumer and
the lender might have different beliefs about the probabilities of each state, and given the
realization of states there may be disappointments or pleasant surprises for each agent35, but in all
states the aggregate plans will be consistent with the budget constraints.

Case 2. Suppose that                      ,  represents the full space of states but markets are incomplete--
suppose that the only type of financial asset is a bond that promises a fixed payment, but given the
stochastic nature of the environment, there is a probability of default that is compensated by a risk
premium. Suppose that the states in which less than the full promised payment will occur are well-
specified and contemplated in the consumption and lending plans. In this case, the economy


34
   Later, we refer to the peculiar notion of equilibrium in DSGE models as "pseudo-equilibrium" to remind us that at the moment prior to the shock,
plans were based on beliefs that at least for many individuals are inconsistent, with each other, and with economic reality. We have repeatedly
emphasized the cognitive dissonance pervasive in DSGE models: though individuals recognize that they have just experienced something that is
inconsistent with their plans, going forward they assume that will never happen again.
35
   In the sense that a state that, for instance, one agent thought unlikely actually occurs; but, of course, the agent will have no way of knowing
whether his judgment about the likelihood of that event was correct or not: we only observe one out of the possible evolutions of the universe.
(This would not be the case in the simplistic world in which the "state" referred to a recurrent event, e.g. rainfall, distributed with a stationary
distribution. In reality, with climate change, even such a simple event can no longer be described by a stationary distribution.)



                                                                        16
operates as if the relevant contracts were "complete," i.e. specified a payment in each state of
nature. Thus, there are again no macroeconomic inconsistencies. When the realized state is
sufficiently bad, there will be a default, but that will be an event that does not create any surprise--
it was perfectly anticipated by agents that there would be a default in that state, and the sum of the
consumer's planned consumption and the lender's expected return that correspond to that state will
not violate the budget constraint in that state. It is still possible that, with an incomplete set of
(insurance) markets, the realization of that state has significant effects on aggregate demand, e.g.
as a result of the failure of certain transfers of resources (purchasing power) from one party to the
other that otherwise would have occurred.

Case 3. As before, suppose that                               ,  represents the full space of states but markets are
incomplete--and again that the only type of financial asset is a bond that promises a fixed payment.
Now, however, suppose that even though agents know that default may occur with some
probability, the states in which default is supposed to occur are not fully specified--instead,
suppose that a default in some state reveals an inconsistency of expectations: the plans of the
consumer and the lender in that state cannot be satisfied at the same time given the budget
constraints in that state. In this case, the default triggers (as opposed to just revealing) a
macroeconomic inconsistency and a distributive conflict over a pie that is smaller than what is
needed to ensure the aggregate consistency of individual plans--the lender does not want to simply
accept the default but the consumer is not willing to pay in full, and there will be uncertainty about
the relevant budget constraints for each of the agents until the dispute is resolved, which may take
considerable time. 

Case 4. Suppose that                      ,  does not represent the full space of states, but agents do not know
it--they think it does represent the full space of states.36 Agents still have access to a set of
contingent assets but contingent only on the states that they conceive as possible--not aware of
their incomplete knowledge of the space of states, they believe that markets are complete. They
make state-contingent plans over the space                                 ,  .




36
  For instance, there are refinements about which the individual is unaware. He assumes that if it rains tomorrow, the crop will be of a given size;
he is unaware that there may be a whole probability distribution, depending not just on rainfall but on temperature.
   The set of states about which individual i is informed may not coincide with the set about which j is informed, and it will not then be possible
to have AD securities on those states. See Radner (1968). Obviously, with the evolution of time, there will be learning about the set of states of
nature, and such learning can have large effects on aggregate demand.



                                                                        17
Suppose that at time                    a state                              ,  that had not been conceived at time  is
realized. In that case, none of the state-contingent plans formulated at time  may be consistent
with the relevant budget constraints at time                            . If             entails a more positive outcome for the
consumer than was anticipated in all of the conceived states in                                               ,  , that will not create
distress. But if                   is a sufficiently bad state, such that the sum of the borrower's planned
consumption and the lender's expected recovery in all future states is larger than what is available
in the realized state, there will be distress, and restoring macroeconomic consistency will require
adjustments. Those adjustments might occur voluntarily (but even then, the resolution might not
have been known ex ante), or there could just be a dispute with an unclear resolution that, while it
lasts, makes uncertain what are the relevant budget constraints for each of the agents.

Case 5. Suppose that                       ,  does not represent the full space of states, and agents know it.
This is, perhaps, the most relevant case: they know their information is incomplete, but because
obtaining information is costly, it does not pay them to obtain information about all the possible
states of nature.37 The revelation of a macroeconomic inconsistency results in a realization of a
greater sense of ignorance--previously held beliefs were shown to be incorrect; and that in turn
leads to more precautionary behavior, with potentially large effects on aggregate demand.



Default and macroeconomic inconsistencies

This analysis highlights that not every default reveals a macroeconomic inconsistency, though
crises where there are systemic defaults typically do. A broken contract could just be the
consequence of the realization of a bad state that everyone knew ex-ante was possible. The transfer
from the debtor to the creditor stipulated in the contract will just not occur in that state, and if there
were no legal conflicts following the event, this would be the end of the story. The outcome would
be the same as if the contract were not a debt but an equity contract with the amount transferred
between the two parties stipulated to be the amount actually transferred.38 There would be nothing

37
   We develop the analysis more extensively in section 5. As we explain there, individuals may know that there are two states, S1 and S2, occurring
with probability p and 1 ­ p, and may know that there are multiple substates, say S21, S22,....S2n, but don't know either the characteristics or
probabilities of those substates, and given that S2 is unlikely, don't make the investments required to obtain that information. But if they obtain
information that the economy is, or is likely to be in, S2, they do so. In short, the "state space" as formulated by the individual is (necessarily)
incomplete, the individual knows this, and the revelation of certain information (the occurrence of a particular event) leads individuals to realize
that there may be substates (i.e. refinements of the state) with significant probability where there will be significant macro inconsistencies.
38
   Thus, debt contracts, seemingly promising to pay a given amount in all states of nature, are in reality partial equity contracts, paying the given
amount when the debtor can, and paying a lower amount in other states--an amount that would be determined by the application of bankruptcy
laws. This formulation assumes, in other words, that there is no ambiguity within bankruptcy laws, and that there is full knowledge of what other



                                                                        18
fundamental to learn about the way the economy works--the default would just represent the
unfolding of history, and things will continue just as they were before the event.

But legal frameworks are incomplete, just as contracts are incomplete. The legal framework
cannot specify how each possible contingency will be dealt with. Thus, when the debtor defaults,
disputes that have to be resolved in a court of law often arise.39 This aspect of defaults is not
modeled even in equilibrium models in which defaults are possible. Those models assume a clear
way forward after a default occurs--the debtor typically gets excluded from credit markets,40 there
may be a well-defined cost of default besides the cost of operating without access to credit, and
there could be a probability of "redemption" such that the debtor is allowed to reenter the credit
markets with a clean balance-sheet.41



III. 3. Defaults and the meanings of macroeconomic consistency

Defaults sometimes simply reveal a macroeconomic inconsistency. But more generally, defaults
themselves are a result of expectations. The possibility of avoiding a default depends on the
debtor's access to liquidity in every period in which his own income is insufficient to service debt.
But the access to liquidity (both its quantity and its price) depends on lenders' beliefs about the
probability that the lending they provide will be serviced in the future--which in turn depends in
part on the lenders' belief that the debtor will have access to more financing when that future
becomes the present, and so forth.42




debt obligations that the debtor has (or at least a well-defined distribution of those obligations, with clarity about the relative seniorities of each).
As the discussion below emphasizes, there is often ambiguity.
39
   In practice, when it comes to the resolution of sovereign debt defaults, there is a particularly high level of uncertainty, as there is not a multinational
formal framework for the resolution of the disputes that arise after a default (see Guzman, Ocampo, and Stiglitz (2016); Guzman and Stiglitz
(2016b, 2016c)). There is often substantial litigation in the aftermath of sovereign defaults (Schumacher, Trebesch, and Enderlein, 2018). But the
extensive discussions after the East Asia crisis and repeated changes in bankruptcy legislation, say in the US, show the existence of significant
problems and uncertainties even at the national level. If there were no ambiguities, then bankruptcy courts would never have to adjudicate: all
parties would know the outcome and could save themselves the costs of litigation by undertaking payments in accord with what the bankruptcy
court would have ruled. See Stiglitz (2000, 2001), Cooter and Rubinfeld (1989), Spier (2007). Earlier, Stiglitz (1972) had suggested how
bankruptcy fundamentally changed the nature of market equilibrium.
40
   Whether defaulting debtors do or should (in a rational equilibrium model) get excluded, even temporarily, from the debt market is a subject of
some controversy. Early literature (e.g. Eaton and Gersovitz, 1981) as well as a class of contemporaneous models on sovereign defaults assumed
that they would be, but later literature (Eaton, Gersovitz and Stiglitz (1986), and Stiglitz (2010a)) suggested that this might not be the case in
"rational" competitive markets.
41
   See Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), Arellano (2008), Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), and Stiglitz (2010a).
42
   That's why the standard distinction between solvency and liquidity (e.g. as a criterion for central bank bailouts) is somewhat confused: if it were
unambiguous that a debtor was solvent, it would generally not face a problem of illiquidity. Illiquidity arises out of a concern for insolvency. And
perceptions of solvency depend in turn on the price of liquidity. (Obviously, matters are somewhat more complicated in the presence of strategic
defaults, especially associated with sovereigns, where "solvency" is not well-defined.)



                                                                            19
This means that from an ex-ante viewpoint, macroeconomic consistency cannot be unambiguously
determined. Many market participants may believe that there is no problem; some that there is:
witness the discussions concerning whether there was a bubble in the years leading up to the 2008
crisis. Those with optimistic beliefs will hold that the debtors' transversality conditions are being
respected--that in essentially all relevant states of nature they will be able and willing to fulfill
their promises, and aggregate plans are consistent. When those who are optimistic dominate the
market, the debtor will have access today to the necessary liquidity to "honor" its promises of
payment; even if his current cash flow is insufficient, (common) beliefs about future cash flows
ensures that he can gain access to funding to fulfill his obligations. On the other hand, if beliefs
are pessimistic, liquidity will be a binding constraint and the debtor may be forced (or choose) to
default.43

Thus, in practice macroeconomic consistency is both objective and subjective: an individual may
not be able to meet his obligations, because he cannot get access to credit (an objective condition);
but the aggregate consistency of plans (which determines each individual's ability to get access to
funds) also depends on perceptions of multiple agents, perceptions that are themselves
subjective.44

Changes in expectations and macroeconomic inconsistencies

The fact that macroeconomic inconsistencies is partly a subjective matter centers attention on the
beliefs of market participants. A change in beliefs is a perturbation that is not really a "shock" in
the standard sense, but the consequence of a social process of formation of beliefs about the
economy in an evolving environment with limited knowledge and information, in which there are
feedback effects in the learning process between the reality and what the agents think they know
about the economy. In fact, the word "shock" is not helpful here. The most meaningful changes in
beliefs--the ones we focus on--are endogenous. So too are the major perturbations that have
afflicted capitalism--the breaking of a credit bubble, a tulip bubble, a housing bubble, the tech
bubble, or the massive change in beliefs provoked by the COVID-19 shock that led to radical



43
   The credit rationing literature makes clear that there may be no interest rate at which the consumer can get access to credit. But even if there is
some interest rate at which he can do so, the consumer may choose to default, or to threaten to default.
44
   The only situation in which this is not true is when there is rational expectations and common knowledge. Beliefs about the future obviously
matter and differ; since such beliefs typically are subjective probability distributions over non-repeated events, there is no way of ascertaining the
validity of those judgments.



                                                                         20
changes in the organization of the economic system that had not been even envisioned as a
possibility.

In the benchmark model with which we began the previous section, nothing constitutes a
perturbation. And because every possible state has already been contemplated in the Arrow-
Debreu securities from the origin of time and is known to everyone, and because all markets at all
dates in all states clear, there will never be a violation of consistency conditions.45

When we move away from those benchmarks, there can be large sudden changes in beliefs, in the
uncertainty with which beliefs are held, and in the disparity of beliefs, giving rise to large changes
in aggregate demand. This is especially so when we take into account the social dimensions of
belief formation, and the possibility of (rational) herding. What we have in mind here is more than
the seemingly inexplicable changes in beliefs due to "animal spirits"46--instead, these are changes
that are inherent to the functioning of an evolving non-stationary market economy in which it is
simply impossible to have full knowledge of the space of states, and impossible to know the
"actual" probability distribution of all the variables and processes that are relevant for the
economic decisions of market participants, and so individuals are always revising their beliefs.
Such revisions are likely to be particularly significant when significant unanticipated events
occur--and crises are by their nature significant and (at least generally) unanticipated. Moreover,
the change in beliefs may itself affect the functioning of the economic system--there can be large
feedback effects in the learning process, between what agents think they know about how the
market economy works and how it actually works.47 The change in beliefs about the ability of
RMBS to disperse risks has had, for instance, a profound effect on the working of the mortgage
and housing markets, continuing to today, more than a decade after the housing bubble broke.

The change in beliefs that precipitates a crisis that both gives rise to and reveals macroeconomic
inconsistencies may arise in many ways. The realization of any state of nature may change the ex
post probability distributions of future states; such changes can be large, and when that is the case,
a macroeconomic inconsistency can arise. But beliefs can have a life of their own, and as we have
already noted, there can be changes in beliefs that cannot be easily traced to any real set of events.

45
   Under rational expectations, not only is there full knowledge of the space of states but also full knowledge of the model that determines the
probability of each state. Conditional on the set of information, all that can be known is known. Uncertainty is irreducible.
   More realistically, in general, when one state out of a possible large number has occurred, there typically is a change in posterior probabilities.
46
   Which are usually interpreted to be related to the psychology of the investor, with some economists suggesting that that may be manipulable. See
the discussion below for how our analysis differs from that associated with those of sunspots and multiple equilibria.
47
   This, of course, is the notion emphasized by Soros (1987), and is incorporated in models such as that of Dosi et al. (2020).



                                                                         21
In complex networks, the beat of the wings of a butterfly can give rise to a cascade of events all
out of proportion to and disconnected from the initiating event; and the social and economic system
is a very complex network. It may be as simple as an article expressing skepticism of some
government policy or a set of financial instruments that goes viral and changes perceptions and
beliefs.48

The study of the origins of belief changes is important. The analysis of this paper, however,
focuses on (a) the consequences, which are largely independent of these origins; and (b) why
beliefs are likely to change dramatically once a macroeconomic inconsistency is revealed.



III. 4. Crises as revealing and inducing macroeconomic inconsistencies

At the center of our analysis is the contention that crises have large effects on aggregate demand
not just because of the (unanticipated) distributive effects (e.g. creditors who had thought that they
would get repaid suddenly realizing that they won't be), but because macroeconomic crises
typically entail large revisions in understanding of the workings of the economy and give rise to a
large increase in uncertainty. True, there are some crises that are triggered by extreme events,
such as a large natural disaster, that do not necessarily lead to substantial revisions of the views
that determine how markets work, including how participants make their plans, or of what is the
space of the states.49 But most macroeconomic crises feature changes to formation of expectations
that are incompatible with the premise that all that could have been known about the structure of
the economy was actually known. The U.S. 2008 crisis illustrates this phenomenon.50

The macroeconomic inconsistencies that are the object of our study here are of this type. In normal
times, when the prevailing opinion in markets is that debt contracts will, with a few exceptions, be
honored, there is a perception of relative certainty about how the economy works and about the
budget constraints that each market participant faces. But, occasionally there may be large changes



48
   See also the discussion of footnote 19, concerning the pace at which expectations get revised.
49
   Though there can still be learning, e.g. about how the economy responds to extreme events, including how the macroeconomic inconsistencies
that emerge with such extreme events are resolved.
50
   In each crisis, one can identify the "learning" that occurred. The East Asia crisis, for instance, "taught" that crises could occur even in economies
with high savings rates and fiscal surpluses, contrary to what economists thought that they had learned in the Latin American crisis of the 1980s.
The S&L crisis taught the risks of under-regulated financial institutions (a lesson that seemingly was soon forgotten) and the risks of undiversified
financial institutions, providing a rationale for universal banks. The 2008 crisis has exposed the risk of "too correlated to fail" and the advantages
of more specialized financial institutions (the disadvantages of universal banks.) See Furman and Stiglitz (1998), Griffith-Jones, Ocampo, and
Stiglitz (2010).



                                                                          22
in expectations51 that in turn trigger changes in the perceptions about the sustainability of the credit
relations. Such changes in perceptions often then trigger a reassessment of understandings of the
economic and social system, in ways (as we explain more fully in the next section) that can lead
to or deepen or prolong a crisis. This, for instance, is typical characteristic in financial crises--
sudden changes in the sets of beliefs of market participants lead to the revelation of large individual
and aggregate wealth misperceptions52. All of a sudden, those who could lend become unwilling
to do so53; those with outstanding loans refuse to roll them over; potential lenders do not find
counterparties that they perceive as solvent with high probability, and it becomes optimal to hoard
savings or invest in a non-produced store of value--a type of behavior similar to what Keynes
defined as liquidity preference. This sudden change in behavior has dynamic consequences. While
under other circumstances an act of saving may signal an increase in demand in the future--that
in an equilibrium model would be satisfied by the increase in supply that the increase in savings-
financed investment generates--the increase in savings that occurs after the revelation of
macroeconomic inconsistencies does not signal an increase in future demand, and so does not
generate an offsetting increase in investment; the increased savings is precautionary, held in non-
produced assets.

As we will discuss in section V, the endogenous increase in uncertainty that gets triggered when
the macroeconomic inconsistency is revealed amplifies the decrease in aggregate demand, a force
that is destabilizing.



     IV.         Macroeconomic Stability

51
   As we noted earlier, we do not fully explore what triggers such expectational changes, or why they take the form they do. In the run-up to the
U.S. 2008 crisis, there were strong a priori reasons to believe that there was an unsustainable bubble; but economic leaders, like Greenspan and
Bernanke, discouraged such thinking, helping the economy to coordinate on an optimistic perspective--we were living in a new economy. But
eventually conventional arithmetic took hold--risk averse homebuyers were unable or unwilling to pay inflated bubble prices--and the bubble
broke. Eventually, even the cheerleading from officials and the media could not offset the reality of macroeconomic inconsistency.
52
   The change in wealth perception may be due to the destruction of pseudo-wealth, which is the individuals' perceived wealth that is derived from
expectations of gains in speculative trades arising from heterogeneous expectations. Each believes that they are going to win, so aggregate perceived
wealth increases as a result of such bets. The resolution of the bet then decreases aggregate wealth and demand. There can also be volatility in
negative pseudo-wealth; in debt contracts, the debtor may believe that he will be paying more than the creditor believes he will be receiving.
     This wealth is divorced from society's real assets. More generally, aggregate pseudo-wealth is positive when the sum of the perceived wealth
of all economic agents is larger than the aggregate wealth that is obtained, say, by weighting individuals' wealth using a distribution of beliefs that
is consistent (as for instance "reasonable beliefs", as defined in Brunnermeier, Simsek, and Xiong, 2014). The concept of pseudo-wealth is
introduced in Guzman and Stiglitz (2016a). There are also changes in wealth perceptions associated with the identification of trends (see Heymann
(2008), Heymann and Montero (2019)).
53
   Some of these responses are consistent with a modicum of rationality: the revelation of the macroeconomic inconsistency meant that some
individuals who previously (were thought to be) able to repay their debts may no longer be able to do so. But typically, these events suggest that
prior to the crisis, many individuals acted in a way that would be hard to reconcile with even a modicum of rationality, as revealed by absurd risk
premiums on Greek debt or absurd assumptions about the evolution of house prices. Modern behavioral economics has provided insights into such
behavior, including the social determination of beliefs. On the latter, see, e.g. Hoff and Stiglitz (2016).



                                                                         23
Earlier, we argued that understanding large economic fluctuations, especially those associated with
significant increases in unemployment, required understanding the large changes in aggregate
demand that sometimes afflict market economies, and that in turn requires an identification of the
perturbations that affect agents' spending decisions. Central to that analysis is the exploration of
economic structures and processes which amplify those perturbations entailing large changes in
beliefs without significant changes in the physical state variables. 54 Here we focus on the systemic
responses to revealed macroeconomic inconsistencies. The revelation of such inconsistencies
inevitably leads to changes in beliefs about budget constraints. But the revelation of an
inconsistency typically also induces a change in beliefs about the structure of the economy. Belief
formation is a social process, in which there can be large changes in the aggregate state of beliefs
even when there are seemingly small changes in observables.55

Financial crises are events in which there are large changes in observables, and so it is hardly
surprising that they engender large revisions of priors, including both the mean and dispersion.
Individuals had beliefs about the world that are shown to be wrong, and normally, that induces a
rethinking about the underlying model. Recently, the U.S. Great Recession was one of those
instances. When debtors could not rollover their debts, models which simply assumed away the
possibility of such events occurring lost credit in the view of many. If they had any relevance, they
certainly didn't have much relevance in describing the economy at that moment. Both
policymakers and academics had to admit that the dominant model did not work.56 By contrast,
our "dynamic disequilibrium theory with randomness" provides an intellectual framework for
understanding what happened: Such a crisis is in fact a stark example of non-market clearing in a
context of severe doubts about agents' solvency; the macroeconomic system is put into an
inconsistent state, as those who had counted on being repaid in order to fulfill their plans find out




54
   Earlier literature highlighted how credit and equity rationing could give rise to financial amplifications of changes in firm, bank, and household
balance sheets (Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1993a, 1993b). (Equity rationing is simply the notion that firms cannot raise additional equity at times that
they would like to, or that were they to do so, the dilution in the value of the equity claims of existing equity owners is so great that they would not
want to raise additional equity. See Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003a) and the references cited there.)
55
   Our earlier discussion highlighted two especially relevant features of the economy: the presence of herding behavior, and the fact that in many
circumstances, individuals have relatively flat priors. The presence of these large changes in aggregative beliefs when beliefs are interdependent
is sometimes referred to as a social multiplier. See Hoff and Stiglitz (2016).
56
   The crisis was defined by some as a "rollover crisis", but that is an event that is nothing else than a liquidity crisis, a large change in the extent
of credit rationing (Christiano et al. (2019)). The standard DSGE models precluded credit rationing, and were unable to explain how a system in
equilibrium could find itself suddenly in a state of macro inconsistency in which liquidity is squeezed. The "trick" of invoking a deus ex machina,
something totally outside the model, like an exogenous supply shock, this time called a rollover crisis, is obviously unsatisfactory.



                                                                          24
that they must now recalibrate57--a possibility that by construction had been left aside in
equilibrium models.

While moments when macroeconomic inconsistencies get revealed are also times when economic
agents lose confidence in their old economic model, there may not be a new model that quickly
replaces the old: these are moments of increased uncertainty not only about the future but about
the governing economic, political, and social model. This increase in dispersion itself has direct
effects to which we have already alluded: it increases precautionary behavior, leading to reduced
demand for produced goods (consumption and investment).

This is part of what often is the unstable dynamics of adjustment. The standard "story" of a shock
leading to unemployment centers on the equilibrating force of (real) wage adjustments, leading to
an increase in employment, ensuring that the unemployment is only transitory. But there may be
simultaneously other stronger disequilibrating forces. We have just identified one: the shock
changes beliefs in ways that increase precautionary behavior, lowering aggregate demand. The
resulting reduced demand for labor may exceed the increased demand generated by lower real
wages.          Worse:          the lowering of real wage--something that previously had not been
contemplated--may lead to even more precautionary behavior, in which case the lowering of real
wages exacerbates the deficiency in aggregate demand, leading to an increase in unemployment.

Thus, understanding the persistence of unemployment requires taking a closer look at the dynamics
of adjustment. As we have observed, in standard equilibrium models the economy is just assumed
to be dynamically stable--following any perturbation, it somehow reaches the new equilibrium --
without specifying the adjustment process. Moreover, it is simply assumed that the dynamic
adjustment processes would, in the absence of wage rigidities, lead quickly (instantaneously) to a
new equilibrium in which all markets, including the labor market, today clear. At the most relevant
times for macroeconomic analysis such assumptions are inappropriate and unpersuasive. There is
neither theory nor evidence that current markets quickly return to equilibrium (with all markets
clearing) after a perturbation. Most importantly, the failure of the labor market to clear cannot just

57
   The basic insight of the credit rationing (illiquidity) literature is that there may be no interest rate at which the lender is willing to lend and the
borrower willing to borrow, even when the borrower (say, the bank facing a potential crisis) has a great need for funds. The higher the interest rate
offered by the borrower, the more likely (in the beliefs of the lender) is it that the borrower will not make the promised payments (either because
of adverse selection or incentive effects or because of costly enforcement), so much so that the expected return (especially, the risk adjusted expected
return) is lowered. Alternatively, at some interest rate lower than that at which the lender believes he is appropriately compensated for the risk of
lending, the borrower concludes that he would be better off defaulting. This may be especially true, as we note below, if there is ambiguity about
what happens in the event of a default--and the borrower (here a bank) believes that there is a reasonable chance it will be rescued, as actually
happened during the U.S. financial crisis of 2008.



                                                                          25
be blamed on wage rigidity. Wages do adjust--but at times in ways that move the economy away
from a full employment equilibrium rather than towards, full employment. Here, we explain why
the natural adjustment processes at work in a decentralized economy often do so. But first, we
review the standard results about stability in perfect markets.

           IV. 1. Stability under perfect and imperfect markets

The fundamental theorems of welfare economics depict an ideal world where the decentralized
market economy produces the best possible outcomes.                                            Because there never is really a
perturbation--every possible shock has already been contemplated and optimally taken into
account in all plans--the question of whether the market forces will restore equilibrium when the
system is perturbed is not even considered. Those who have enquired into the subject, making
what might seem natural assumptions about adjustment processes beginning with an initial set of
"proposed" prices, have found it hard to find robust conditions for stability--and for good reason
(to be discussed more fully below).58

While even in a world with perfect markets we have no general theory of stability, the real world
is, of course, not one of perfect markets, and in this real world, stability is even less likely. Earlier
work (e.g. Solow and Stiglitz (1968)) showed formally that a natural decentralized process need
not lead to the elimination of unemployment, and that if it did so, it might be a very slow process.
As wages fall, prices fall, and markets may adjust so that they fall at the same rate--with real
wages and unemployment unchanged. Fisherian dynamics (Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993a))
suggested things may be worse: as wages and prices fall, bankruptcies increase and so too does
unemployment.59

           IV.2. Market adjustment forces


58
   Scarf (1960) demonstrated that price-adjustment in a Walrasian general-equilibrium setting does not always converge to a general equilibrium;
on the contrary, adjustments in one market may be continually counteracted by independent adjustments in other related markets. Howitt (1994)
explains that the literature on the stability of general equilibrium, which flourished in the 1950s and 1960s, did not in any way establish a
presumption of stability, and that all that it has shown is that there are hypothetical sufficient conditions for stability, such as universal gross
substitutability. He adds that "when theorists discovered what a messy subject they had on their hands they just dropped it, although they had hardly
begun to deal with expectations." On the other hand, the standard DSGE models simply assume the matter away: the economy mystically, somehow,
gets to the equilibrium. While there are plausible arguments that one might put forward for how this might happen in an economy in which there
is a representative individual (who knows that all other individuals are identical to himself), in a more general model, there is no such mechanism.
Enquiries into the stability of intertemporal market economies have been even more disappointing, showing that even if there are rational
expectations ensuring that the no-arbitrage condition among assets is satisfied for any finite number of periods, no matter how large, unless there
are futures markets going infinitely far into the future (or somehow expectations are such to be macroeconomically consistent going infinitely far
into the future, as if there were such futures markets, an assumption that begs disbelief outside of the representative agent model) the economy is
not stable. (See Hahn, 1966, Shell and Stiglitz (1967)).
59
   These bankruptcies result in the loss of informational and organizational capital, a kind of negative technology shock--but one which is
endogenous, and engendered by the decentralized dynamics.



                                                                        26
Earlier, we explained how the absence of a complete set of markets gives rise to the possibility of
macroeconomic inconsistencies, the revelation of which can lead to large changes in beliefs
without any large perturbation to the physical state variables or the state of technology. These
changes in beliefs in turn induce large changes in aggregate demand. We now show the revelation
of a macroeconomic inconsistency triggers market forces that may destabilizing, and that can be
stronger than the stabilizing forces that might have prevailed when the consistency of the system
had not been violated.60 Thus, while economic theory provides little presumption that the
benchmark model economy is stable, there is some presumption that real economies are not, at
least at the critical moments when macroeconomic inconsistencies occur, e.g. when there is a
significant economic disturbance.

Suppose that a there is a change in the beliefs about the future states of the economy that acts as a
negative wealth shock61. There are a variety of ways in which a shock of that type can occur. For
instance, the general opinion about the capacity of the economy for generating incomes could
become more pessimistic, e.g. because prospects for future innovations are less than had
previously been thought,62 the society suddenly realizes that there was a misperception of the
economy's wealth, the PDV of future income. Or it could just be that agents were making trades
based on heterogeneous beliefs that had led to all sides of the trade to an expectation of future
income that, in the aggregate, was not consistent with the capacity of the aggregate economy for
generating incomes, and the economy is then hit by a shock that suddenly eliminates those
differences in beliefs. Guzman and Stiglitz (2016a, d) refer to this difference between the sum of
perceived wealth and actual wealth as pseudo-wealth. That shock will destroy pseudo-wealth,
leading to a fall in the aggregate perceived wealth.

Following any shock that reduces perceived wealth, normally aggregate demand will fall. If the
shock does not simultaneously reduce the real capacity of the economy by the same amount, an
economy that was in a momentary equilibrium in which all markets cleared today moves out of
that pseudo-equilibrium--aggregate demand today falls, reducing also the demand for labor. We
introduce the terminology "pseudo-equilibrium" to remind us that at the moment prior to the shock,

60
   Even a small change in the state of the economy could, in principle, trigger large redistributions, which, if individuals differ significantly, could
have large consequences. This may happen, for instance, in the models of pseudo-wealth discussed in the next paragraph. For example, in those
models, small differences in beliefs with low levels of risk aversion but large differences in intertemporal preferences can imply that an occurrence
of a seemingly small event could have large consequences.
61
   That is, for instance, with any given supply of inputs (say labor), the value of incomes will be lower, and this affects life-time budget constraints.
62
   As a result, for instance, of the publication of an influential work such as that of Gordon (2016).



                                                                          27
while markets may have cleared, plans were based on beliefs that may well have been inconsistent,
with each other, and with the new (perceived) reality. Indeed, before the shock not only may the
economy have been in a momentary equilibrium with markets clearing, all market participants
might have believed that they were on equilibrium trajectories, in which all their plans would be
fulfilled.

Rational Expectations

Earlier, we explained in a world with incomplete markets, episodic crises revealing
macroeconomic inconsistencies, and an ever evolving economic, political, and social system it was
not rational to have "rational expectations," to believe that the economy is always in equilibrium,
that one knows fully everything relevant to how the economic system behavior, and that there
accordingly is nothing to learn from what has happened.                 The vast majority of large
macroeconomic shocks cannot be appropriately analyzed within models of rational expectations
simply because they reveal that previously held beliefs were wrong. In analyzing what happens
then, one has to focus on how individuals respond to the changes--including how their beliefs
change. Their behavior might be described as "reasonable" and even rational--but not in the
narrow sense of the rational expectations literature. Thus, it was "rational" for banks to respond
to the unfolding events in the 2008 financial crisis by not lending to others, as they realized that
their previous beliefs, e.g. about the ability of diversification to insulate financial institutions from
a financial crisis; and this is so whether their previous beliefs were fully rational or not. These
second-round expectations effects may clearly be destabilizing. This is just one example of a
multiplicity of "forces" which a crisis unleashes; as we will see, many of these exacerbate the
downturn, rather than returning the economy back to a full employment equilibrium.

A Taxonomy of Stabilizing and Destabilizing Forces in a world of decentralized adjustment and
learning

The critical question for our analysis is whether the market forces will quickly return the economy
to a state of full equilibrium--or even just to a (pseudo-) momentary equilibrium in which all
markets clear today. The general answer, as we will see, is "it depends". It will depend on the
structure of markets (the types of market failures) that prevail and the assumptions about the
structure of knowledge.




                                                   28
Following the change in beliefs that creates a negative wealth effect, there are multiple forces that
determine the nature of the market adjustment. We can distinguish nine of these. In each case, we
attempt to ascertain whether the effects are stabilizing or destabilizing, and the conditions under
which they might arise, e.g. whether the extent to which the particular effect is linked to market
incompleteness:

     1. Substitution effects: market forces will change prices for both goods and labor, both today
           and in the future. The standard price mechanism ensures that a sufficient fall in prices
           (wages) equalizes supply and demand, provided that demand curves are negatively sloped.
           The presence of this effect does not rely on any specific assumption about market
           completeness or the process of expectation formation.63 The working of this mechanism
           may, however, be limited by wage or price rigidities; these rigidities may arise from
           adjustment costs, from                    uncertainties (some of which are described below) of the
           consequences of adjusting, or from efficiency wage effects in labor markets or customer-
           market effects in product markets.64
     2. Income effects that come from distributional consequences of price changes: changes in
           prices have distributional consequences that may affect aggregate demand. The
           implication, as demonstrated by the Sonnenschein-Mantel-Debreu theorem, is that the
           response of the aggregate demand to the fall in prices could go in any direction.65 Similar
           to the substitution effects, these effects do not rely on any specific assumption about market
           completeness or the process of expectation formation.
     3. Fisher-Greenwald-Stiglitz balance sheet effects: deflation will affect the income and
           wealth of market participants. Market participants who have not purchased insurance to
           fully insulate themselves from such shocks----almost everyone in all markets--will

63
   Although the sign and magnitude of the substitution effects depend on the expectational path: if there are, for instance, expectations that prices
in the future are going to fall even more than those today, then the net substitution effect will decrease demand today. Similarly, there can be
decreases in demand today because of complex complementarities across products, especially given expectations about the future. In general
models, after a shock which at existing prices for goods and factors results in a deficiency of demand for a particular good, in the new full
equilibrium, the price of that good may have risen. Partial equilibrium analysis provides an imperfect guide for general equilibrium.
64
   See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1989), Shapiro-Stiglitz (1984), Greenwald-Stiglitz (2003b). In contrast to real adjustment costs (which would slow
adjustment in the context of an optimal response to a shock), the rigidities arising from uncertainty, efficiency wage, or customer-market effects
may be more socially costly. In any of these cases, however, incomplete adjustment may give rise to macroeconomic externalities.
65
   Early studies of stability of general equilibrium (with origins in Walras) focused on a process of tatonnement, an iterative adjustment process in
which capital gains and losses along the way were left aside. This was done to avoid the potentially destabilizing consequences of these income
effects. Even so, as discussed earlier, it proved difficult to establish general plausible conditions under which the equilibrium was stable. These are
not just theoretical niceties. The lowering of interest rates, which on the basis of substitution effects would lead to an increase in consumption and
aggregate demand today, may have the opposite effect, if those who are dependent on interest income cut back their consumption more than those
who are induced to consume more increase it.
    Here and elsewhere, the extent to which the occurrence of an event (say a change in price or in technology) has distributive consequences and
induces a change in aggregate demand depends on the set of insurance policies in place. See, e.g. Korinek and Stiglitz (2019).



                                                                         29
           respond.          Of particular relevance are the real balance effects that arise because debt
           contracts are not sufficiently indexed to the relevant prices.66 These effects are typically
           destabilizing: while creditors are better off, if the borrower repays, the decrease in
           consumption and investment by those whose balance sheets have been worsened will be
           greater than the increase on the part of those whose balance sheets have improved. And if
           there are large (perceived) bankruptcy costs, it is possible that even creditors' balance
           sheets are worsened.67
     4. Incentive effects from debt overhang: the increase in the real value of debts also affects
           economic performance.68                    A large debt burden acts as a high marginal tax rate on the
           debtor's effort--thus blunting debtor incentives to produce. Moreover, with equity
           rationing, increased production is typically financed out of increased debt, inducing an
           increased probability of bankruptcy, so that deflation discourages production. It also
           discourages investment. Together, with adverse effects both on the demand and supply
           side, employment can fall. This effect can only arise under incomplete markets and/or
           incomplete information, and exacerbates the downward movement of the economy.
     5. Income effects as the consequence of bankruptcy: Wage and price decreases may increase
           bankruptcies, and because of the significant costs associated with bankruptcy, net incomes
           may fall. These costs include those associated with the uncertainty about the outcome of
           the bankruptcy process (to be discussed more fully below); and the dissipation of economic
           resources in the period of limbo, as those temporarily controlling the resources attempt to
           divert as much of those resources to their own welfare.69                                     70
                                                                                                              Macroeconomic crises are
           typically associated with large numbers of bankruptcies, so these income effects take on



66
   Most debt contracts are not indexed at all. Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993a) emphasize that what matters is not so much a fall in prices, but a
lower level of prices relative to what was expected. Hence disinflation can have analogous effects. Theories of asymmetric and imperfect
information help explain the absence of insurance and the imperfections of indexation.
67
   If there were a single creditor, he would obviously renegotiate rather than bear the consequences of a Pareto inferior default. But when there are
multiple creditors, bargaining among different creditors and the debtor, in the presence of asymmetric information, often does lead to defaults in
which creditors are worse off.
68
   See, for instance, Krugman (1988).
69
   Uncertainties about the outcome of the bankruptcy process and the extent to which resources will be dissipated in the periods before resolution
imply that there may be large costs of delay in achieving a settlement. Credit is likely to be rationed in the interim. More generally, the actions
which firms can undertake in the interim may be severely curtailed, and this too may generate high costs.
    Court attempts to limit such diversion are inevitably incomplete. Note that the period between the revelation of the macroeconomic
inconsistencies and the resolution of the inconsistencies is one of heightened uncertainties, the effects of which are described below. For analyses
of the consequences of systemic bankruptcy and implications for the design of bankruptcy codes, see Miller and Stiglitz (2010) and Stiglitz (2000,
2001).
70
   There can also be general equilibrium price effects (both as a result of the delays prior to the resolution of bankruptcy and the changes in
production patterns after the resolution as a result of a change in control), which in turn induce further distributional and income effects.



                                                                        30
           macroeconomic significance. These effects can only arise under incomplete markets, and
           these effects are typically destabilizing.71
     6. Distributional effects as consequence of the settlement of the macroeconomic
           inconsistency: the way in which the consistency of the system is restored will have
           distributional consequences that can affect aggregate demand.72 These effects can only
           arise under incomplete markets, and could be either stabilizing or destabilizing.73
     7. Uncertainty effects as a result of undefined budget constraints: if it were perfectly clear
           how the macroeconomic inconsistency is going to be resolved, then there would not be
           uncertainty about the budget constraints that the economic agents will face after the shock.
           In the absence of such predictability, the increased uncertainty following the revelation of
           a macroeconomic inconsistency will tend to increase precautionary savings by risk-averse
           agents and depress aggregate demand.74 Indeed, aggregate demand will become depressed
           even earlier, before the actual occurrence of the crisis, as evidence mounts that there might
           be a crisis, thereby making such an occurrence more likely. These effects will be amplified
           if, as prices fall in response to the decrease in aggregate demand, the increase in the real
           value of debts increases the size of the macroeconomic inconsistency. Moreover, as we
           noted in the previous paragraph, the resolution of bankruptcies, especially in deep
           downturns, often takes a long time, leading to an extended period during which uncertainty
           effects may prevail. Again, these effects can only arise under incomplete markets.75


71
   That is, with a complete set of markets, these effects would have been anticipated and insured against.
   There is another income effect associated with bankruptcy, noted earlier: the loss of organizational and informational capital.
    There is still another aspect of incomplete markets associated with bankruptcy that can be important, but whose impact on stability is hard to
ascertain. In complete markets, control is not important. In incomplete markets, it is (Grossman and Stiglitz (1977, 1980). Bankruptcy is typically
associated with a change in control, and a change in control is associated with a change in decisions, affecting differentially the incomes of different
individuals (Stiglitz, 1972).
72
   The relevant distributional consequences of the settlement are not only those in relation to the pre-shock scenario, when the perception was one
of macroeconomic consistency, but also in relation to the expectations that are formed about how the inconsistencies will be resolved after the
inconsistencies get revealed. Consider a sovereign debt crisis. At times, the market expectation is that the settlement will include a large haircut
on the creditors--a force that is generally stabilizing (because it is a redistribution from those with a low marginal propensity to consume living
outside the country to those with higher propensities to consume living within the country)--but the actual settlement sometimes ends up involving
less relief for the debtor than was previously anticipated. (In a sense, if market participants had "reasonable" expectations, then at least some of the
time, debtors will be disappointed about the amount of debt relief.) A recent example of such a case was the settlement of Puerto Rico's defaulted
COFINA bonds, what included a level of relief for the country that was substantially lower than what market prices were anticipating a year before
the settlement.
73
   Under rational expectations, the possibility of these effects would be anticipated and correctly priced. Defaults would just be the consequence of
bad random draws from a perfectly known and correct probability density function--agents endowed with rational expectations but operating in
incomplete markets can get unlucky or lucky. And the distributional consequences of default settlements would be anticipated and priced ex-ante.
Nonetheless, the realization of this particular "draw" of the lottery could lower aggregate demand, destabilizing the economy.
74
   There is a large literature explaining how, in general, an increase in uncertainty leads to more precautionary behavior. See Rothschild and Stiglitz
(1971).
75
   The uncertainties are especially great when there is systemic bankruptcy, i.e. where the bankruptcy of one enterprise affects the viability of others.
See Miller and Stiglitz (2010) and Stiglitz (2001). Only recently has there been an adequate resolution of the mathematical problem of the solution
of systematic bankruptcy in the presence of extensive bankruptcy interdependencies. See Roukny, Battiston, and Stiglitz (2018).



                                                                          31
     8. Uncertainty and learning effects as a result of learning about the economic system--that
           it is different from what had previously been thought: Under rational expectations, where
           by definition the "true" model that describes the workings of the economy is known, the
           occurrence of any specific event itself does not affect beliefs about how the economy
           actually works. But in an environment in which the economy is constantly evolving in ways
           that cannot be anticipated, the occurrence, or even the perception of an increasing
           likelihood, of a macroeconomic inconsistency can reveal that the economy does not work
           as agents previously thought. This means that economic agents suddenly face an increase
           in perceived structural uncertainty. Learning from what happened entails possibly a large
           change in the perceived probability distributions, say of future states,76 significantly
           affecting aggregate demand. There is some presumption (since the macroeconomic
           inconsistencies on which we are focusing occur as a result of not fully anticipated
           unfavorable events such as those associated with debt crises) that this is destabilizing.77

     9. Uncertainty and learning effects as a result of learning about the socio-political system:
           Crises typically reveal macroeconomic inconsistencies, where some parties' ex ante plans
           have to be revised. Typically too the sum of individuals' perceived "just" claims on
           societal resources exceeds the available resources. And typically, there is fully pre-
           determined system to deal with those inconsistencies.78 This will give rise to negotiations
           and disputes that will at least in part be resolved by the socio-political system. The way in
           which the inconsistencies are dealt with may also entail learning about the true nature of
           the socio-political system. Learning about the social/economic/political system includes
           learning how legal frameworks work, revising views of those who judge over disputes, and
           obtaining greater insights into the power structure within the system. The system itself is
           always evolving, as, for instance, underlying technologies change and the economic
           consequences of those evolutions become apparent. While it is possible that we may learn
           that the social-political system is better at dealing with macroeconomic inconsistencies

76
   The event could alternatively provide more insights about how the economy works, leading to a decrease in uncertainty, although not under the
assumption of rational expectations and not likely in the contexts upon which we focus here, the occurrence of a crisis.
77
   This is especially so because typically such events give rise to an increased dispersion of beliefs, with the adverse effects of those who are more
pessimistic more than offsetting the responses of the more optimistic, as suggested, for instance, by the analysis of Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993a).
78
   For instance, earlier we discussed the ambiguities that arise in bankruptcy laws. As we also noted, such problems are heightened in the presence
of systemic bankruptcies.



                                                                         32
           than was previously thought to be the case, just the opposite may be true, so these effects
           may be either stabilizing or destabilizing.79

Table 1 summarizes the effects that get triggered after the beliefs shock, each of which must be
analyzed comprehensively in order to draw conclusions about the stability properties of a market
economy.80 If there were a complete set of markets, the large income effects that we identify
would not occur, because individuals would have insured against them.81 And with a complete
set of markets, there are not bankruptcies,82 precisely because contracts are designed in ways that
the budget constraints are satisfied without a bankruptcy or default in any state of nature.

                                              Table 1: Types of adjustment forces
                 Type of adjustment force                Direction                             Required market failures
                 Substitution effects                    Stabilizing                           None. Limited by price
                                                                                               rigidities
                 Income       effects     from           Stabilizing or destabilizing          None. Limited by price
                 distributional consequences                                                   rigidities
                 of price changes
                 Fisher-Greenwald-Stiglitz               Destabilizing                         Incomplete markets
                 debt deflation effects
                 Incentive effects from debt             Destabilizing                         Incomplete markets
                 overhang
                 Income       effects     from           Stabilizing or destabilizing          Incomplete markets
                 distributional consequences
                 of the settlement of the
                 macroeconomic
                 inconsistency
                 Income effects as the                   Destabilizing                         Incomplete markets
                 consequence of bankruptcy
                 costs
                 Uncertainty effects as a                Destabilizing                         Incomplete markets
                 result of undefined budget
                 constraints
                 Uncertainty and learning                Destabilizing                         Incomplete markets
                 effects from learning about
                 the economic system
                 Uncertainty and learning                Destabilizing or stabilizing          Incomplete markets
                 effects from learning about
                 the socio-political system

79
   In addition, there may be a dispersion in the changes in beliefs, with those who perceiving the system is unfair--who believe that they have
experience a large loss in wealth--dominating over those who believe otherwise, and the losers may have a higher marginal propensity to consume
than the (relative) winners. In that case, the change in beliefs resulting from learning about how the economic and social system works will depress
aggregate demand.
80
   The change in beliefs gives rise to second round effects that may make matters even worse, including through price adjustments that in the
standard theory were simply hypothesized to help restore equilibrium.
81
   Richer individuals would, on average, provide insurance to poor individuals, so that the realization of a negative wealth shock would in such a
world lead to a transfer of resources from individuals with a low marginal propensity to consume to a high marginal propensity to consume, and so
the payment of the insurance would be stabilizing.
82
   As we have noted, even without a complete set of markets, "complete contracts" can be designed to avoid bankruptcy. The fact that so many
debt contracts are written in ways that clearly anticipate the possibility of default implies that contracts are far from complete. This takes on
particular importance in the events upon which we focus, such as debt crises.



                                                                        33
           IV.4. Assessing stability under imperfect markets

The stability of the market economy will depend on the relative strength of the dis-equilibrating
and equilibrating forces that are put in motion when the system is perturbed. There is no
presumption that the equilibrating forces always dominate over the dis-equilibrating forces. It is
possible that the adjustment forces are overall stabilizing under some circumstances, e.g. for a
small perturbation, but destabilizing under other circumstances, e.g. in the context of a large
disturbance.83 An example of such a non-linearity is the discontinuity in the adjustment forces if
dis-equilibrating forces get activated under some circumstances but not others. We have argued,
for instance, that the revelation of macroeconomic inconsistencies typically will put in motion dis-
equilibrating forces associated with uncertainty, wealth, distributional, and incentives effects that
are not present when the prevailing perception is that the system is in a state of consistency.
Discontinuities in belief formation too give rise to a discontinuity in the strength of destabilizing
adjustment forces.84

Importantly, the adjustment forces that we have described are market determined. None are
dependent on the existence of government, let alone a particular view about how the government
behaves. On the other hand, the belief that government is committed to maintaining the economy
at or near full employment and that it has the tools to do so may affect the behavior of market
participants in ways that are stabilizing.85

Our discussion of stability enables us to further clarify the distinction between the concepts of
equilibrium and disequilibrium to which we alluded in the introduction to this paper.

Disequilibrium vs. Equilibrium with stagnation

The macroeconomic phenomena that are at the core of our analysis have to do with the
malfunctioning of the economy. We have argued that the deepest forms of malfunctioning arise in
situations of disequilibria where a disturbance reveals the inconsistency of plans: Given the new
state of the economy, there will be equilibrium conditions--for instance, the transversality


83
   See Howitt (1978) and Leijonhufvud (1981) for a related discussion on the limits to the stability of a full-employment equilibrium.
84
   Alternatively, even if there is continuity in belief formation--with the size of the revision in beliefs a continuous function of the size of the
revealed macroeconomic inconsistency--there can be a critical threshold--a big enough crisis--such that for crises of that size or larger, at least
in the short run, the dynamics are destabilizing.
85
   For instance, it may lead to reduced precautionary behavior, and this belief itself can help stabilize the economy.



                                                                        34
conditions--that will be violated. Even the standard momentary equilibrium conditions (full
employment) may be violated, even with considerable flexibility of wages and prices, because the
decentralized adjustment processes (described earlier) may not work quickly and forcefully
enough to restore the economy to full employment, and indeed, may move the economy in the
opposite direction.

There are other strands of recent macroeconomic research analyzing the malfunctioning of the
economy--reflected, for instance, in the persistence of unemployment-- as equilibrium
outcomes.86 Our analysis of disequilibrium must be distinguished from those related literatures.
For instance, one approach that became popular in the aftermath of the Great Recession invokes
rigidities in wages to ensure that the labor market can't be restored to full employment after a
shock to aggregate demand.87                           The analysis employs the standard intertemporal general
equilibrium model.                 The increased uncertainty after the crisis induces more precautionary
behavior, lowering aggregate demand88. However, it puts under the rug some of the fundamental
aspects of the behavior of the macroeconomic system that get manifested in the aftermath of the
disequilibrium to which the previous section called attention. A robust analysis of the
macroeconomic dynamics that follow a perturbation must account for how the system responds to
the perturbation, including how the size of the inconsistencies responds to price changes and how
uncertainty evolves endogenously when inconsistencies get revealed.

Another important strand in macroeconomics notes how coordination failures can lead to a bad,
inefficient equilibrium--but the focus is still on "equilibrium".89 The key ingredients of those
theories include strategic complementarities--still generally in an environment of agents endowed
with rational expectations. For instance, suppose that signing a labor contract is costly: the process
of search and matching consumes resources, both for the employer and the potential employees;
and suppose that there is a "thin-market externality" in the search and matching process: the return
of the search for the employer is larger when the potential employee exerts more search effort, and
vice versa. In this context, there will be two equilibria: one with low intensity of search and low

86
   As in the case of the literature on secular stagnation described below.
87
   In the absence of any constraints for market prices, there would still be a vector of prices that would satisfy the market clearing conditions.
    The assumption of fixed wages is, of course, extreme; all that is required is that they are not fully flexible. We have emphasized, however, that
if there is some flexibility, the direction of adjustment may be dis-equilibrating rather than equilibrating.
88
   Not just precautionary savings will be higher, but real investment will be lower. There is an "option value" in not investing, and this is especially
so in a world of "putty-clay." To reiterate what we emphasized earlier: if there were no non-produced asset into which agents could put their
precautionary holdings, the precautionary demand would only increase the composition of the demand for produced goods, not the overall level.
89
   For example, Diamond (1982), Howitt (1985), Cooper and John (1988), Cooper (1999), Benhabib and Farmer (1994, 1999), and Cass and Shell
(1983). See also Howitt (2003) for a review of the literature on coordination failures.



                                                                          35
employment, and another with high intensity of search and high employment. The low effort and
low employment equilibrium is inefficient.90 The dysfunction is often referred to as a coordination
failure; if everyone would become more optimistic about the efforts that the others would exert,
the system would reach a superior, well-coordinated, solution. Absent a mechanism for bringing
about such a coordinated change in expectations, the economy will stay trapped in a low-
employment equilibrium. This equilibrium is of a non-Walrasian type: it is not just determined by
price variables but also by (expectations of) non-price variables--the expectations about the
intensity of search of others. However, this is a different type of coordination failure than the one
associated with the inconsistency of plans in the aggregate that we have emphasized. No
equilibrium conditions are violated in the decentralized market outcome. There is no shock that
puts the economy off-course and to which it has to adjust. Thus, there is, within this literature no
discussion of dynamics of adjustment--the dis-equilibrating forces associated with macroeconomic
inconsistencies that we have discussed in this section are simply absent.91

But still, there is an important link between multiplicity of equilibria and the possibility/likelihood
of the occurrence of macroeconomic inconsistencies, and which can be present even with rational
expectations 92, and especially so in the presence of bankruptcy costs. Without knowing which of
the dynamic trajectories will characterize the future, one cannot know whether a path is
dynamically consistent, and we won't know for sure until the dynamic path is fully revealed. 93
While such multiplicity of equilibria naturally gives rise to macroeconomic inconsistencies, they
can arise more generally--our analysis focuses on this more general situation.



     V.          Beliefs, Uncertainty, and Learning



90
   In such models, even with a unique equilibrium, the level of search will in general not be efficient. See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1988b). The
inefficiencies that arise in the case can be thought of as simply associated with macroeconomic externalities.
91
   More precisely, this literature, like the DSGE literature, focuses on the macroeconomic equilibrium, with no attention to how the economy attains
that equilibrium. Typically, the models are simple enough that standard game-theoretic approaches suffice, with market participants knowing the
pay-off functions of the other relevant participants, and therefore being able to infer their behavior. See, however, our discussion above of how
heterogeneity undermines the plausibility of that approach more generally.
92
   Hirano and Stiglitz (2019) show that in a rational expectations model with overlapping generations, there can be an infinity of trajectories. The
large literature on sunspots (Cass and Shell 1983, Benhabib and Farmer1999) focused on multiplicity of macroeconomic equilibria. Similarly, in
debt markets there may be a low interest rate equilibrium, associated with and justified by low default rates; and another equilibrium with high
interest rates, marked by high default. See Calvo (1988) and Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003a). For a general equilibrium discussion, see Roukny,
Battiston, and Stiglitz (2018).
93
   That is, different individuals (given the observables) may believe that the economy is on different paths; on the trajectory they each believe the
economy is on, there is full macroeconomic consistency; but their beliefs are inconsistent. In this case, the macroeconomic inconsistencies are
sometimes described as arising out of a "coordination failure." But, of course, such coordination failures are to be expected in the absence of a full
set of markets.



                                                                         36
This section focuses on one set of effects identified in the previous section, the interaction between
formation of beliefs, uncertainty, and learning in an environment of incomplete markets in which
macroeconomic inconsistencies can arise.

           V.1. Uncertainty effects as a result of learning about the economic and socio-political
           system

The increase in subjective uncertainty arising out of learning about the economic and socio-
political system can be founded on reasonable assumptions about the structure of learning and its
costs. Suppose that agents understand that there may be more than one model that represents how
the economy works--there are multiple possible worlds. Suppose that understanding the workings
of the economy in each of the possible worlds (including in each of the possible substates) is
costly94. Furthermore, suppose that the agents of the economy have a common prior that suggests
that with very high probability the true world is world A. For a sufficiently high learning cost, it
is optimal for the agents not to learn about how the economy works in world not-A. They act as if
there were a single not-A state. The may form beliefs about the average value of relevant variables
in not-A (but if not-A occurs with small enough probability they may not even do that); but it does
not pay to "refine" one's thinking about what happens in a world of type not-A. Under those
circumstances, sufficiently small updates of priors would not have large effects on the state of
knowledge and beliefs about not-A. But a sufficiently large disparity between priors and posteriors
will trigger an entirely new learning process. Now, the perceived probability of being in world not-
A is large enough as to pay the learning cost. While they learn, uncertainty will reign. They now
not only know that they don't know, they act accordingly.

An example that fits this learning process is the idea of thinking through categories (Mullainathan,
2002) in the presence of non-convexities. The structure of costs of processing information and
learning may be such that it becomes optimal for the economic agents to use coarse categories to
make inferences. Rather than engaging in continuous Bayesian updating, agents update their views
of the world only when they see enough data that suggests that a different view is a better fit to the
realities they have been experiencing--and that it pays to make the investment in information to




 And that there are natural non-convexities to learning--it is better to learn a lot about a few things than a little (say almost nothing) about a lot.
94

And even if ignorance isn't bliss, it's a local optimum. See Radner and Stiglitz (1982).



                                                                         37
refine one's views. Once a category is chosen, other categories are not considered in making
predictions--until another refinement seems desirable.

The same process that governs the evolution of beliefs may endogenously create uncertainty about
the workings of the socio-political-economic system. Suppose that world A is one represented by
a typical DSGE model, in which the possibility of macroeconomic inconsistencies is ruled out. As
long as the signals that the economy receives do not lead to a significant discrepancy between
priors and posteriors, it will be optimal for the agents not to figure out how the socio-political
system under which a macroeconomic inconsistency (that reveals that the world is not-A) would
be resolved. But a sufficiently large discrepancy between priors and posteriors will entail learning.
They now know that they are living in a different world than they had thought, and they know that
they don't know much about this world. They (rightly) perceive themselves as facing more
uncertainty--and this induces still more learning. Note that there is a subtlety here with respect to
the issue of uncertainty: agents knew less about the workings of world not-A before the shock, and
in that sense the distribution of probabilities over world no-A was more disperse--if it were
defined at all. But the probability that they were assigning to that world was low enough as to act
as if that world could not happen and as if for all practical purposes, if it did, it could be described
by, say, the average variables that might prevail in the not-A world. This means that perceived
uncertainty increases after the shock, and, of course, perceived uncertainty, is what actually matters
for economic decisions.95

Heterogeneous beliefs

If different agents follow different processes for formation of expectations, uncertainty may grow
even larger. Take an economy that has had a long period of stability, and that has led to a low
dispersion of beliefs about the nature of the economic system. For instance, before the Great
Recession there was convergence to a shared perception of common knowledge, in particular a
shared belief that we live in a world of the Great Moderation. The switch from the shared belief
of being in world A, the Great Moderation, to world not-A, created significant heterogeneity of

95
   There is an additional element of uncertainty associated with differences in beliefs: "learning" may mean different things for different agents,
creating not only more dispersion in beliefs about the correct model but also more disagreement about the structural parameters of what is believed
to be the correct model for those who share that belief. (See, for instance, Acemoglu, Chernozhukov, and Yildiz 2006Take the example of learning
about macroeconomic theory after the Great Recession: It is clear that some hold to the prior that the world is described by a DSGE model far
more firmly than others, but there is uncertainty about what fraction of market participants will change their beliefs, and for those who change their
beliefs, what their new beliefs will be. Among those who continue to believe in the DSGE model, some may believe that the crisis changed their
estimates of the structural parameters, others that there is no reason for revision, given that one has just observed a once-in-a-hundred year flood,
an event ("a rollover crisis") that, while recognized to be outside the model, does not alter one's views of possible future courses of history.



                                                                         38
beliefs, in particular, because the World not-A can include many different worlds. There is no
reason a priori why all the agents would have the same posterior distribution of probabilities over
all those alternative worlds96, or even employ the same sets of categorizations. And the evidence
is that they did not. Accordingly, the crisis was associated with a discontinuous jump from the
shared belief of being in world A, the Great Moderation, to world not-A; and this led to a large
increase in uncertainty--not only had prior beliefs been destroyed, now individuals knew that they
didn't know what others believed and how the increased dispersion of beliefs would affect the
performance of the economy.

COVID-19

The COVID-19 pandemic--that broke out about a year after we started to write this paper--
constitutes a salient example of a change from world A to world not-A that triggers an endogenous
large increase in uncertainty and a new learning process. The pandemic led to lock-downs that
massively affected the workings of the economic system, leading to significant macroeconomic
inconsistencies--of the kind that constitute the object of our study, as economic plans--and
economic systems all over the world in general--had not accounted for the possibility of such a
contingency.

An extreme event like the COVID-19 pandemic can be analyzed through the lens of the framework
for dynamic macroeconomic disequilibrium with randomness that we present in this paper in two
different ways. The first is to think of COVID-19 as an event that economic agents knew was
possible but thought had such a low probability that it was not worth to learn about its
implications--despite the costs that not knowing much about it would entail in case it was
realized.97 The second possibility is to think of it as an event that could not be foreseen, that was
the consequence of evolutionary forces that could not be anticipated--thus, there was no chance
of even making economic plans that were contingent on such a state of nature. In either case, its
realization would trigger a change in economic and social constraints, a new learning process
(including learning about the sub-states within the state of nature "COVID-19") in which time acts



96
   We would expect such dispersion, for instance, if the agents follow different processes for formation of expectations, including choosing different
categories.
97
   The earlier SARS and MERS epidemics had made clear--to a few--the possibility of a hard-to-anticipate pandemic, inducing the White House
to set up an office within the National Security Council to deal with the threat. But few economic agents incorporated the possibility into their
planning, and it is now clear that there will be major macroeconomic inconsistencies.



                                                                         39
as a constraint, and in which macroeconomic inconsistencies get revealed that act as an accelerator
of the increases in uncertainty.



    V.2. Forecasting and subjective expectations

In the aftermath of the 2008 North-Atlantic financial crisis, the difficulties of macroeconomic
forecasting became evident, with large and systematic errors in forecasting, even by "blue chip"
forecasters. There were also large divergences in forecasts, contradicting the standard assumptions
about common knowledge and rational expectations, but consistent with the analysis of this paper.

Figures 1 and 2 provide two telling examples. Figure 1 shows the comparison between the actual
GDP growth of the U.S. and the FOMC forecasts, and figure 2 shows the comparison between the
actual GDP of Greece and the IMF forecasts, in both cases from the origins of their respective
crises.



                                            Figure 1




Source: Deutsche Bank Research



                                                40
                                                                Figure 2




Source: Reproduced from Guzman and Heymann (2015)




Quantitative macroeconomics has relied for model validation on matching moments.98 The
approach involves calibrating the model so that the "theoretical" or predicted moments of chosen
variables matches the "empirical" or observed moments. In effect, it imposes the assumption that
the subjective probability distribution of outcomes believed by agents within an economic system
is the same as the frequency distribution from a sufficiently large sample of past realizations. Such
a methodology, while it may be useful for forecasting in stable times--if there is a long enough
period of stability without structural or policy changes-- is likely to fail in unstable times, or if the
underlying stochastic processes are non-stationary. It is also likely to fail in ascertaining the
consequences of contemplated policy changes, if those changes are large. In these conditions,
changes in perceptions about how the economy works are likely to be paramount--market

98
   For a telling critique of this methodology and a discussion of alternatives, see Korinek 2018b, and the Symposiums in the Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 2018 and 2020 (in particular the work of David Hendry and Muellbauer, 2018) and Fair (2019).



                                                                    41
participants now realize that that old model was wrong, or is at least is now obsolete. Accordingly,
their behavior will change, and even if the model worked well in describing economic outcomes
before, it may not do so now. In an evolving world there is by definition insufficient data to
construct a reliable posterior distribution based solely upon sample frequencies--in a world in
which the space of states evolves, the limits to what is learnable about the future from any number
of past empirical observations makes such simplistic methodologies unreliable. In times in which
there are massive revisions to beliefs, it may become optimal for agents to put lower weight on
objective data-evidence from the past and more weight on highly uncertain judgments. We may
be able to make inferences about the future direction of the economy under alternative policies,
but the recognition that what is learnable falls short of full structural knowledge implies that such
inferences will require a different methodology; one cannot rely on a model calibrated to match
moments using past data. It is, in particular, a poor way of assessing ex-ante the effects of
economic policies.

Puzzles in economics

In fact, when the standard model proves incapable of matching the reality, the situation is often
characterized as a "puzzle".99 Our analysis provides a way of understanding these so-called
puzzles. The puzzles represent contradictions between real-life data and that predicted by a model
in which agents have confidence in the model of the economy, believe it is stationary, and
accordingly have sure expectations of objective frequencies generated by an already known
stochastic structure (about which nothing remains to be learned), as the rational expectations
hypothesis assumes.100 But in reality, agents behave with not-so-sure expectations about an
evolving economic structure. Those "puzzles" tell something about the subjective expectations
that agents implicitly hold and that lead them to behave in the ways that generate those data
patterns. An alternative, more sensible, approach for macroeconomics entails making inferences
about processes of expectation formation and subjective uncertainty from the observation of
reality, including from survey data on beliefs, and modeling beliefs based on those observations.
Belief formation may implicitly be very non-linear, with selective emphasis on particular pieces
of information. Models employing data on subjective beliefs have the potential in an evolutionary
world to "beat" models relying on objective non-expectations data-evidence in forecasting actual

99
     Like the asset-return pricing puzzles of the finance literature, such as the equity-risk premium puzzle.
100
      Our perspective does not, of course, resolve all puzzles: behavioral finance has provided ample evidence of a wealth of "irrationalities."



                                                                          42
behavior. And this is especially important for macroeconomic analyses whose objective is--like
Keynes'--the improvement in the short run performance of the economy.



    VI.    Macroeconomic Policy

The 2008 economic crisis was also a crisis of mainstream macroeconomics, whose models had not
contemplated even the possibility of such an event happening, and accordingly, hadn't predicted
it, and had a hard time explaining it and providing guidance on how to respond (Stiglitz (2018)).
Critically, many of the "experts" providing advice did not seem to realize that macroeconomic
crises are times in which the crucial assumptions of the benchmark DSGE models are violated.
While those benchmarks might have been reasonable for assessing the effects of policies in times
of Great Moderation, they became unhelpful, even misleading, in times of crisis.

The choice of assumptions (models) obviously has implications for policy. In this section, we
compare the macroeconomic policy prescriptions that are implied by a model that recognizes that
the market economy may produce outcomes that are inter-temporally inconsistent versus one that
doesn't. We show in particular that an analytical framework that, by assumption, precludes the
possibility that policies might exacerbate macroeconomic inconsistencies and uncertainties--
moving the economy in the opposite direction from what they would do in a full equilibrium model
and from what policymakers want--will likely have trouble in assessing the impact of policy at
precisely those times in which policy guidance is most needed.

VI.1. Implications of costly adjustment of wages and prices

In general equilibrium models that assume away the problem of macroeconomic inconsistencies,
unemployment is typically attributed to problems in the structure of labor markets, never to the
broader and more fundamental problems in the macroeconomy. As we have already noted, at first
glance this seems natural: if there is unemployment, there must be a failure in the labor market.
No matter what the cause and magnitude of the source of fluctuations in the demand for labor, a
fully flexible labor market would restore the economy to full employment. The first remedy, if
available, is to remove "frictions" in the labor market, for instance, by weakening the bargaining
power of workers' union in order to eliminate downward wage rigidities.




                                               43
But this policy perspective is partial101 and at times incorrect, as it misses the fundamental issue
raised by the theory of the second best that tells us that removing one distortion, in the presence of
others, may make matters worse. Most importantly from our perspective, more flexible wages may
simply increase the size of the macroeconomic inconsistencies, lowering aggregate demand even
more, and possibly causing more individuals to rethink the appropriateness of their previous sets
of beliefs, in an ongoing downward spiral.102 Thus, once we open the door to the possibility of
macroeconomic inconsistencies and the associated endogenous evolution of structural uncertainty
and beliefs, policies encouraging greater wage flexibility may be counterproductive, as the
decentralized process of adjustment may actually move the economy away from the kind of full
equilibrium with full employment contrary what is envisaged in standard models.

So too, a perspective that focuses on labor market rigidities will likely, in times of macroeconomic
crises, fail at identifying the deeper set of market failures giving rise to high and persistent
unemployment. The important market failures--the ones requiring a policy "fix"--may be those
giving rise to disproportionately large fluctuations in aggregate demand. If those markets failures
hadn't existed, even less than fully flexible labor markets might suffice to maintain full or near-
full employment.

The implication is that analyses of optimal ex-ante and ex-post (that is, in anticipation of the
possibility of large changes in aggregate demand and after those changes occur) policies that omit
how those policies affect the macro consistency of the system and how in turn the inconsistencies
endogenously affect the perceived structural uncertainty and behavior will not in general be robust.
In situations of large macroeconomic inconsistencies, prescriptions based on such analyses may
go badly awry.

The next subsection illustrates these principles in the context of monetary policy.



101
    For instance, it fails to take into account efficiency wage effects: unemployment can persist even in economies without effective labor legislation
or unions. We note the presence of high levels of unemployment in developing countries, where workers have little bargaining power. It is simply
wrong to assert that the seeming "distortions" in the labor market that give rise to unemployment are due to government or to collective action by
workers.
102
     As a result of a downward wage-price spiral of the kind described by Solow and Stiglitz (1968), with adverse Fisherian debt-deflation (or
disinflation) dynamics (Greenwald and Stiglitz (1993a)).
  If individuals fully understood the model, they would understand how the change in policy affected the default rate, and the change in the default
rate (from what was previously expected) would convey no information. Instead, if individuals do not have full confidence in their model, there
will be learning from the change in policy and the consequent change in default rates. The policy experiment (and any change in policy can be
viewed as an experiment) gives them a different set of data from which to make inferences from those that they otherwise would have had. Even
this discussion may put excessive emphasis in assuming individuals act "rationally." More plausibly, seeing a rash of defaults, they may conclude
that the mortgage market is much riskier than they had previously thought. Originally, they hadn't thought through an entire model, nor do they so
in the aftermath of the crisis. Responses may not be well-described by a model formulated on the basis of rational Bayesian updating.



                                                                         44
VI.2. The effectiveness of monetary policy

Monetary policy occupied the center of the policy debate in the aftermath of the 2008 U.S. financial
crisis. It proved ineffective in quickly restoring levels of aggregate demand compatible with full
employment.103 Some of the conventional literature attributed this to the inability to lower the
nominal interest rate below zero (the zero lower bound, ZLB.) Given the ZLB on the nominal
interest rate and the lack of commitment of the monetary authorities to deliver inflationary policies
that would make the real interest rate negative, the economy (according to this theory) is prevented
from achieving an equilibrium in which all (current) markets clear--and in particular, today's
labor market remains in surplus. In this view, if somehow the real interest rate could fall enough,
the economy would be in a situation of (at least momentary) equilibrium with full employment.104

We find the ZLB explanation of the persistence of an insufficiency of aggregate demand
unpersuasive: if that view was correct, one could in general achieve the full employment
equilibrium by, for instance, changing intertemporal prices through time dependent consumption
taxes and investment credits.105

An alternative analysis focuses on how unresolved disequilibria create large structural uncertainty.
In such situations, market participants are aware of the uncertainty surrounding the budget
constraints that they face. In these circumstances, characteristic of an economy in a state of high
macroeconomic distress, it is not really the zero-lower bound what constrains the effectiveness of
monetary policy. Rather, monetary policy is ineffective because, when there is too much
uncertainty, lending, investment, and consumption decisions are highly insensitive to the interest
rate, so the elasticity of aggregate demand to the interest rate becomes small106. Indeed, at moments
of crises, credit rationing becomes more pervasive; and with credit rationing, it is not the interest


103
    For analyses on the effectiveness of monetary policy in the crisis, see for instance Borio (2014), Borio and Hofmann (2017), Goodhart (2015),
Reichlin (2014).
104
    Situations where at a zero-interest rate, there is still an excess supply of labor are sometimes referred to as exhibiting secular stagnation. (See
Hansen (1938), Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014), Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins (2019), Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and Summers
(2016)).We argue below (as Hansen did earlier) that changes in fiscal policy may resolve such situations.
  The term secular stagnation is used in another, markedly different, way: "secular stagnation" is a state of the economy in which productivity
growth is low. This interpretation focuses on the rate of change of productivity, and centers on whether that can be affected by economic policy.
See, e.g. Gordon (2015).
105
    See Stiglitz (2016) and Correia at el. (2013). Of course, a sufficiently large "money rain" would also restore full employment.
106
    That is, estimates of elasticities based on "normal" times, where macroeconomic inconsistencies are not the center of attention, are of limited
relevance in such times. An important aspect of this, emphasized in Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003a) and strongly evident both in the East Asian
crisis and in the 2008 crisis, is bank behavior. Normally, banks do not like to keep excess reserves: the risk adjusted expected returns to lending
out money far exceeds the (often zero) returns to keeping reserves at the central bank. Lowering reserve requirements and lowering the returns on
government bonds induces more lending. But in the presence of the extremes of uncertainty that arise in the presence of the revelation of
macroeconomic inconsistencies and the realization that one's model of the economy was wrong, banks' demand for "precautionary" balances
increases.



                                                                         45
rate that matters so much as bankers' willingness to lend. (Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003a)). When
lenders have a hard time finding solvent counterparties, changes in the interest rate will hardly
affect the lenders' willingness to lend. In short, a decrease in the real interest rate from say 1% to
-1%, or even -5%, will hardly boost aggregate demand, and this makes the standard mechanisms
of transmission of monetary policy to economic activity ineffective (Stiglitz, 2018).

Worse, if it were possible to implement large changes in real interest rates, to say minus 20 percent,
it is likely that doing so would be counterproductive. Such a large change would undoubtedly
have saved some enterprises from default, but pushed other enterprises into default. Creditors that
had counted on receiving positive returns from their lending would suddenly be in difficulty.
Those depending on these creditors for a supply of funds would, in turn, be in difficulties.107
Similarly, negative interest rates will affect the balance sheet of banks and their ability and
willingness to lend. Firms and households that formerly were not subject to credit rationing may
now well be. A whole new range of uncertainties would have opened up: most enterprises have a
complex portfolio of assets (typically imperfectly known to those outside the enterprise), all of
which have to be revalued because of the large effect that the change in the interest rates would
have had on asset prices; and each enterprise depends on a complex network of suppliers
(including suppliers of credits) and customers, whose solvency probabilities have now changed
dramatically.108 The new constraints and increased uncertainty may have large effects on spending
and saving behavior, and thus on the aggregate demand--effects that would not be well-captured
in consumption and investment models estimated in more normal times.109

Thus, the change in intertemporal prices may plausibly have just the opposite effect of that
intended, especially as it may exacerbate macroeconomic inconsistencies. The relevant discussion
for policy guidance is not be about the zero lower bound--as if, if only we could get rid of this
artificial barrier (which one might conceivably do if all money became digital). Rather, it should
be about how to more directly increase aggregate demand, e.g. through fiscal policies, debt

107
    Because the extension of credit is dependent on very specific information, it is typically difficult if not impossible to switch sources of credit,
especially for small enterprises. (See Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990)). Creditors include, of course, not just banks, but suppliers and, in some instances,
customers.
108
    The large recent literature on networks has shown how uncertainties in one part of the network can get passed onto, and amplified, in others.
Complex derivatives have increased these uncertainties, to the point where it may not even be possible to ascertain systemic stability. See, e.g.
Battiston et al 2016, Battiston et al. 2012a,b and Roukny et al. 2018.
109
    This is exemplified by the result that an increase in domestic interest rates can actually lead to a decrease in a country's exchange rate, contrary
to the usual "partial equilibrium" analysis which has traditionally played a central role in international policy guidance. The failure was particularly
evident (and predicted) in the East Asia crisis. Increases in interest rates increased the macroeconomic inconsistencies that had already been
revealed, increased uncertainties as large fractions of productive enterprises were thrown into bankruptcy, and thereby discouraged capital inflows.
See Greenwald and Stiglitz (2003a), Stiglitz (2002b) and Furman and Stiglitz (1998).



                                                                         46
restructuring, or government insurance programs that might reduce the extent of macroeconomic
uncertainties.

VI.3. The effectiveness of fiscal policy

Failure to recognize the importance of macroeconomic inconsistencies in times of crisis can also
lead to incorrect ex-ante evaluations of the macroeconomic effects of fiscal policies. One of the
standard arguments against using fiscal policy is Ricardian equivalence: that the increased
indebtedness on the part of the government as a result of increased spending will lead to an exactly
offsetting reduction in spending by households, making fiscal policy ineffective. But whether such
Ricardian equivalence holds in more normal times (already an unlikely outcome given the
restrictive assumptions under which it holds110), it is not likely to do so in moments such as we are
considering here.

Individual risk--the consequences for particular individuals of their inability to fulfill their
obligations--can be markedly different from collective or aggregate risk. There may be a high
level of uncertainty about which individuals are at risk of going to go into default--and so all
individuals may increase their precautionary savings--but less uncertainty about aggregate
resources. The fact that the higher taxes that might have to be levied in the future will be levied
on those for whom the outcome of the resolution of the inconsistencies treats well means that the
government is in effect providing some state insurance. The provision of such insurance reduces
the need for precautionary behavior, and thus expands aggregate demand.111

Of course, to ascertain whether a budget trajectory exhibits macroeconomic consistency the
government, like the private sector, also faces the difficult challenge of identifying output trends--
a task that becomes particularly complex in times of crises. In fact, the idea that debt crises are
the consequence of reckless spending--in what is often referred to as "fiscal indiscipline"--needs
to be reexamined. It is wrong to classify spending as "excessive" on the basis of ex-post
performance, instead of in reference to what were the prevailing expectations at the time in which


110
   E.g. the absence of credit constraints. See, e.g. Stiglitz (1988).
111
   These results are, of course, consistent with those showing that there are in fact higher multipliers associated with government spending in deep
downturns. But there are other reasons as well to expect multipliers to be smaller when the economy is near full employment: the scope for the
expansion of output is limited, and central banks are less likely to engage in offsetting measures, and such measures are more likely to be effective.
Moreover, if it is expected that the economy will be operating below full employment next period, spending deferred to future dates has multiplier
effects in later periods, and that redounds to increase consumption this period: the full multiplier is thus larger than a simple one period analysis
suggests. (See Neary and Stiglitz (1983)). Just as estimates of interest elasticities based on "normal" times, where macroeconomic inconsistencies
are not the center of attention, are of limited relevance in more normal times, so too for multipliers. See, for instance, Auerbach and Gorodnichenko
(2012a, 2012b), Blanchard and Leigh (2013), Canzoneri et al. (2016), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014).



                                                                         47
the fiscal policies were implemented. The problem becomes even more complex when we
recognize that the cycle affects the trend, as theoretical and empirical literature suggests (see for
instance Cerra and Saxena (2008, 2017), Aguiar and Gopinath (2007)). There are plausible
circumstances under which more countercyclical spending could have made the debts sustainable:
the problem may have been that the government spent too little, not too much.112

VI.4. The importance of debt policies

Macroeconomic crises are situations in which there are not enough resources to fulfill all plans.
Inevitably, something has to adjust. The restoration of macroeconomic consistency becomes a
necessary condition for the resolution of the crisis. The most direct way that this might be done is
through a restructuring of liabilities, a process that determines how the "losses" (the difference
between what was planned (or "promised") and what will happen) are distributed. Such a process,
in the absence of a complete legal framework, entails conflict. And the resolution of conflict is
essentially a political process.

Ultimately, when monetary and fiscal policies are insufficient to restore the economy to full
employment, and as a result, macroeconomic inconsistencies get revealed--many credit contracts
cannot be fulfilled-- governments need to contemplate the possibility of debt restructurings. And
to provide guidance on the appropriate debt policies, macroeconomic models must account for the
effects of such restructurings on economic performance.

These effects are sometimes ambiguous, with considerable controversy surrounding judgments.
Consider a debt restructuring involving a write-down of foreign debts. Reducing the net outflow
of funds out of a country provides more fiscal space for expansionary policies. Those in the
financial markets, who obviously wish to discourage such debt restructurings, argue that there is a
high risk of losing access to financial markets. But when the flow of funds is systematically out
of the country (to service the debt) for the foreseeable future, access to capital is largely irrelevant.
Moreover, competitive markets are supposed to be forward looking: the main insight that rational
markets should make from a default is that earlier lenders failed to do due diligence to check the



112
    Our identification of the increased uncertainty following the revelation of a macroeconomic inconsistency, and the resulting increased
precautionary behavior which reduces aggregate demand, suggests a set of policies which might stabilize the economy: the provision of
macroeconomic Arrow-Debreu securities, providing compensation to investors, for instance, should it turn out that the macroeconomic downturn
lasts longer than expected; such insurance would remove a major impediment to investment in a recession and might increase the responsiveness
of investment to monetary policy.



                                                                    48
macro consistency of the country's plans. Accordingly, a country with less debt burden is in a
better position to get greater access to funds.113

The failure to account for the effects of debt restructurings on economic performance represents
an important lacuna in the mainstream macroeconomics literature on debt crises resolution, and is
especially noticeable in the literature on sovereign defaults.114                                          Because the problem of
macroeconomic inconsistency and what it implies for adjustment is not even contemplated in these
strands of work, the destabilizing consequences of not restructuring debt that we have emphasized
in this paper--the endogenous increase in uncertainty that depresses aggregate demand and thus
deteriorates even more the debt sustainability, is absent from the analyses.115

        VII.        Conclusions

The 2008 U.S. financial crisis posed a challenge to macroeconomic theory in many ways similar
to that posed by the Great Depression. The 2008 crisis revealed the inadequacies of the prevailing
macroeconomic doctrines. The standard DSGE models neither anticipated the possibility of the
Great Recession--nor could they have done so116; nor would they have done any better 80 years
ago in accounting for the possibility of the Great Depression; nor have they provided a framework
for understanding how to prevent another such occurrence or how to respond to such crises. These
deficiencies suggest the need for an alternative macroeconomics. But there has yet to be reached
a consensus on a new overarching framework for macroeconomic analysis. This paper, and this
symposium, are intended to help fill in the lacuna.

We have followed the traditional approach of identifying the critical failure in the standard Arrow-
Debreu paradigm that might account for market dysfunctions of the magnitude observed; here, we
argue for the crucial role of the incompleteness of markets, individual heterogeneity and an
evolving economy where individuals are constantly learning about the structure of the economy


113
    Empirically, countries that had deep restructurings, such as Russia in 1998, very quickly returned to the capital markets. See, for instance,
Stiglitz (2010a).
114
    Much of which emphasizes the problems of limited commitment and the importance of the reputation of sovereign debtors--to some extent
understandable, given the enforceability problems for sovereign debt payments. See, e.g. Eaton and Gersovitz (1981).
    The issue, however, is equally important with private, including domestic, debt. Many argued, for instance, that a debt restructuring in the US
mortgage market would have facilitated recovery. Iceland's quick recovery from the 2008 Recession is widely attributed to its extensive debt
restructuring. See Stiglitz (2010b).
115
    The degree of uncertainty associated with a debt crisis and debt restructuring would be reduced if there were a more widely agreed set of
principles guiding such restructuring; and that in turn might reduce the adverse effects on aggregate demand and accordingly the depth of the
subsequent downturns. This is part of the reason that virtually every country has adopted a bankruptcy law to guide restructuring; but the US and
a few other countries have thwarted the adoption of international guidelines along the lines endorsed by the UN General Assembly in 2015.
116
      Simply because that event entailed a "disequilibrium" of a kind that the model itself ruled out.



                                                                           49
and the behavior of agents within it. We focus in particular on a key consequence of these
assumptions:           the presumption that the economy is not necessarily on an equilibrium trajectory,
the almost inevitable macroeconomic inconsistencies which emerge, giving rise episodically to
crises.

It has long been recognized that Keynes' static approach to understanding persistent
unemployment is unsatisfactory. But we argue here so too is the pseudo-equilibrium dynamics of
DSGE models, which assume that there are no macroeconomic inconsistencies--and which
assume that when they inevitably occur (as they did in the Great Depression and in 2008, and in
the myriad of other crises over the past century), the economy miraculously instantaneously gets
restored to the new equilibrium, and blithely plunges ahead again assuming that there will never
again be such an event. Our approach provides a more intellectually coherent way forward.

We argue that the center of attention should be explaining the large changes in aggregate demand,
well beyond the level that can easily be explained by the exogenous technology shocks buffeting
the economy; and in understanding the real time adjustment processes. We have shown, in
particular, that these may be destabilizing; rather than quickly restoring the economy to full
employment, they move the economy away from it. Those destabilizing forces are just absent in
the benchmark macroeconomic models that assume that consistency conditions are always
satisfied and that simply assume that the economy constantly re-equilibrates to move along an
equilibrium trajectory. 117

The Arrow-Debreu model provides a powerful apparatus for economic analysis. Keynes wrote
before Arrow and Debreu, and hence he did not have access to that formal apparatus to identify
what were the differences between the perfect markets benchmark and actual economies that lead
to persistent unemployment and unstable macroeconomic dynamics. Other leading
macroeconomists in the era before the "rational expectations revolution" and DSGE models came
to dominate the field, for instance Leijonhufvud (1968, 1981) and Clower (1965),118 focused, as
we have, on the analysis of disequilibrium and intertemporal coordination failures, but perhaps
one of the barriers for the communication with the mainstream literature was that they did not

117
    Thus, this paper can be thought of as complementing and extending earlier work on shock amplification (e.g. as a result of the financial
accelerator) and shock creation (e.g. work on instability arising from pseudo-wealth creation and destruction and Minsky credit cycles) by focusing
on the volatility associated with the revelation of macro-inconsistencies and the destabilizing dynamics to which that can give rise. Even without
a crisis, there can be large and sudden changes in aggregate demand, beyond the ability of labor and other markets to instantaneously adjust to
restore full employment.
118
    For a detailed account and analysis of the evolution of macroeconomic thinking, see De Vroey (2016).



                                                                       50
conduct their analyses sufficiently in reference to the Arrow-Debreu benchmark that quickly
became a cornerstone of the language of economic theory.

We learned in the four decades that preceded the 2008 U.S. financial crisis that the Arrow-Debreu
theorems were not robust to small changes in assumptions--in a large number of papers, one of
the authors of this paper, Joseph Stiglitz, and his coauthors, demonstrated, first, that small changes
to the assumptions of the perfect markets benchmark implied that the free-markets solution was
no longer in general Pareto optimal--on the contrary, there could be large inefficiencies, and there
were policy interventions that would improve the outcomes delivered by markets; second, that
even with tiny costs of acquiring information, perfect information would become an impossibility,
meaning that the benchmark of perfect markets was largely irrelevant; and third, that with
imperfect information, even competitive markets could be characterized by non-market
clearing.119 The micro-inefficiencies to which this literature called attention have been shown to
have their macro-economic counterparts, as demonstrated in the large and growing literature on
macroeconomic externalities.                      But one aspect that was not analyzed by that literature was the
implications of the possibility of macroeconomic inconsistencies in an environment of incomplete
markets for the stability of the system--that is, large changes in the aggregate demand could trigger
inconsistencies that would render the market solution unstable. (Obviously, along these unstable
paths, with persistent unemployment, for instance, there may be massive inefficiencies.)

Our framework for macroeconomic analysis provides, in turn, a different perspective of the
effectiveness of alternative macroeconomic policies, suggesting, in particular that the
ineffectiveness of monetary policy may not be due to the zero lower bound, that fiscal policy may
be more effective than in the traditional equilibrium theory, and that there are situations in which
a restructuring of debt is desirable.120 Better institutions for resolving inconsistencies, e.g. better
legal frameworks for debt restructuring, may accordingly improve macroeconomic performance.




119
   There were a host of other ways in which the standard model was shown not to be robust, e.g. equilibrium often did not exist; markets were not,
in general, competitive; and a competitive equilibrium was not, in general characterized by a single price for a given good. For a survey, see Stiglitz
(2002a). Unfortunately, much of modern macroeconomics is based on the "perfect markets" model, with various "frictions" thrown into the
analysis, often in a relatively ad hoc manner--in spite of the pretense of "micro-founding" macroeconomics. See, e.g. Greenwald and Stiglitz
(1987).
120
   In the aftermath of crises, macroeconomic analysis needs to identify whether the environment that is under scrutiny corresponds to a new
"normal" of low growth/secular stagnation, or if the observed stagnation is a result of the abnormality of the environment--one featured by
disequilibria with unresolved inconsistencies. The answer to that question is crucial for identifying the right policy course.




                                                                         51
Our analysis also suggests that interventions that stabilize beliefs ex-ante contribute to a more
stable environment--the belief that the government can stabilize the economy reduces
precautionary behavior and is thus itself stabilizing. There are a number of interventions that
should be considered. For instance, those that reduce the magnitude of the shocks experienced by
an economy, such as capital account or macro-prudential regulations; and those that increase the
ability of the economy and those within it to absorb risk and to respond to it in ways that stabilize
the economy, such as the automatic stabilizer provided by income or unemployment insurance.121

There is a well-defined model of a perfectly functioning economy; but economic dysfunction can
take many different forms. This is especially so for deep downturns: one may be the result of a
trade war, another of a housing bubble, another of a tech bubble, another of an overexuberant
response to inflationary fears, another to oil politics, still another to a pandemic.122 None of these
are well described by a random technology shock with a known distribution; in all of them there
is great uncertainty about subsequent events and their implications for the evolving economy. But
we can nonetheless develop an intellectual frame for thinking about these never fully anticipated
events, which give rise to macroeconomic inconsistencies with all the untoward follow-on effects
that we have described: the revealed inconsistencies lead in turn to the recognition of future
possible disequilibrium, to momentary equilibrium where the markets do not clear, and to
adjustment processes which may move the economy further away from equilibrium.

In this paper, there are, of course, many important questions we have not been able to address.
Capital market imperfections, for instance, give rise to imperfect labor market mobility:
individuals may not be able to move from a declining sector to a growing sector; and such "real"
rigidities can give rise to dysfunctional macroeconomic equilibria--including those associated
with high levels of defaults.123

Nor have we identified the conditions under which macroeconomic inconsistencies are likely to
be especially large or the revelation of such inconsistencies is likely to be sudden. Loose financial
market regulation may give rise, for instance, to Minskyian excessive credit expansion which

121
    There is a limit to what the government can do to prevent macroeconomic inconsistencies. It may be as difficult for the government as for the
private sector to understand what the consequences of certain innovations for the future of wealth creation will be--like the private sector, the
government may have incomplete knowledge about the full space of states. Thus, in the absence of complete markets, governments are not immune
to the possibility of miss-identification of wealth that matters for ensuring macroeconomic consistency. But while government may face the same
limitations of knowledge that the private sector faces, it can do more to resolve them once they appear; indeed, in one way or another, the resolution
of macroeconomic inconsistencies almost always entails some government actions.
122
    The evidence on macroeconomic crises reviewed in Heymann and Montero (2019) constitutes a clear testimony of this fact.
123
    See Gallegati et al (2012a, 2012b).



                                                                         52
likely leads to a large macroeconomic inconsistency. Excessive fears of inflation too may lead
monetary authorities to suddenly increase interest rates in an unanticipated way, exposing if not
creating a macroeconomic inconsistency. What is clear, however, is that the associated large
macroeconomic fluctuations that are the object of our study are typically induced not by a large
exogenous technology shock, but by endogenous processes.124

We have also not had much to say about the kinds of underlying economic circumstances in which
these problems are most likely to arise: central is the notion of the non-stationarity of the
underlying stochastic processes describing the economy, and that is most likely to be particularly
relevant in periods of rapid and unpredictable changes in technology and/or economic structure,
such as that associated with the move from agriculture to manufacturing in the earlier part of the
last century or the move from manufacturing to a service sector economy, accompanied by rapid
globalization, including the integration of the emerging markets and developing countries into the
global economy, that marks the current era. (Our perspective is thus consistent with the findings
of Kindleberger, who observes the booms and bubbles are typically associated with large
technology changes.)

While there is a rich agenda ahead, even in its current state of development, our dynamic
disequilibrium theory with randomness helps us understand the fundamental failures of DSGE,
which no Ptolemaic attempts at repair, no tweaking of the model, can address. It makes clear the
sense in which the standard model is not really general, emphasizes that the standard model is
intellectually incoherent, has no theory (outside of the representative agent model) for how
equilibrium is attained125, and does not provide a framework for addressing the most important
macroeconomic challenges, which appear when macroeconomic inconsistencies appear. Most
importantly, the dynamic disequilibrium theory with randomness points the way towards a better
macroeconomics, focusing in particular on situations where macroeconomics really matters. It
explains why decentralized market forces may be disequilibrating, provides a framework for
thinking about how to do better forecasting, and provides a distinctly different policy framework--
which had it been employed in 2008, might have led to a more robust recovery.

124
   As we have also noted, we have not identified the conditions under which there is a slow gradual evolution of beliefs, including about the
existence of macroeconomic inconsistencies, vs. the kind of sudden change often associated with a crisis.
125
   Advocates of DSGE models might say: "Never mind that we don't have a theory explaining how equilibrium is attained. All we are claiming is
that the economy behaves as if it somehow instantaneously achieved the equilibrium." Such a response, of course, runs counter to the thrust of
modern macroeconomics, which is to provide micro-foundations to the assumptions. But even more to the point, we have repeatedly shown here
that the economy does not function as if it instantaneously is restored to an equilibrium trajectory, once perturbed.



                                                                     53
The evolutionary nature of the environment that we have described means that it is not just that
societies need to develop institutions to deal with the macro inconsistencies that that are inherent
to the functioning of market economies, but they also need to build institutions that are adaptable--
that can evolve with the understanding of the society in a world that also evolves in ways that
cannot always be conceived at the time that those institutions are designed. Learning and
adaptation is the key. This is true for macroeconomic thinking as well. We hope these notes
contribute to that.

References

Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, and Muhamet Yildiz. "Learning and disagreement in an
uncertain world." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12648 (2006).

Aghion,    Philippe,   and    Peter    Howitt.    "A    model    of    growth    through    creative
destruction." Econometrica 60, no. 2 (1992): 323-351.

Aghion, Philippe, and Peter W. Howitt. The Economics of Growth. MIT Press, 2008.

Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath. "Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current
account." Journal of International Economics 69, no. 1 (2006): 64-83.

Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath. "Emerging market business cycles: The cycle is the
trend." Journal of Political Economy 115, no. 1 (2007): 69-102.

Arellano, Cristina. "Default risk and income fluctuations in emerging economies." The American
Economic Review 98, no. 3 (2008): 690-712.

Arnott, Richard, Bruce Greenwald, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Information and Economic
Efficiency," Information Economics and Policy 6, no. 1 (March 1994): 77-88.

Aguiar, Mark, and Manuel Amador. "Sovereign debt." In Handbook of International Economics
4, edited by Gita Gopinath, Elhanan Helpman, and Kenneth Rogoff, 647-687. Elsevier, 2014.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. "Fiscal multipliers in recession and expansion."
In Fiscal policy after the financial crisis, 63-98. University of Chicago Press, 2012a.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. "Measuring the output responses to fiscal
policy." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4, no. 2 (2012b): 1-27.




                                                 54
Auman, Robert J., Agreeing to disagree, The annals of statistics, 1976

Banerjee, Abhijit V. ,"A Simple Model of Herd Behavior," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
Volume 107, Issue 3, August 1992, Pages 797­817,
Battiston, S., Domenico Delli Gatti, Mauro Gallegati, B. C. Greenwald, and Joseph E. Stiglitz.
"Liaisons Dangereuses: Increasing Connectivity, Risk Sharing, and Systemic Risk." Journal of
Economic Dynamics and Control 36, no. 8 (2012a): 1121-1141.

Battiston, S., Domenico Delli Gatti, Mauro Gallegati, B. C. Greenwald, and Joseph E. Stiglitz.
"Default cascades: When does risky diversification increase stability?" Journal of Financial
Stability 8, no. 3 (2012b): 138-49.

Battiston, S., Guido Caldarelli, Robert M. May, Tarik Roukny, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "The Price
of Complexity in Financial Networks." PNAS (Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America) 113, no. 36 (September 6, 2016): 10031-36.

Benhabib, Jess, and Roger E.A. Farmer. "Indeterminacy and increasing returns." Journal of
Economic Theory 63, no. 1 (1994): 19-41.

Benhabib, Jess, and Roger E.A. Farmer. "Indeterminacy and sunspots in macroeconomics." In
Handbook of Macroeconomics 1A, edited by John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, 387-448.
Elsevier, 1999.

Bernhardt, Donald, and Marshall Eckblad. "Stock Market Crash of 1987." Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago (2013).

Blanchard, Olivier. "On the future of macroeconomic models." Oxford Review of Economic
Policy 34, no. 1-2 (2018): 43-54.

Blanchard, Olivier J., and Daniel Leigh. "Growth forecast errors and fiscal multipliers." The The
American Economic Review 103, no. 3 (2013): 117-20.

Borio, Claudio. "Monetary policy and financial stability: what role in prevention and recovery?"
Capitalism and Society 9, no. 2 (2014).

Borio, Claudio, and Boris Hofmann. "Is monetary policy less effective when interest rates are
persistently low?" Bank of International Settlements Working Papers 628 (2017).




                                               55
Boz, Emine, Christian Daude, and C. Bora Durdu. "Emerging market business cycles: Learning
about the trend." Journal of Monetary Economics 58, no. 6-8 (2011): 616-631.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., Alp Simsek, and Wei Xiong. "A welfare criterion for models with
distorted beliefs." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 4 (2014): 1753-1797.

Calvo, Guillermo A. "Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of sudden
stops." Journal of Applied Economics 1, no. 1 (1988): 35-54.

Canzoneri, Matthew, Fabrice Collard, Harris Dellas, and Behzad Diba. "Fiscal multipliers in
recessions." The Economic Journal 126, no. 590 (2016): 75-108.

Cass, David and Karl Shell. "Do Sunspots Matter?" Journal of Political Economy 91, no. 21
(1983): 193­228.

Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena. "Growth dynamics: the myth of economic
recovery." The American Economic Review 98, no. 1 (2008): 439-57.

Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena. "Booms, crises, and recoveries: A new paradigm of
the business cycle and its policy implications." International Monetary Fund Working Paper
17/250 (2017).

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. "On DSGE
models." Journal of Economic Perspectives 32, no. 3 (2018): 113-40.

Clower, Robert W. "A Keynesian Counter Revolution: A Theoretical Appraisal." (1965).

Colander, David, Peter Howitt, Alan Kirman, Axel Leijonhufvud, and Perry Mehrling (2008).
"Beyond DSGE models: toward an empirically based macroeconomics." The American Economic
Review 98, no. 2 (2008): 236-40.

Cooper, R. "Coordination Games: Complementarities and Macroeconomics." New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1999.

Cooper, R., and A. John. "Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Models." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, no. 3 (August, 1988): 441-63.

Cooter, Robert D., and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. "Economic analysis of legal disputes and their
resolution." Journal of Economic Literature 27, no. 3 (1989): 1067-1097.



                                              56
Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. "Unconventional Fiscal
Policy at the Zero Bound." The American Economic Review 103, no. 4 (2013): 1172-1211.

Dávila, Eduardo, and Anton Korinek. "Pecuniary externalities in economies with financial
frictions." The Review of Economic Studies 85, no. 1 (2017): 352-395.

De Vroey, Michel. A history of macroeconomics from Keynes to Lucas and beyond. Cambridge
University Press, 2016.

D. Delli Gatti, M. Gallegati, B. Greenwald, A. Russo and J. E. Stiglitz, "Mobility Constraints,
Productivity Trends, and Extended Crises," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
83(3) (2012a) 375­ 393.
D. Delli Gatti, M. Gallegati, B. Greenwald, A. Russo and J. E. Stiglitz, "Sectoral Imbalances and
Long Run Crises," The Global Macro Economy and Finance, F. Allen, M. Aoki, J.-P. Fitoussi,
N. Kiyotaki, R. Gordon, and J.E. Stiglitz, eds., IEA Conference Volume No. 150-III, Houndmills,
UK and New York: Palgrave, 2012 , pp. 61-97

Diamond, P. "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium." Journal of Political
Economy 90, no. 5 (1982): 881-94.

Dosi, Giovanni. "Sources, procedures, and microeconomic effects of innovation." Journal of
Economic Literature 26, no. 3 (1988): 1120-1171.

Dosi, Giovanni, and Richard R. Nelson. "An introduction to evolutionary theories in
economics." Journal of Evolutionary Economics 4, no. 3 (1994): 153-172.

Dosi, Giovanni, Mauro Napoletano, Andrea Roventini, Joseph E. Stiglitz and Tania Treibich.
"Rational Heuristics? Expectations and Behaviorism Evolving Economies with Heterogeneous
Interacting Agents." Economic Inquiry, Vol. 58, Issue 2, April 2020 (Also, NBER Working
Paper no. 26922

Eaton, Jonathan, and Mark Gersovitz. "Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical
analysis." The Review of Economic Studies 48, no. (1981). 2: 289-309.

Eaton, Jonathan, M. Gersovitz, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Pure Theory of Country Risk." European
Economic Review 30, no. 3 (June 1986): 481-513.

Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman. "Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: A Fisher-
Minsky-Koo approach." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, no. 3 (2012): 1469-1513.



                                               57
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Neil R. Mehrotra. "A model of secular stagnation." National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 20574 (2014).

Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins. "A model of secular stagnation:
Theory and quantitative evaluation." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11, no. 1
(2019): 1-48.

Evans, George W., and Roger Guesnerie. "Coordination on saddle-path solutions: the eductive
viewpoint--linear univariate models." Macroeconomic Dynamics 7, no. 1 (2003): 42-62.

Evans, George W., and Roger Guesnerie. "Coordination on saddle-path solutions: the eductive
viewpoint--linear multivariate models." Journal of Economic Theory 124, no. 2 (2005): 202-229.

Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja. Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics.
Princeton University Press, 2001.

Fair, Ray. "Some Important Macro Points." Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 2165R
(2019).

Furman, Jason and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from East Asia."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. 2 (1998): 1-114.

Goodhart, Charles. "Why monetary policy has been comparatively ineffective?" The Manchester
School 83, no. S1 (2015): 20-29.

Gordon, Robert J. "Secular stagnation: A supply-side view." The American Economic Review 105,
no. 5 (2015): 54-59.

Gordon, Robert J. The Rise and Fall of American Growth, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2016.

Greenspan, Alan (2008). Hearing before the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
House of Representatives, One Hundred Tenth Congress, Second Session, October 23. Available
at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg55764/html/CHRG-110hhrg55764.htm

Greenwald, B. C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Externalities in economies with imperfect information
and incomplete markets." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 101, no. 2 (1986): 229-264.

Greenwald, B. C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Keynesian, New Keynesian and New Classical
Economics." Oxford Economic Papers 39 (March 1987): 119-133.


                                              58
Greenwald, B. C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Examining Alternative Macroeconomic Theories,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. 1 (1988a): 207-270.

Greenwald, B. C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Pareto Inefficiency of Market Economies: Search and
Efficiency Wage Models," The American Economic Review 78, no. 2 (May 1988b): 351-355.

Greenwald, B. C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Toward a Theory of Rigidities." The American
Economic Review 79, no. 2 (May 1989): 364-69.

Greenwald, B. C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Financial Market Imperfections and Business Cycles."
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, no. 1 (February 1993a): 77-114.

Greenwald, B. C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "New and old Keynesians." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 7, no. 1 (1993b): 23-44.

Greenwald, B. C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary Economics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003a.

Greenwald, B. C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Macroeconomic Fluctuations in an Economy of
Phelps-Winter Markets." In Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern
Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, edited by Philippe Aghion, Roman Frydman,
Joseph Stiglitz, and Michael Woodford, 123-136. Princeton University Press, 2003b.

Griffith-Jones, Stephany, José Antonio Ocampo, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds. Time for a visible
hand: Lessons from the 2008 world financial crisis. Oxford University Press, 2010.

Grossman, S., and J. E. Stiglitz, "On Value Maximization and Alternative Objectives of the
Firm," Journal of Finance, 32(2), May 1977, pp. 389-402.

Grossman, S., and J. E. Stiglitz, "Stockholder Unanimity in the Making of Production and
Financial Decisions," with S. Grossman, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94(3), May 1980,
pp. 543-566

Guesnerie, Roger (1992). "An exploration of the eductive justifications of the rational-
expectations hypothesis." The American Economic Review 82, no. 5 (1992): 1254-1278.

Guzman, Martin, and Daniel Heymann. "The IMF debt sustainability analysis: issues and
problems." Journal of Globalization and Development 6, no. 2 (2015): 387-404.




                                                59
Guzman, Martin, and Peter Howitt. "Learning, expectations, and the financial instability
hypothesis." In Towards a General Theory of Deep Downturns, IEA Conference Volume, 155-VI,
edited by Joseph E. Stiglitz and Martin Guzman, 50-60. Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2016.

Guzman, Martin, José Antonio Ocampo, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds. Too little, too late: The quest
to resolve sovereign debt crises. Columbia University Press, 2016.

Guzman, Martin, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Pseudo-wealth and consumption fluctuations." National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 22838 (2016a).

Guzman, Martin and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Creating a Framework for Sovereign Debt Restructuring
That Works." In Too Little, Too Late: The Quest to Resolve Sovereign Debt Crises, edited by
Martin Guzman, José Antonio Ocampo and Joseph E. Stiglitz. Columbia University Press, 2016b.

Guzman, Martin and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "A Soft Law Mechanism for Sovereign Debt Restructuring
based on the UN Principles." Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung International Policy Analysis (2016c).

Guzman, Martin and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "A Theory of Pseudo-Wealth." In Towards a General
Theory of Deep Downturns, IEA Conference Volume, 155-VI, edited by Joseph E. Stiglitz and
Martin Guzman, 21-33. Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016d.

Hahn, Frank, "Equilibrium Dynamics with Heterogeneous Capital Goods," The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, 1966, vol. 80, issue 4, 633646

Haldane,   Andrew     G.,   and    Arthur   E.    Turrell.   "An   interdisciplinary   model   for
macroeconomics." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 34, no. 1-2 (2018): 219-251.

Hansen, Alvin, Full Recovery or Stagnation? New York: W.W. Norton & Co.; 1st edition, 1938

Hendry, David F., and John N. J. Muellbauer. "The future of macroeconomics: macro theory and
models at the Bank of England." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 34, no. 1-2 (2018): 287-328.

Heymann, Daniel. "Macroeconomics of broken promises." In Macroeconomics in the Small and
the Large, edited by Roger E. A. Farmer. Edward Elgar, 2008.

Heymann, Daniel, and Pablo Sanguinetti. "Business cycles from misperceived trends." Economic
Notes 27, no. 2 (1998): 205-232.




                                                 60
Heymann, Daniel, and Gustavo Montero. "Notes on Expectations, Coordination Failures, and
Macro Crises." Working Paper (2019).

Hirano, Tomohiro, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "The Wobbly Economy." Working Paper (2019).

Hoff, K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Striving for Balance in Economics: Towards a Theory of the
Social Determination of Behavior." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 126 (June
2016): 25­57.

Howitt, Peter. "The limits to stability of a full-employment equilibrium." The Scandinavian
Journal of Economics 80, no. 3 (1978): 265-282.

Howitt, Peter. `Transaction Costs in the Theory of Unemployment', The American Economic
Review 75, no. 1 (March 1985): 88-100.

Howitt, Peter. "Adjusting to technological change." The Canadian Journal of Economics 27, no.
4 (1994): 763-775.

Howitt, Peter. "Coordination failures." In An Encyclopedia of Macroeconomics, edited by Brian
Snowdown and Howard R. Vane, 140-44. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2003.

Jeanne, Olivier, and Anton Korinek. "Managing credit booms and busts: A Pigouvian taxation
approach." Journal of Monetary Economics 107 (2018): 2-17.

Jermann, Urban, and Vincenzo Quadrini. "Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks." The
American Economic Review 102, no. 1 (2012): 238-71.

Keynes, John Maynard. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Kessinger
Publishing, 1936.

Kindleberger, Charles P., and Robert Z. Aliber. Manias, panics and crashes: a history of financial
crises. Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.

Kirman, Alan P. "Whom or what does the representative individual represent?" Journal of
Economic Perspectives 6, no. 2 (1992): 117-136.

Korinek, Anton. "Regulating capital flows to emerging markets: An externality view." Journal of
International Economics 111 (2018a): 61-80.




                                               61
Korinek, Anton. "Thoughts on DSGE Macroeconomics: Matching the Moment, But Missing the
Point?" In Toward a Just Society, edited by Martin Guzman. Columbia University Press, 2018b.

Korinek, Anton, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Artificial Intelligence and Its Implications for Income
Distribution and Unemployment," in The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda, Ajay
Agrawal, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb (eds.), NBER/University of Chicago Press, May, pp.
349-390. 2019 also National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. w24174 ,( 2017).

Krugman, Paul. "Financing vs. forgiving a debt overhang." Journal of Development
Economics 29, no. 3 (1988): 253-268.

Leijonhufvud, Axel. On Keynesian Economics and the Economics of Keynes. Oxford University
Press, 1968.

Leijonhufvud, Axel. Information and Coordination: Essays in Macroeconomic Theory. Oxford
University Press, 1981.

Lindé, Jesper. "DSGE models: still useful in policy analysis?" Oxford Review of Economic
Policy 34, no. 1-2 (2018): 269-286.

Lorenzoni, Guido. "Inefficient credit booms." The Review of Economic Studies 75, no. 3 (2008):
809-833.

McKibbin, Warwick J., and Andrew Stoeckel. "Modelling a complex world: improving macro-
models." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 34, no. 1-2 (2018): 329-347.

Milgrom, Paul, and Nancy Stokey. "Information, trade, and common knowledge." Journal of
Economic Theory 26, no. 1 (1982): 17-27.

Miller, Marcus, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Leverage and Asset Bubbles: Averting Armageddon with
Chapter 11?" Economic Journal, 120, no. 544 (May 2010): 500-518.

Mullainathan, Sendhil. "Thinking through categories." Working Paper (2002).

Nakamura, Emi, and Jon Steinsson. "Fiscal stimulus in a monetary union: Evidence from US
regions." The American Economic Review 104, no. 3 (2014): 753-92.

Neary, Peter and J. E. Stiglitz, "Toward a Reconstruction of Keynesian Economics: Expectations
and Constrained Equilibria," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98, Supplement, 1983, pp. 199-228.



                                              62
Neeman, Zvika. "Common beliefs and the existence of speculative trade." Games and Economic
Behavior 16, no. 1 (1996): 77-96.

Nelson, Richard R., and Sidney G. Winter. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change,
Cambridge: Harvard U. Press, 1982

Radner, Roy. "Competitive Equilibrium under Uncertainty." Econometrica 36, no. 1 (1968): 31-
58.

Radner, Roy. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "A Nonconcavity in the Value of Information." In Bayesian
Models in Economic Theory, edited by Marcel Boyer and Richard Khilstrom, 33-52. Elsevier,
1984.

Reichlin, Lucrezia. "Monetary policy and banks in the euro area: the tale of two crises." Journal
of Macroeconomics 39B (2014): 387-400.

Reis, Ricardo. "Is something really wrong with macroeconomics?" Oxford Review of Economic
Policy 34, no. 1-2 (2018): 132-155.

Roukny, Tarik, Stefano Battiston, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Interconnectedness as a Source of
Uncertainty in Systemic Risk." Journal of Financial Stability 35 (2018): 93-106

Scarf, Herbert. "Some examples of global instability of the competitive equilibrium." International
Economic Review 1, no. 3 (1960): 157-172.

Schumacher, Julian, Christoph Trebesch, and Henrik Enderlein. "Sovereign defaults in court."
European Central Bank Working Paper No. 2135 (2018).

Shapiro, Carl, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device." The American Economic Review 74, no. 3 (1984): 433-44.

Shell, Karl and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Allocation of Investment in a Dynamic Economy." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 81, no. 4 (1967): 592-609.

Solow, Robert, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Output, Employment and Wages in the Short Run," The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 82, no. 4 (1968): 537-560.

Soros, George. The Alchemy of Finance: Reading the mind of the Market. Hoboken: John Wiley
& Sons, 1987.



                                                63
Spier, Kathryn E. "Litigation." In Handbook of Law and Economics 1, edited by A. Mitchell
Polinsky and Steven Shavell, 259-342. Elsevier, 2007.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Some Aspects of the Pure Theory of Corporate Finance: Bankruptcies and
Take-Overs." Bell Journal of Economics 3, no. 2 (Autumn 1972): 458-482.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public Financial Policy." In The Economics
of Public Debt, Proceedings of the 1986 International Economics Association Meeting, edited by
Kenneth Arrow and Michael Boskin, 4-76. London: Macmillan Press, 1988.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Methodological Issues and the New Keynesian Economics," Macroeconomics:
A Survey of Research Strategies, A. Vercelli and N. Dimitri (eds.), Oxford University Press,
pp. 38-86, 1992.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Some Elementary Principles of Bankruptcy." In Governance, Equity and
Global Markets: Proceedings from the Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics in
Europe, June 1999, 605-620. Paris: Conseil d'Analyse Economique, 2000.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Bankruptcy Laws: Basic Economic Principles." In Resolution of Financial
Distress: An International Perspective on the Design of Bankruptcy Laws, edited by S. Claessens,
S. Djankov, and A. Mody, 1-23. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2001.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Information and the Change in the Paradigm in Economics." The American
Economic Review 92, no. 3 (2002a): 460-501.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. Globalization and Its Discontents. New York: W.W. Norton Company,
2002b.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Sovereign Debt: Notes on Theoretical Frameworks and Policy Analyses." In
Overcoming Developing Country Debt Crises, edited. By B. Herman, J.A. Ocampo, and S.
Spiegel, 35-69. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010a.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy, New
York: WW Norton, 2010b

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Rethinking Macroeconomics: What Failed and How to Repair It," Journal of
the European Economic Association, 9(4), pp. 591-645, 2011.




                                               64
Stiglitz, Joseph E. Towards a General Theory of Deep Downturns, IEA Conference Volume, 155-
VI. Houndmills, UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016. Also available as National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 21444 (August 2015).

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Where modern macroeconomics went wrong." Oxford Review of Economic
Policy 34, no. 1-2 (2018): 70-106.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss. "Credit rationing in markets with imperfect
information." The American Economic Review 71, no. 3 (1981): 393-410.

Summers, Lawrence. "The Age of Secular Stagnation." Foreign Affairs, 2016.

Vines, David, and Samuel Wills. "The rebuilding macroeconomic theory project: an analytical
assessment." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 34, no. 1-2 (2018a): 1-42.

Vines, David, and Samuel Wills. "The financial system and the natural real interest rate: towards
a `new benchmark theory model'." Oxford Review of Economic Policy 34, no. 1-2 (2018b): 252-
268.

Weitzman, Martin L. "Subjective expectations and asset-return puzzles." The American Economic
Review 97, no. 4 (2007): 1102-1130.

Weitzman, Martin L. "On modeling and interpreting the economics of catastrophic climate
change." The Review of Economics and Statistics 91, no. 1 (2009): 1-19.




                                               65
