                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      PERSONAL WEALTH AND SELF-EMPLOYMENT

                                            Aymeric Bellon
                                         J. Anthony Cookson
                                             Erik P. Gilje
                                          Rawley Z. Heimer

                                        Working Paper 27452
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27452


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




This project has received financial support from the following: Wharton Dean's Research Fund, the
Wharton Alternative Investments Initiative, the Rodney L. White Center for Financial Research, the
Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative Financial Research, the National Bureau
of Economic Research Household Finance Working Group and the Sloan Foundation, the Ewing Marion
Kauffman Foundation, and the Center for Research on Consumer Financial Decision Making. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Aymeric Bellon, J. Anthony Cookson, Erik P. Gilje, and Rawley Z. Heimer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Personal Wealth and Self-Employment
Aymeric Bellon, J. Anthony Cookson, Erik P. Gilje, and Rawley Z. Heimer
NBER Working Paper No. 27452
June 2020
JEL No. G02,G5,G51,L26

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine how wealth windfalls affect self-employment decisions using data on cash payments
from claims on Texas shale drilling to people throughout the United States. Individuals who
receive large wealth shocks (greater than $50,000) have 51% higher self-employment rates. The
increase in self-employment rates is driven by individuals who lengthen existing self-employment
spells, and not by individuals who leave regular employment for self-employment. Moreover, the
effect of wealth reverts for individuals whose payments run out. Rather than alleviating a
financial constraint, our evidence suggests that unrestricted cash windfalls affect self-employment
decisions primarily through self-employment's non-pecuniary benefits.


Aymeric Bellon                                   Erik P. Gilje
The Wharton School                               The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania                       University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk                                 3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           Philadelphia, PA 19104
abellon@wharton.upenn.edu                        and NBER
                                                 gilje@wharton.upenn.edu
J. Anthony Cookson
University of Colorado                           Rawley Z. Heimer
995 Regent Dr.                                   Boston College
Boulder CO 80309                                 Carroll School of Management
tony.cookson@colorado.edu                        140 Commonwealth Avenue
                                                 Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3809
                                                 heimer@bc.edu
1    Introduction

Forty percent of U.S. workers go through at least one self-employment spell during their lifetime

(Astebro et al. (2014) and Parker (2009)). Recent literature shows that alleviating barriers to self-

employment, such as financial constraints or fear of downside risk, can lead individuals to enter self-

employment, spurring job creation and business dynamism (e.g., Hombert et al. (2020); Herkenhoff,

Phillips, and Cohen-Cole (2018)). An important class of policies ­ namely, cash transfers ­ does

not affect barriers to self-employment directly, but rather indirectly through the impact on personal

wealth. Although cash windfalls undoubtedly alleviate financial constraints, an influx of personal

wealth may lead people to want to work less and take leisure in non-employment. On the other hand,

if people derive utility from owning a business, personal wealth could help sustain self-employment

activities through this "consuming self-employment" channel (Hurst and Pugsley (2011, 2017)).

Thus, the net effects of personal wealth on self-employment are unclear.

      This paper evaluates the effects of personal wealth on self-employment by using large cash

windfall payments to individuals from the discovery and extraction of shale natural gas during the

fracking revolution. Crucially, though the payments come from mineral rights claims in Texas,

windfall recipients in our sample reside in all 50 states and are not necessarily land owners because

claims to mineral rights are often distinct from the ownership of surface property (see Figure 1).

We find that large positive shocks to personal wealth increase self-employment through lengthening

existing self-employment spells, not through entry into self-employment, and that individuals exit

self-employment when wealth shocks dissipate. In this way, our evidence stands in contrast to

the view that personal wealth discourages work. Indeed, our evidence suggests that individuals

respond to an influx of personal wealth by "consuming self-employment" rather than forsaking

employment altogether, or taking substantially more employment risk (e.g., through starting high-

growth ventures).

      Our focus on cash windfalls from the extraction of shale natural gas has a number of no-

table empirical advantages. First, the shale natural gas setting is attractive for identification. We

compile novel data on payments to individuals from shale gas extraction, which we merge with

self-employment data from Experian. Because the timing and amounts of individual payments from

shale are difficult to anticipate, this setting enables clean identification of how wealth windfalls af-


                                                   1
fect self-employment decisions. In support of using cash payments from shale extraction to identify

the effect of personal wealth on self-employment, we provide evidence of parallel trends in self-

employment decisions around the timing of individual payments for those who receive them versus

matched controls. Furthermore, after conditioning on mineral acreage owned and geographic fixed

effects, most observable characteristics are similar for those who receive payments versus those

who do not. Importantly, our tightest identification rests on the distinction between individuals who

receive large payments (greater than $50,000) versus small payments, which is completely external

to factors chosen by the individual (i.e., extraction companies determine the timing and intensity

of drilling, not the mineral leaseholders we study).1 Our sample of Barnett Shale mineral owners

resides all over the U.S., which enables our tests to distinguish the effect of of cash windfalls from

the effects of expanding local opportunities due to the shale shock.

          Second, studying windfalls from shale natural gas is also attractive from the standpoint of

external validity. Though our sample of mineral owners is different from a national random sample,

mineral ownership is prevalent in the U.S. (12 million Americans have received mineral payments

according to the National Association of Royalty Owners) and there is significant overlap between

our sample and the characteristics of a nationally representative sample of individuals. Specifically,

many mineral have both good and bad financial health (14.6% of windfall mineral owners are sub-

prime while 30.8% of in the nationally representative sample are subprime), and a subsample of

mineral owners rent and do not own a home. Exploiting this significant overlap, we re-weight our

analysis to match the national representative sample characteristics (age, income and credit score)

and we find similar results, providing support for the applicability of our estimates to a broader sam-

ple. Therefore, our results complement contemporaneous work that focuses on how windfalls affect

individuals in specific samples such as lottery winners (Mikhed, Raina, and Scholnick (2019)), or

in other countries (Bermejo et al. (2019)), or localized area shocks (Decker, McCollum, and Upton

Jr. (2018)).

          We find that wealth windfalls have economically significant effects on self-employment rates.

Specifically, individuals who receive large windfalls in excess of $50,000 have a 51% greater self-
   1 We  describe each of these tests as they relate to our identification strategy in more detail in Section 5. In particular,
we observe that individuals who receive small payments versus large payments, but nonetheless have the same min-
eral acreage, are on similar trends with respect to self-employment decisions around the timing of first payment. We
also conduct a placebo exercise for individuals who receive small payments (below $10,000), finding a small, but not
economically and statistically meaningful effect.


                                                              2
employment rate compared to a control sample of individuals who receive smaller payments or

no payments, even after accounting for other important characteristics that likely determine self-

employment decisions (i.e., geography, age and income bin fixed effects, credit scores, mineral

acreage owned). We find similar effects both for mineral owners that reside in the area of shale

development as well as for those that live in other areas, suggesting that local business investment

opportunities linked with shale are unlikely to be the driver of this result.

      There are several potential mechanisms for why personal wealth could increase self employ-

ment: personal wealth could alleviate financial constraints (e.g., Herkenhoff, Phillips, and Cohen-

Cole (2018)), personal wealth reduces individuals' need to worry about the downside risk of busi-

ness failures (e.g., Hombert et al. (2020)), or personal wealth could make self-employment more

attractive through demand for its non-pecuniary benefits (e.g., Hurst and Pugsley (2017)). Of these

channels proposed by the literature, our evidence is most consistent with the non-pecuniary bene-

fits channel. Three empirical tests support this interpretation. First, when we examine the effect

separately for initially self-employed versus initially regularly employed, we find that most of the

effect of personal wealth is on extending existing self-employment spells, not spurring new self-

employment activities. Second, we find that, once individuals stop receiving shale royalty payments,

they tend to exit self-employment for regular employment, consistent with the idea that shale roy-

alty payments were subsidizing their income in a way that allowed them to be self-employed. This

evidence also supports the view that the wealth shocks were not being used to fund self-sustaining

or otherwise productive projects. Third, we find similar or larger effects of personal wealth on

self-employment for unconstrained borrowers, suggesting that the main effect is not driven pri-

marily by shocks to personal wealth alleviating a financial constraint. Taken together, these re-

sults suggest that cash windfalls from shale extraction, and wealth more broadly, are being used to

subsidize marginally successful businesses, consistent with leisure and non-pecuniary benefits of

self-employment. This evidence, which contrasts with the financial constraints view, is consistent

with recent evidence that ample bank financing to individuals is available, as is shown by Robb and

Robinson (2014).

      Finally, aside from non-pecuniary motives, an important alternative view on the apparent low

returns to self-employment is that there are substantial gains to experimentation in self-employment

­ either through learning about uncertain self-employment earnings or learning skills that can be

                                                   3
applied upon returning to regular employment. Allowing for experimentation, the low average

earnings of self-employed individuals cannot be interpreted as evidence of non-pecuniary motives

(Manso (2016); Dillon and Stanton (2017)). To speak to this issue, we estimate the effect of wealth

windfalls on self-employment rates separately by different age cohorts. We find a similar effect

of wealth on self-employment for younger cohorts versus older cohorts, indicating that the effect

on self-employment is not concentrated among younger individuals for whom the gains to experi-

mentation are greatest. Indeed, we contrast this profile with retirement decisions to assess whether

self-employment and retirement are capturing distinct decisions and we find large effects of wealth

windfalls on retirement propensities for individuals nearing or exceeding normal retirement age

(age 65) as opposed to the flat profile of self-employment. Taken together, these findings provide

novel evidence that wealth windfalls lead to self-employment through an individual's non-pecuniary

motives.2

        Our paper makes a number of notable contributions. First, our paper contributes to the un-

derstanding of the economic barriers to self-employment. Broadly, this literature focuses on two

classes of barriers: financial constraints coming from limited access to credit markets and protec-

tions against the downside risk of personal-business failures. The literature on financial constraints

and self-employment considers the effects of shocks to the banking sector (e.g., Black and Stra-

han (2002); Kerr and Nanda (2009); Chatterji and Seamans (2012); Hanspal (2016); Fracassi et al.

(2016)), shocks to personal collateral (e.g., Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2015); Naaraayanan

(2019)), and shocks to personal credit constraints (e.g., Bos, Breza, and Liberman (2018); Herken-

hoff, Phillips, and Cohen-Cole (2018); Dobbie et al. (2020)), the latter of which, like our work,

combines personal credit data with data on self-employment.3 On the other hand, the literature on
   2 We also estimate the effect of wealth shocks on self-employment across different industry types and education levels.

Overall, we find that the effect of wealth on self-employment rates is similar across different industries and for individuals
across different education levels. This is further evidence that wealth shocks in our setting are unrelated to high growth
entrepreneurship and is consistent with the results on the nature of unincorporated self-employed in Levine and Rubinstein
(2017).
   3 Related to the literature on personal collateral, there is a well-developed literature on collateral constraints from

housing wealth that originated out of Hurst and Lusardi (2004)'s proposal to use housing wealth shocks to understand
how wealth affects self-employment and entrepreneurship outcomes. Although a few papers directly tie self-employment
to house price appreciation (Corradin and Popov (2015); Harding and Rosenthal (2017)), research has taken a critical
view of the ability of households to realize housing wealth (Bhutta and Keys (2016)), and the literature has come to
understand that housing wealth affects self-employment primarily through alleviating a collateral constraint (Kerr, Kerr,
and Nanda (2015); Schmalz, Sraer, and Thesmar (2017)). This collateral constraint is particularly relevant because early-
stage entrepreneurs often use their personal credit to secure bank financing at the time of business formation (Robb and
Robinson (2014)). Related work studies the effects of constraints on existing entrepreneurs and within firms (e.g., Howell
(2017)).


                                                              4
downside protections focuses on how social insurance can encourage increased risk-taking by po-

tential new business owners (e.g., Gottlieb, Townsend, and Xu (2016); Hombert et al. (2020)). Our

paper tests the effects of shocks to personal wealth on self-employment. Greater wealth can increase

self-employment by alleviating financial constraints or by reducing downside risk, but in contrast

to other barriers, personal wealth might have an effect on self-employment through affecting the

individual's preference for self-employment. To the extent that self-employment is a normal good,

as is argued by Hurst and Pugsley (2017), personal wealth could lead to more self-employment

through this alternative "consuming self-employment" channel. Our paper's contribution is to pro-

vide rich evidence on the net effect of personal wealth on self-employment and self-employment

entry and exits. We find that personal wealth shocks primarily affect self-employment levels by

extending self-employment spells, and provide evidence consistent with self-employment being a

normal good (i.e., having non-pecuniary benefits).

      Our interpretation, that wealth shocks support the non-pecuniary benefits of self-employment,

also relates to the literature that studies the motivations of business owners and the different types

of self-employed (e.g., Blanchflower and Oswald (1998); Schoar (2010); Levine and Rubinstein

(2017)). Much prior literature equates self-employment with a desire to be entrepreneurial (e.g.,

Glaeser (2007)). If entrepreneurship is the objective of a self-employment spell, then drivers of

self-employment can include personal characteristics, such as confidence, risk-tolerance, and abil-

ities (e.g., Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979); Lazear (2004); Puri and Robinson (2007); Andersen and

Nielsen (2012); Hvide and Panos (2014); De Meza et al. (2019)), as well as rational responses to

demand shocks and labor market restructuring (e.g., Bernstein et al. (2018); Bermejo et al. (2019);

Kleiner and Hacamo (2019); Babina (2020)). However, recent work augments prior literature by

showing that many self-employed do not aspire to be entrepreneurs (in the classical sense) and in-

stead enjoy the non-pecuniary benefits of business ownership (Hurst and Pugsley (2011)). Related,

there is documented evidence of "serial entrepreneurs" (e.g., Lafontaine and Shaw (2016)), and

though their persistent pursuit of new ventures can be consistent with project experimentation (e.g.,

Manso (2016); Dillon and Stanton (2017)), it could also be evidence of non-pecuniary motives, such

as a desire to be one's own boss. In our empirical setting, we show the empirical relevance of the

"consuming self-employment" channel, and distinguish it from these notable alternatives from the

literature ­ namely, experimentation, tolerance for risk/failure, and local demand shocks.

                                                  5
        Finally, our paper relates to prior work on the effects of personal wealth shocks on labor

market decisions and business formation by individuals.4 Papers in this literature most often rely on

wealth shocks brought about by lottery winnings and interpret the lottery winnings as relaxing finan-

cial constraints on business entry (e.g., Lindh and Ohlsson (1996); Cesarini et al. (2017); Mikhed,

Raina, and Scholnick (2019)). We contribute to this literature by introducing a different type of

wealth shock, royalty payments from natural resource extraction, which reaches a broad segment of

the U.S. population and has considerable variation in size, timing, and geography.5 Furthermore,

several of these recent papers only consider the effects of wealth shocks on individuals who are pre-

disposed to self-employment, namely existing business owners (e.g., Cespedes, Huang, and Parra

(2019)). These papers find that wealth shocks alleviate financial constraints on existing business

owners, whereas we find no evidence that wealth shocks increase transitions into self-employment

from the general population. Instead, the positive relation between wealth and self-employment

we document is driven by wealth shocks merely extending pre-existing self-employment spells, a

finding that is new to this literature.



2     Setting and Data

2.1    Overview of Barnett Shale and Mineral Rights

Our study focuses on a sample of oil and gas mineral owners with claims to mineral extraction

in the Barnett Shale of Texas from 2005 through 2015. The Barnett Shale was the first shale gas

development in the United States. Before the mid-2000s, shale gas had been uneconomic to drill and

develop. However, the combination of horizontal drilling with hydraulic fracturing ("fracking"), by
    4 Beyond labor market outcomes, a kindred line of research studies the effects of wealth shocks on a variety of other

outcomes including asset market participation, credit market outcomes, personal happiness, and health (Hankins, Hoek-
stra, and Skiba (2011); Cesarini et al. (2016); Cookson, Gilje, and Heimer (2019); Briggs et al. (2020); Agarwal, Mikhed,
and Scholnick (2020); Lindqvist, Östling, and Cesarini (2020)). Additionally, there is a literature in economic develop-
ment that studies the effects of cash transfers on business formation and entrepreneurship (see e.g., Bianchi and Bobba
(2013); Blattman, Fiala, and Martinez (2014)).
    5 Related work examines how aggregate new business opportunities originating from the Fracking Boom affects the

entry of new firms and the expansion of preexisting firms (e.g., see Decker, McCollum, and Upton Jr. (2018)). Though
our work shares an interest in the entry and exit dynamics linked to fracking activity, our measurement of the shock at
the individual level allow us to speak to the role of personal income, as distinct from industrial responses to regional
opportunities, which has been the focus of most of the research on the role of new firms in responding to the shale shock.
More broadly, our work uses unique variation within the literature that has exploited variation from the shale oil and gas
extraction context. For example Gilje (Forthcoming), Gilje, Loutskina, and Strahan (2016), Cunningham, Gerardi, and
Shen (2017), and Feyrer, Mansur, and Sacerdote (2017).



                                                            6
Devon Energy and George Mitchell, led to a technological breakthrough which allowed vast new

quantities of natural gas to be developed. According to the U.S. Energy Information administration,

shale gas production was less than 1% of total U.S. natural gas production in the year 2000, but

by 2015 accounted for 46.2% of total U.S. gas production. Moreover, the Barnett Shale was the

first shale development in the United States. It was also among the most prolific ­ the four Barnett

Shale counties in our analysis accounted for 17.3% of total U.S. shale gas production when shale

production peaked in 2012. There is a 14-fold increase in shale wells during the time period of our

study. We start in 2005 largely because that is towards the beginning of the shale discovery (only

6.7% of our mineral owners were receiving payments at that time), and it is the first year in which

credit bureau data was available to us.

      The development of the Barnett Shale offers several attractive features. First, shale develop-

ment was unexpected by the industry, and even less expected by households in our study. Indeed,

Chevron CEO John Watson was famously quoted as saying "'fracking' took the industry by surprise

(2011 WSJ)." Moreover, there was a broadly held view in the United States that natural gas supply

was running out and no new sources of supply (i.e., shale) would be developed. For example, in

Senate testimony in 2003, Alan Greenspan stated:

      "Today's tight natural gas markets have been a long time in coming, and distant futures

      prices suggest that we are not apt to return to earlier periods of relative abundance and

      low prices anytime soon."

Accordingly, mineral ownership in the Barnett Shale represented a deep out-of-the-money option,

which had minimal value until there was a technological breakthrough. In the context of our empir-

ical design, Section 5 provides evidence that individuals did not anticipate the payments they would

eventually receive (as of 2005 and even after 2010) ­ we find parallel trends in self-employment

rates between those who receive large windfalls against our control samples.

      Who owns mineral rights in the United States? These rights typically reside with individuals

whose families were involved in the initial permanent settlements of oil and gas producing regions of

the United States. The mineral right were then often severed from surface rights when those families

migrated elsewhere. According to news articles and other anecdotes about mineral ownership, the




                                                 7
discovery of shale and the resulting wealth shock was largely unexpected by individual recipients.

For example, the following characterization by Kiplinger's Magazine is relatively common:

       "Pam Cooner, 42, an occupational therapist in Houston, has collected about $15,000 in

       the past year for a fractional ownership of mineral rights. Cooner was surprised when

       contacted by a landman about the rights. She didn't know she'd inherited them--as

       had 13 other distant family members. In August, Cooner got a $400 royalty check for

       rights on another property, owned jointly with a different, non-family group--again, a

       total surprise."

For those fortunate to own minerals, which typically occurred through family ancestry, the shale

breakthrough caused the mineral rights, previously a deep out-of-the-money option, to become

a valuable cash-flow stream when natural gas was drilled. Therefore, although people who own

minerals are not a purely random sample of U.S. individuals, the increase in personal wealth these

mineral owners experience was due to an exogenous technological breakthrough over which these

individuals did not have control.


2.2    Oil and Gas Lease and Royalty Data

When an oil and gas firm decides to drill and develop an oil and gas reservoir, it must first negotiate

a contract, often with a private individual for the right to do so. These private individuals constitute

our sample of royalty recipients. Contracts to develop oil and gas compensate a mineral owner in

two ways. First, prior to any extraction, a mineral owner will receive an upfront bonus payment,

which will typically be a dollar per acre value. For example, a person receiving a $5,000 per acre

bonus that owns 10 net mineral acres would receive a check for $50,000. Second, once extraction

commences, individuals receive a royalty stream based on their share in a well. In our sample royalty

percentages range from 12.5% to 30%, with 18.75% being the most common. An individual's dollar

royalty payment is also scaled by their interest percentage in a drilling unit. In Texas, the law is such

that royalties are computed based on gross revenues, and no costs can legally be deducted from the

gross revenue.6 For example, if a well generates gross revenue of $10,000 in a month, and an
   6 There are popular press accounts of individuals with mineral rights in other U.S. regions who had a dispute with an
extraction company over the costs that the company could deduct before paying the leaseholder (e.g., "Millions Own Gas
and Oil Under Their Land. Here's Why Only Some Strike It Rich" from NPR, March 15, 2018). However, these "deduct


                                                           8
individual owns 10 net mineral acres at a 20% royalty on a 400 acre drilling unit, that individual

would receive a check for $10,000*10/400*20% = $50 for that month.

        Accurate data on payments that individuals receive is exceedingly difficult to obtain and com-

pute. Fortunately, in the state of Texas, unlike in other states, mineral owners are required to pay

property tax. Texas requires all oil and gas firms to turn over their so-called "pay decks" with

detailed well-by-well ownership interest information to the state. We use this royalty interest in-

formation to compute an ownership value based on the production profile of each well. Because

property tax information is public information in the state of Texas, we used open record requests

to obtain the detailed title and ownership information that private firms paid millions of dollars to

construct. The data are provided in PDF format, which required us to convert the images into usable

data. In our study, we focused on compiling mineral appraisal roll data for the four main produc-

ing counties in the Barnett Shale going back to the year 2000. Though shale drilling eventually

expanded to states outside of Texas, the identities of individuals who own mineral rights to oil and

gas wells in other states is not easily attainable. Public county court records can be used to compute

ownership percentages, but this often requires manually searching county indices and filings, and

oil and gas firms typically pay an average of $50,000 per well to compile accurate royalty owner

information from these public records. To put this in perspective, the number of wells in our sample

is 7,041.

        A crucial feature of our mineral roll appraisals is that it provides the address at which the

mineral owner receives tax bills. This accurate address is useful for ensuring a high quality merge

with credit bureau data. Furthermore, we used the well ownership percentages to calculate individ-

uals royalty payments. To do so, we matched these percentages with well production and natural

gas pricing. For each well in our sample, we compile monthly production data from the oil and

gas regulatory body in Texas, the Texas Railroad Commission. We then multiply production by

prevailing spot natural gas prices reported by the U.S. energy information administration for a given

month, this computation gives us the total gross revenue of a well, which combined with ownership

information from the mineral rolls, is sufficient to calculate the amount of each individual check.
clauses" are extremely rare, and it is highly unlikely that an extraction company would be successful in seeking them
informally because Texas is a state with "no implied duty of marketability." In practice, this feature of Texas state law
implies that ­ if the parties did not spell it out explicitly in the original contract ­ the default contract is to not deduct
costs. From a practical standpoint, we separately see bonus versus royalty payments. If we only consider bonus payments
for our tests ­ which are unaffected by the issue of deducting costs ­ we obtain the same main result.


                                                              9
       In our sample, royalty payments from production account for 60% of total payments. The

remaining payments are the bonus payments that mineral owners received at the time a lease was

signed. To compute bonus payments, we conducted public record requests for all oil and gas leases

from the four counties in our study, as well as county indexes. The lease bonus payment in many

cases is not reported on a lease because it is not required to be. However, many leases do have

this information, as well as net acreage amounts. Based on the leases that do have lease bonus

information we estimate a regression to predict the lease bonus payment on a dollar-per-acre basis

using time fixed effects, county fixed effects, and operator fixed effects. The R-squared we obtain

from the regression is 0.82. We then use this predicted amount to estimate the lease bonus amounts

for the remaining sample in which we do not have direct data on bonus payments.

       Once we have computed lease bonus payments and royalty payments for the sample, we then

merge the royalty payment data and the lease bonus payment data to obtain our overall payment

amounts. Overall the payment someone receives is a function of prevailing natural gas prices, the

amount of net mineral acreage they own, and the amount of natural gas produced on their mineral

acreage. Crucially, as shale development increased over time, there was a high degree of spatial

heterogeneity in well production. This variation frequently caused individuals to receive vastly

different payment amounts, even when these individuals are from the same region and own similar

levels of mineral acreage.


2.3    Experian Data Overview

From the raw data, we identified approximately 500,000 mineral rights owners, and computed a

monthly panel data set of the payments received by rights owners from 2000 onward. We con-

tracted with Experian to merge the mineral rights data with individual-level credit bureau data.7

We provided information on payments, names and addresses, and Experian conducted the merge

on name and address. In addition, Experian provided us with two control samples, (i) a sample

matched on the geography and age distribution of our Experian records, and (ii) a nationally repre-

sentative sample. The merge with credit bureau data returned an 80 percent match rate, leaving us

with approximately 400,000 consumers who received mineral rights payments. Each of our control
    7 Copyright 2018 Experian. All rights reserved. Experian and the Experian marks used herein are trademarks or

registered trademarks of Experian Information Solutions, Inc. Other product and company names mentioned herein are
the property of their respective owners.


                                                       10
samples has approximately 300,000 individuals, leaving us with approximately 1.1 million credit

histories.8

        For each individual in our sample, we observe an annual snapshot of credit bureau charac-

teristics (credit score, estimated personal incomes modeled using actual W2 statements, an internal

debt-to-income measure, plus 250 credit attributes). In addition to standard credit bureau charac-

teristics, from 2010 to 2015 the credit bureau also provides information on employment status of

individuals and demographic characteristics. The employment status field listed by the credit bu-

reau is a textual field that lists the actual name of the employer of an individual (for example, "Fort

Worth Independent School District"). If an individual is self-employed, the credit bureau data lists

the individual as being "self-employed."

        To provide more context on the types of individuals switching between self-employment and

employment, we manually extract and classify the names of the firms that employ individuals who

switched into or out of self-employment. Though we can only examine firm names for individuals

during their period of regular employment, these jobs provide useful and granular contextual in-

formation on the skills and professions for individuals who choose self-employment in our sample.

This analysis is complementary to the analysis we perform on the broad industry and educational

categorizations available from Experian because it is more precise about the types of individuals

who choose self-employment. For firms we can classify industry or skillset reliably, the most com-

mon industry for switchers is Real Estate, followed by Government, Construction, and Medical.

These four categories combined account for over half of the people who transition into or out of

self-employment. By contrast, individuals who work for Technology firms account for less than

5% of these switchers. This classification exercise provides some additional context on the types of

individuals driving the self-employment decisions we identify in our main tests.

        To our knowledge, our research is the first academic use of Experian's employment data. As

such, we conduct a battery of tests to confirm the validity of the data. In particular, we benchmark

the propensity to be self-employed from the credit bureau to two other data sources used throughout
    8 For a detailed discussion of this data merge in the context of household debt, see Cookson, Gilje, and Heimer (2019).

Although Cookson, Gilje, and Heimer (2019) uses the same data merge as this paper, the identifying variation from the
wealth windfalls is quite distinct. One of the main lessons of Cookson, Gilje, and Heimer (2019) is that small-to-moderate
payments matter more than larger payments when it comes to affecting the propensity of individuals to repay debt. By
contrast, the present paper gets most of its identifying variation from very large shocks (in excess of $50,000 in most
specifications, but sometimes, payments exceeding $1 million). Apart from this difference in identifying variation from
the shale windfalls, the lessons from these two papers apply to substantively different domains of life.


                                                           11
the literature -- the American Community Survey and Current Population Survey. To illustrate this

comparison, we plot self employment propensity at the state-year level drawn from our nationally

representative sample from Experian and find a high degree of correlation with measures of un-

incorporated self-employment in the public use microdata (Figure 2). Overall, the credit bureau

data offer a measure of self-employment consistent with these other data sources at the levels of

aggregation in which we can draw the comparison. However, our self-employment field is useful

because it is observable at the individual-year level, and we have this individual-level measure of

self-employment linked with actual payments to individuals from natural gas extraction. Further-

more, our data is uniquely positioned to observe a substantial number of other attributes on self

employed individuals, including credit characteristics and oil and gas royalty wealth shocks.

      As an alternative check on data validity, we use the textual employment data field to con-

struct a measure of retirement by searching for the string "retired." As retirement has a distinct

lifecycle (with a normal retirement age of 65) from self-employment, this variable allows us to ver-

ify whether the timing of the employment field is informative. Consistent with the employment data

field providing useful insight, we find that retirement propensities are greater among individuals of

typical retirement age. Moreover, we also find that the impact of wealth windfalls on retirement

propensities follows this life-cycle pattern (greater in near-retirement cohorts and normal retirement

age cohorts than younger individuals). As we present in Figure 3, the impact of personal wealth

on self-employment propensities is relatively flat over the life-cycle, which concords with our intu-

ition that self-employment and retirement derived from the textual employment data field capture

economically distinct activities.


2.4   Summary Statistics

Our royalty windfall data provide us with payment information to individuals for royalty payments

between 2005 and 2015. However, the credit bureau data only have employment information from

2010 onward. We account for this discrepancy by utilizing both a cross-sectional analysis of our

entire sample of mineral owners, as well as a panel analysis on a sub-sample of owners who begin

receiving payments after 2010. All of our subsequent tests compare the effects of wealth windfalls

across individuals. We define the "treatment group" as those who received more than $50,000 in

cash payments (we perform sensitivity analysis around this cutoff) and define the "control group"

                                                 12
as individuals who received no payments or payments less than $50,000. A central concern for

identification is whether the payments individuals received are meaningfully correlated with other

characteristics.

        In Table 1, we report summary statistics on the cross-sectional sample as of 2015. The mean

self-employment rate in our sample of 1.77% is somewhat lower than self-employment rates re-

ported in public use microdata (ACS or CPS). The lower self-employment is also present in the na-

tionally representative sample (see the range on the horizontal axis in Figure 2), which indicates that

the self-employment measure provided by Experian undercounts some forms of self-employment

(e.g., part-time self-employed).

        In addition, individuals in our sample have an average income of $57,000, an average credit

score of 738, and are 49 years old on average. These summary characteristics indicate that our

sample tilts slightly toward older individuals who have higher income and higher credit scores.

However, as we show in Figure 4, there is substantial overlap among individuals in our sample who

receive mineral payments versus the distribution from a nationally representative sample drawn

from Experian. From the standpoint of external validity, we exploit this overlap to re-weight our

regressions to the representative sample characteristics, as a robustness exercise in Section 5. To

enhance the validity of our empirical tests, we construct a matched control sample using a propensity

score matching on initial credit characteristics in 2005.

        The variable of interest in our regressions is whether an individual receives a large payment.

To give context for the underlying variation in payments, Figure 5 presents a histogram of total pay-

ments received between 2005 and 2015, grouped by $10,000 bins. The distribution is right skewed,

with a significant number of people receiving small windfall amounts. We choose to set $50,000

as the cutoff for large payments because $50,000 is approximately as large as a typical individual's

annual income. Approximately 10 percent of the sample of people who received mineral payments

received large payments exceeding $50,000. In a sensitivity analysis, we find that the choice of this

cutoff does not qualitatively affect our results.9

        To compare the matched control sample to the mineral owners who receive large payments,

Table 2 reports how observable characteristics compare across the treatment and control groups for
   9 Indeed,  as nonparametric visual evidence, the bin scatter plot presented in Figure 6 indicates that the effect of wealth
is persistent throughout the sample. We also explicitly vary the cutoff for large payment in a series of robustness exercises.



                                                             13
our cross-sectional estimation (Panel A) and panel estimation (Panel B). One being all sample in-

dividuals, which as of 2005 both treatment and control have not received payments. The second

being individuals who have not received a payment as of 2010, but who subsequently do receive a

payment, this sample allows us to focus on the subset of data where we have complete employment

information and can construct a meaningful panel. In our two samples, the raw differences in indi-

vidual characteristics are economically and statistically meaningful. As such, we control for these

differences by saturating our regressions with granular fixed effects to control for age, zip code, in-

come, mineral acreage size, and ex ante credit score. We can compute an adjusted difference where

we look at differences after controlling for these fixed effects. In both samples, most observable

differences are reduced dramatically, and there are only a few differences that remain statistically

meaningful, though in most instances are not economically meaningful.

       Our main specifications rely on both cross-sectional and time series comparisons to individu-

als receiving wealth windfall shocks. As we report in Table 2, there are some observable differences

between individuals who receive large wealth shocks, and individuals who do not. We employ nu-

merous fixed effects to absorb this variation, including granular controls for mineral acreage owned.

However, it still could be possible that our treatment (high payment group) and control (low pay-

ment group) have differential trends. To explicitly evaluate this possibility we look at the propensity

to be self employed in event time (time t = 0 is the year the first payment is received), and plot the

coefficients before and after treatment. Figure 7 shows that there is no differential pre-trend prior to

the initial wealth windfall, which provides evidence in support of our research design.



3     Effects of Shale Royalties on Self-Employment

3.1   Empirical Specification

We examine how large wealth shocks affect self-employment rates using the following linear prob-

ability model, which we estimate via OLS:




               sel fi2015 =z + age + income + acreage + 1 large paymenti + Xi  + i ,                (1)




                                                  14
where the dependent variable sel fi2015 is an indicator (=1) for whether the individual is self-employed

in 2015. The variable, large paymenti , is an indicator (=1) for whether individual i receives a large

payment (> $50,000 in aggregate over the period 2005 to 2015). Given this specification, the coef-

ficient of interest 1 reflects the (conditional) difference in self-employment rates between (treated)

individuals who receive large payments versus (control) individuals who receive small payments.

To account for local clustering of payments, standard errors are clustered by by three digit ZIP

codes.

         This specification conditions the effect of receiving a large windfall on a set of granular fixed

effects: z are three digit zip fixed effects, age are age fixed effects (dummies for each year of

age), income are fixed effects for quintiles of the initial (2005, pre-shock) income distribution, and

acreage are fixed effects for quintiles of the distribution of mineral acreage owned. The acreage,

age, and initial income fixed effects, in particular, account flexibly for individual differences that

can lead to large payments. In this specification, therefore, the residual variation in payments is

driven entirely by factors external to the individual ­ the timing and intensity of drilling, as well as

macro fluctuations in the price of natural gas.


3.2    Main Results on Self-Employment

Table 3 presents the results from estimating equation (1). We include several different functional

forms of "large payment" to assess whether the relationship between self-employment and wealth

is linear, discontinuous (dummy variable), or log. Overall, the results indicate a non-linear relation-

ship. Although the coefficient estimate is statistically significant when we employ a linear speci-

fication for payment size in columns (1) and (2), the other specifications, which allow for various

types of non-linearities provide a better fit of the data. Notably, the economic interpretation of the

coefficient estimate from column (5) is that individuals who receive a windfall of more than $50,000

have 0.90 percentage points higher self-employment rates than individuals who receive smaller (or

zero) payments. These specifications account for granular age, income, and acreage-owned fixed

effects (as well as initial credit score). We obtain a similar 0.93 percentage point effect when in-

cluding a wide set of individual-level controls measured as of 2015.10 Overall specifications (5) and
  10 Acrossall cross-sectional specifications where we indicate accounting for individual-level controls, these controls
include 2015 values of the individual's credit score, debt-to-income, fraction of accounts 90 days past due, revolving



                                                          15
(6) suggest an increased self employment rate of approximately 51% to 53% of the baseline rate

(baseline rate of 1.77%). Our identification relies on the assumption that in the absence of receiv-

ing treatment, self-employment rates would be similar for treatment relative to control. Section 5

provides evidence in support of this assumption.

       The additional specifications are also instructive on the relationship between wealth and self-

employment. Specifically, the impact of wealth on self-employment is largest for large shocks,

confirming intuition that small shocks should matter less for choices related to important life events,

such as the decision to become or remain self-employed. This is borne out in the dummy variable

specifications in (7) and (8), which shows that the larger payment amounts have larger impacts on

self-employment rates. Moreover, the effects are pervasive throughout the sample (i.e., not driven

by outliers or tail events). This pervasive relationship is perhaps most striking in the bin scatter of

self-employment rates on logged wealth in Figure 6, which shows a robust, positive relationship

between wealth and self-employment.



4    Mechanisms

The prior section finds that increased personal wealth from shale royalties has a large positive effect

on self-employment. This result provides evidence that on net, increased personal wealth does not

discourage people from being self-employed. This section establishes a mechanism for the positive

relation between personal wealth and self-employment. We consider three plausible mechanisms

that are relevant to our setting ­ financial constraints, downside risks of business failures, and non-

pecuniary benefits ­ each of which would have distinct predictions about the nature of the personal-

wealth-self-employment relationship.

       First, much prior literature views wealth shocks as alleviating financial constraints for aspir-

ing entrepreneurs. In the financial constraints view of self-employment, the population contains

a set of aspiring entrepreneurs with positive NPV projects who have insufficient capital to initiate

such ventures (Evans and Jovanovic (1989)). For these financially constrained individuals, the addi-

tional personal wealth is the source of investment capital to start a business. As such, if the positive

relation between wealth and self-employment we document was evidence of such a mechanism,
utilization (%), and indicators for whether the individual is subprime, has a mortgage, has collections debt, and has an
auto loan. In panel specifications, we control for each of these variables in a time-varying manner.


                                                          16
we would expect to find that personal wealth increases the rate of entry into self-employment (i.e.,

increased transitions from regular employment to self-employment). We would also expect to find

that individuals who are more financially constrained when they begin receiving wealth windfalls

to have the largest positive response to large wealth shocks.

      Related to the financial constraints view, recent literature suggests that the decision to be-

come self-employment is often deterred by the downside risks of business failures. Because starting

a business is inherently more risky than regular employment, some individuals may be reluctant

to enter self-employment if they are sensitive to earnings risk, for example, because they dislike

periods of low consumption. The downside-risk mechanism would have a similar prediction as

the financial constraints mechanism in that downside protections would increase entry into self-

employment (e.g., unemployment insurance, as Hombert et al. (2020) documents). Here too, we

would observe shale windfalls cause an increase in individuals transitioning from regular employ-

ment to self-employment.

      Instead, our evidence is most consistent with a "consuming self-employment" channel, in

which individuals derive utility from being self-employed (Hurst and Pugsley (2011, 2017)). Un-

der this view, individuals choose self-employment over regular employment, because they value

the non-pecuniary benefits, such as job autonomy. These individuals are also willing to accept

lower risk-adjusted incomes in order to avoid regular employment. As such, we expect that per-

sonal wealth shocks would allow those who have previously decided to become self-employed to

continue being self-employed even if their business is not self-sustaining. This would lead us to ob-

serve personal wealth shocks lengthen preexisting self-employment spells. We would also observe

individuals transition back to regular employment when they no longer receive supplemental income

from shale royalties. In addition, these "consuming self-employment" types are less motivated by

the growth prospects of their business. Consequently, in contrast to the financial constraints and

downside risk mechanisms, we would expect to find the effects of wealth shocks to be less sensitive

to the growth prospects of the business. Our empirical evidence in the following section supports

the "consuming self-employment" interpretation of the positive relation between personal wealth

from shale windfalls and self-employment.




                                                 17
4.1   Transitions Into and out of Self-Employment

We provide two complementary tests of transitions into versus out of self-employment. First,

we examine transitions into versus out of self-employment in a panel setting. Because the self-

employment data begin in 2010, our individual-year panel ranges from years 2010 to 2015. We

estimate:




                sel fi,t =FE + 1 Post treati,t + 2 Post treat i,t × high payment i + i ,            (2)




      We estimate equation (2) separately for individuals who were initially self-employed in 2010

versus those who were regularly employed in 2010. If initially-regularly-employed individuals

transition into self-employment, it would be consistent with a financial constraints channel ­ i.e.,

the wealth windfall has given an employed individual the necessary start-up capital to pursue

self-employment. Alternatively, if wealth windfalls extend self-employment spells of currently

self-employed individuals it would be more consistent with the windfall being used to subsidize

a marginal business, consistent with non-pecuniary motives of self-employed individuals (Hurst

and Pugsley (2011, 2017)). In the initially self-employed sub-sample, the estimate 2 reflects the

propensity for an individual to remain self-employed after receiving a large wealth inflow (i.e., stick-

ing with self employment). In the initially regularly-employed sub-sample, the estimate 2 reflects

the propensity to switch into self-employment after receiving a large influx of wealth. Note that the

direct effect of high payment i is subsumed by individual fixed effects.

      Table 4 reports the results from estimating how large wealth shocks influence transition rates

into and out of self-employment. Specifically, in columns (1) and (2), we obtain positive, eco-

nomically large and highly statistically significant coefficient estimates for the sticking with self-

employment effect. That is, individuals who receive a large wealth windfall are 8.4 to 9.6 percentage

points more likely to remain self-employed than an individual who received a small mineral pay-

ment or no payment at all. When we consider different ranges of payment sizes (lower and greater

than $50,000) in column (3) of Table 4, the effect is driven by payments in excess of $50,000.



                                                  18
By contrast, when we consider whether wealth windfalls lead individuals to switch from regular

employment into self-employment (columns (4), (5) and (6) of Table 4), we either estimate no

effect or a small negative effect for payments greater than $50,000. This evidence highlights im-

portant dynamics in self-employment behavior that are consistent with the non-pecuniary motives

of self-employment: wealth windfalls increase self-employment rates by extending existing self-

employment spells, as opposed to creating new self-employed individuals from currently employed

individuals.

      As a second test of the non-pecuniary motives mechanism, we evaluate whether individuals

revert to normal employment from self employment once the wealth windfall payments run out.

This can happen once a well's production has been exhausted. If wealth shocks are used to support

self-employment activities of individuals who primarily derive utility from owning a business, we

would expect to observe people exit self-employment when this stream of payments runs out. To

evaluate this hypothesis, Table 5 augments our cross-sectional regression specification to estimate

this effect. Specifically we estimate:




               sel fi2015 =FE + 1 large paymenti + 2 large paymenti × run out i + i ,                (3)




where the coefficient of interest, 2 , captures the difference in self-employment rates between two

individuals who both receive large windfalls (exceeding $50,000), but one individual whose pay-

ment stream has been exhausted.

      Referring to Table 5, the effect of receiving a windfall is fully reversed once the windfall

payments stop. One can see this, for example, in column (1) by adding together the coefficients 0.92

(main payment effect) + 0.15 (run out effect) - 2.10 (interaction effect) = -1.03. That is, taking these

point estimates at face value, the total effect of receiving large payments that eventually run out is to

slightly reduce the propensity to be self-employed. If the windfall payments had been used to fund

positive NPV projects, we would expect these self-employment spells to become self-sustaining as

cash flows from the positive NPV projects are realized. The fact that the self-employment effects




                                                   19
we observe are short-lived suggests that the wealth windfalls were being used to subsidize marginal

projects, consistent with "consumption" of self-employment for non-pecuniary motives.


4.2   Self-Employment and Liquidity Constraints

To provide further evidence on the potential role of wealth windfalls in alleviating liquidity con-

straints, we augment our main cross-sectional specification to evaluate whether the effect of wealth

on self-employment is heterogeneous with empirical proxies for personal liquidity constraints.

Specifically, we estimate:




              sel fi2015 =FE + 1 large paymenti + 2 large paymenti × cross vari + i ,                (4)




in which the variable cross vari is a measure for whether an individual is financially constrained

prior to the fracking revolution (i.e., the debt-to-income ratio and credit score). The prediction,

if wealth affects self-employment by alleviating financial constraints (e.g., by providing start-up

capital), is that individuals with greater ex ante financial constraints should exhibit a greater effect

of wealth on self-employment. We report the results of the interactive specifications in Table 6.

      Throughout the table of results, interactions with debt-to-income result in negative and sta-

tistically insignificant coefficient estimates (e.g., columns (1) and (2) of Table 6). We also estimate

payment interactions with credit scores, to the extent lower credit scores are associated with more fi-

nancially constrained individuals one would expect a negative coefficient on the interaction term, in

fact the estimated interaction coefficients are positive, though not statistically significant (see Table

6, columns (3) and (4)). These results suggest, if anything, individuals facing financial constraints

before the fracking revolution are less likely to become self-employed for the same large windfall.

These results contrast with the view that the impact of wealth on self-employment is attributable

to the fact that wealth alleviates liquidity constraints. We are cautious in the interpretation of the

results of Table 6, as the proxies we use for financial constraints can correlate with other individ-

ual characteristics. However, this evidence, combined with the tests in Tables 4 and 5, provide




                                                   20
some evidence against liquidity constraint motives being the primary mechanism that links windfall

payments to increased self-employment.


4.3   Heterogeneity by Education and Industry

To further contrast the effect of personal wealth on self-employment with alternative mechanisms

(namely, high-growth entrepreneurship), we estimate the impact of wealth on self employment

propensities by education level. As we present in Figure 8, we find broadly similar effects of

receiving a wealth windfall on self-employment rates regardless of education level. Specifically,

we find that individuals with graduate degrees are just as likely to increase self-employment rates

as individuals who have less than a high school diploma. When we formally test whether there

is a differential effect for having a college degree in propensities to be self-employed from wealth

shocks we find a coefficient that is negative (meaning college educated individuals are less likely

to become self employed upon receiving a wealth windfall), but not statistically significant. To the

extent that education proxies for human capital, and that high human capital is required for high

growth businesses, this result suggests that "consuming self-employment" types drive the relation

between personal wealth and self-employment in our sample. We report the regression results asso-

ciated with this figure in Appendix Table A1.

       We also use coarse industry classifications from Experian to test whether high-growth sectors

affect the relation between personal wealth and self-employment. If people who are self-employed

are starting businesses that have the potential for high-growth, we would expect to see larger effects

in Professional/Technical industries relative to Blue Collar or Farm related industries. However, as

reported in Appendix Table A2, and as we show in Figure 9, we find similar propensities to be-

come self-employed across all industries, suggesting that self-employment rates respond to wealth

regardless of industry focus.



5     Robustness and External Validity

5.1   Tests on Validity of Empirical Design

Our identification strategy relies on the conjecture that in the absence of receiving mineral royalty

wealth windfalls, treatment individuals who receive large windfalls would have self-employment

                                                 21
rates that trended similarly to control individuals who did not receive cash windfalls. However,

mineral ownership, and therefore treatment, in our sample is not random (ownership typically relates

to family ancestry as these assets are passed down through generations), and there are important

observable differences between mineral owners and a national random sample of individuals (e.g.,

see Figure 4). In this section, we undertake a series of tests to assess whether treatment individuals

would have behaved similarly to control individuals if they were not treated. The robustness tests

in this section are reported in the Appendix, and in each instance, the main estimate of interest is

reported graphically in Figure 10.

      First, we document parallel trends in a panel setting between treatment individuals and con-

trol individuals for our main tests on self-employed individuals prior to treatment. Our evidence

on parallel trends is reported in a leads-and-lags plot that allows the difference-in-difference coef-

ficient in equation (2) to differ by lag (lead) relative to the date of first payment. Figure 7 reports

the dynamic results that speak to parallel trends. Consistent with our tabular evidence, we sepa-

rately evaluate this plot for the initially self-employed sample (left panel) and the initially regularly

employed sample (right panel). We also separately report this result for the full estimation sample

(Panel A), and the estimation sample restricted to individuals who received some mineral payment

(Panel B, treatment-on-treated specifications). Regardless of the specification, we see no evidence

of a pre-trend leading up to the year of first payment, supporting the view that the payment (at least

whether the windfall would be large) is unanticipated by the individuals in our sample.

      Second, there are few observable differences between the treatment group that receives min-

eral payments and control individuals receiving no payments or low payments after conditioning

on the set of fixed effects and controls we employ in our main specifications. This evidence of

conditional covariate balance supports our empirical strategy of comparing high payment individ-

uals to the control group, particularly for the cross-sectional specifications (see Table 2 for these

comparisons).

      Third, we undertake a "treatment on the treated" test that drops from our control sample

the individuals who received no payments from natural gas exploration. In this test, we draw a

comparison between individuals who received large versus small payments, which after controlling

for mineral acreage, is driven entirely by the timing and intensity of drilling ­ factors external to the

individuals in our sample. Following the same tabular structure of Table 3, these tests are reported

                                                   22
in Appendix Table A4, and we report the key coefficient of interest in this test in Figure 10. We

obtain coefficients and bound on these coefficients well within the initial estimates in Table 3.11

        Fourth, we address the possibility that our main results in Table 3 do not reflect the effects

of wealth shocks, but instead capture changes in local investment opportunities. To evaluate this

possibility, we limit the sample to mineral owners who live outside of the Barnett shale, and thus,

are unlikely to see local opportunities arise from the shale shock. Appendix Table A5 presents the

results from estimating the main specifications on the sub-sample of individuals who do not reside

in the Barnett Shale area, and we report the key coefficient of interest in this test in Figure 10.

Coefficients and confidence intervals fall within the range estimated in Table 3. This pattern of

results implies that it is the effect of wealth on the person's choice to become self-employed, not

changes to regional income or local economic opportunities that drives our central result.

        Fifth, we evaluate the effects of heterogeneous expectations on payment streams by exploring

differences in the fraction of overall payments that come from the upfront bonus versus the royalty

bonus stream. To do so, we estimate our main tests using bonus payments only and royalty payments

only to compute the high payment mineral windfall variable. We report these results in Appendix

Table A6 and we report the key coefficient of interest in this test in Figure 10. We again obtain

coefficients with bounds close to our main results in Table 3, suggesting the impact of these potential

factors is not a primary driver of our main results.12

        Sixth, we address the possibility that "stale" employment data from Experian could be driving

our results. If receiving a windfall leads to more inertia in our self-employment measure ­ perhaps

through less interaction with the credit registry ­ our results on extending self-employment spells

could be due to having stale employment records. We address this possibility by restricting our

sample to individuals who consistently have credit inquiries throughout the sample period, and

therefore, have less potential for stale records. For this "Credit inquiry" subsample, we report the

results in Appendix Table A7, and we summarize the key coefficient of interest in this test in Figure

10. As is apparent in the results, our findings on the "Credit inquiry" subsample are well within
  11 Related, we have also estimated the model without saturating it with fixed effects and controls, finding very similar

magnitudes. The coefficient stability that we have observed in these tests is another measure of comfort against a possible
omitted variable bias (Oster (2019)). We report these findings in Appendix Table A3.
  12 We also report results in Appendix Table A6 assuming flat royalty rates across all mineral owners, and average bonus

per acre and royalty percentage amounts in a given year for mineral owners, so as to alleviate potential issues of certain
types of mineral owners negotiating better terms and self sorting into high windfall categories. These tests fix lease terms
constant and re-estimate our main tests. We obtain similar results to our main tests in Table 3.


                                                            23
the standard errors of our main test in Table 3. As further evidence that stale records do not drive

our estimates, we find that Experian routinely updates employment status even individuals do not

have updates to their credit reports. This finding is consistent with Experian's deep database on

individuals and background check services.

      Lastly, we include a series of robustness tests in Appendix Table 8 where we estimate our

main specifications from Table 3 using different dollar cutoffs to define the High Payment Dummy.

We obtain coefficients and interpretations consistent with those in Table 3.


5.2   External Validity

We also undertake two tests that relate to the broader applicability and interpretation of our results.

      First, we evaluate whether individuals who received their first payment after 2010 (our panel

sample) react to the receipt of large payments as if the payments were unexpected. People in this

post-2010 sample may have anticipated wealth windfalls because fracking technologies had been

employed for at least five years. To understand whether recipients of later windfalls exhibit anticipa-

tion effects, we perform a placebo exercise that mirrors the parallel trends plot in Figure 7. Namely,

we identify people who received small windfalls (<$10,000) as treated relative to the control group

who received no payments, and we produce a leads-and-lags plot of the effect of receiving a small

payment. Figure 11 reports this evidence, which exhibits no effect for initially self-employed, nor

initially regularly employed. Crucially, Panel B re-weights this exercise such that the distribution

of acreage for small payment recipients matches the distribution for our main treatment group, and

we continue to find no effect. If the small payment individuals have similar acreages, they plau-

sibly have similar expectations regarding the eventual payments. Thus, anticipation effects due to

forming expectations about eventual payments are unlikely to be driving our findings.

      Second, though our sample of mineral owners covers a broad swath of the population, we pro-

vide further evidence that our findings can generalize to a nationally representative sample of U.S.

individuals. Referring to the the distributions of key characteristics in comparison to the nationally

representative sample (Figure 4), our sample of mineral owners is statistically different from a na-

tionally representative sample along several important dimensions. At the same time, we observe




                                                  24
significant overlap between our sample and the national random sample.13 To alleviate the concern

that our conclusions would differ in a more representative sample, we re-estimate our main spec-

ification, using sample weights to match the national random sample distribution on age, income,

and credit score (see Appendix Figure A.5 for an illustration of how our re-weighting matches the

national random sample's distribution for age, income and credit scores). We report estimates from

this weighted regression in Appendix Table A9, and we report the key coefficient of interest in this

test in Figure 10. When we weight to match the national random sample characteristics, our coef-

ficient estimates remain close to our initial estimates, providing support for the applicability of our

estimates to a broader sample.



6    Conclusion

Entrepreneurship encompasses a wide range of economic activities. Using a broadly relevant data

set of cash windfalls from payments related to shale natural gas extraction, our paper studies the

impact of wealth on self-employment decisions and finds evidence consistent with personal wealth

affecting self-employment decisions through a non-pecuniary "consuming self-employment" chan-

nel (Hurst and Pugsley (2011, 2017)). Recent literature has identified several important barriers to

self-employment, including financial constraints and downside risk of business failures (Herkenhoff,

Phillips, and Cohen-Cole (2018); Hombert et al. (2020)). When evaluating the impact of wealth on

self-employment rates, we find that these alternative channels are not the primary drivers of our

results. Indeed, our results are most consistent with the idea that wealth enhances individuals' pref-

erences for the non-pecuniary benefits of self-employment, and that the corresponding increase in

self-employment rates resembles a personal consumption choice (i.e., individuals choose to become

self-employed because of the non-monetary benefits, such as leisure or job autonomy).

       The insights from how each of these channels is operative in the economy are important,

as each channel corresponds to different policy targeting and responses. For example, shocks to

personal wealth most resemble unrestricted cash transfer programs, whereas other barriers to self-
   13 Using an analysis of the names from the mineral roll data, we were able to impute race of the individuals in our

sample to provide some description of the distribution of individuals across various ethnic backgrounds. The imputations
from Nameprism are reported in a frequency distribution in Appendix Figure A.4. Unfortunately, the Experian merged
data set does not have the race field appended to it, because of federal regulations regarding the use of race in credit
services. Thus, we cannot construct sample weights to match a nationally representative sample. However, the data ­
though tilted toward whites ­ does indicate a mix of races in our sample of mineral owners.


                                                          25
employment studied in the literature (e.g., unemployment insurance and financial constraints) ought

to inform policies that either insure downside risk or alleviate financial constraints directly via the

banking sector. Though a systematic comparison of policy options is beyond the scope of our

study, our core insight that unrestricted cash windfalls tend to facilitate consumption of the personal

benefits of self-employment rather than benefits to the broader economy is important to keep in

mind.




                                                  26
References
Adelino, M., A. Schoar, and F. Severino. 2015. House prices, collateral, and self-employment.
  Journal of Financial Economics 117:288­306.

Agarwal, S., V. Mikhed, and B. Scholnick. 2020. Peers' income and financial distress: Evidence
  from lottery winners and neighboring bankruptcies. The Review of Financial Studies 33:433­72.

Andersen, S., and K. M. Nielsen. 2012. Ability or finances as constraints on entrepreneurship?
  evidence from survival rates in a natural experiment. The Review of Financial Studies 25:3684­
  710.

Astebro, T., H. Herz, R. Nanda, and R. A. Weber. 2014. Seeking the roots of entrepreneurship:
  Insights from behavioral economics. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28:49­70.

Babina, T. 2020. Destructive creation at work: How financial distress spurs entrepreneurship. The
  Review of Financial Studies Forthcoming.

Bermejo, V. J., M. A. Ferreira, D. Wolfenzon, and R. Zambrana. 2019. Entrepreneurship and Re-
  gional Windfall Gains: Evidence from the Spanish Christmas Lottery. Working Paper .

Bernstein, S., E. Colonnelli, D. Malacrino, and T. McQuade. 2018. Who creates new firms when
  local opportunities arise? Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bhutta, N., and B. J. Keys. 2016. Interest rates and equity extraction during the housing boom.
  American Economic Review 106:1742­74.

Bianchi, M., and M. Bobba. 2013. Liquidity, risk, and occupational choices. Review of Economic
  Studies 80:491­511.

Black, S. E., and P. E. Strahan. 2002. Entrepreneurship and bank credit availability. The Journal of
  Finance 57:2807­33.

Blanchflower, D. G., and A. J. Oswald. 1998. What makes an entrepreneur? Journal of labor
  Economics 16:26­60.

Blattman, C., N. Fiala, and S. Martinez. 2014. Generating skilled self-employment in developing
  countries: Experimental evidence from uganda. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129:697­
  752.

Bos, M., E. Breza, and A. Liberman. 2018. The labor market effects of credit market information.
  The Review of Financial Studies 31:2005­37.

Briggs, J. S., D. Cesarini, E. Lindqvist, and R. Östling. 2020. Windfall gains and stock market
  participation. Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming.

Cesarini, D., E. Lindqvist, M. J. Notowidigdo, and R. Östling. 2017. The effect of wealth on
  individual and household labor supply: Evidence from Swedish lotteries. American Economic
  Review 107:3917­46.

Cesarini, D., E. Lindqvist, R. Östling, and B. Wallace. 2016. Wealth, health, and child develop-
  ment: Evidence from administrative data on Swedish lottery players. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131:687­738.


                                                27
Cespedes, J., X. Huang, and C. Parra. 2019. More Cash Flows, More Options? The Effect of Cash
  Windfalls on Small Firms. Working paper .

Chatterji, A. K., and R. C. Seamans. 2012. Entrepreneurial finance, credit cards, and race. Journal
  of Financial Economics 106:182­95.

Cookson, J. A., E. P. Gilje, and R. Z. Heimer. 2019. Shale Shocked: The Long Run Effect of Wealth
  on Household Debt. Working Paper .

Corradin, S., and A. Popov. 2015. House Prices, Home Equity Borrowing, and Entrepreneurship.
  Review of Financial Studies 28:2399­428.

Cunningham, C., K. Gerardi, and Y. Shen. 2017. Fracking and mortgage default. Federal Reserve
  Bank of Atlanta, Working Paper Series 2017.

De Meza, D., C. Dawson, A. Henley, and G. R. Arabsheibani. 2019. Curb your enthusiasm: Opti-
  mistic entrepreneurs earn less. European Economic Review 111:53­69.

Decker, R. A., M. McCollum, and G. B. Upton Jr. 2018. Firm dynamics and local economic shocks:
  Evidence from the shale oil and gas boom. Working Paper .

Dillon, E. W., and C. T. Stanton. 2017. Self-Employment Dynamics and the Returns to En-
  trepreneurship. NBER Working Paper No. 23168 .

Dobbie, W., P. Goldsmith-Pinkham, N. Mahoney, and J. Song. 2020. Bad credit, no problem? credit
  and labor market consequences of bad credit reports. Journal of Finance Forthcoming.

Evans, D. S., and B. Jovanovic. 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under liquidity
  constraints. Journal of Political Economy 97:808­27.

Feyrer, J., E. T. Mansur, and B. Sacerdote. 2017. Geographic Dispersion of Economic Shocks:
  Evidence from the Fracking Revolution. American Economic Review 107:1313­34.

Fracassi, C., M. J. Garmaise, S. Kogan, and G. Natividad. 2016. Business microloans for US
  subprime borrowers. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 51:55­83.

Gilje, E. Forthcoming. Does local access to finance matter? evidence from u.s. oil and natural gas
  shale booms. Management Science .

Gilje, E. P., E. Loutskina, and P. E. Strahan. 2016. Exporting liquidity: Branch banking and financial
  integration. Journal of Finance 71:1159­84.

Glaeser, E. L. 2007. Entrepreneurship and the city. NBER Working Paper No. 13551 .

Gottlieb, J. D., R. R. Townsend, and T. Xu. 2016. Does career risk deter potential entrepreneurs?
  Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hankins, S., M. Hoekstra, and P. M. Skiba. 2011. The ticket to easy street? The financial conse-
  quences of winning the lottery. Review of Economics and Statistics 93:961­9.

Hanspal, T. 2016. The effect of personal financing disruptions on entrepreneurship. Working Paper,
  SAFE Working Paper.

Harding, J. P., and S. S. Rosenthal. 2017. Homeownership, housing capital gains and self-
  employment. Journal of Urban Economics 99:120­35.

                                                 28
Herkenhoff, K., G. M. Phillips, and E. Cohen-Cole. 2018. The Impact of Consumer Credit Access
  on Self-Employment and Entrepreneurship. Working Paper .

Hombert, J., A. Schoar, D. Sraer, and D. Thesmar. 2020. Can unemployment insurance spur en-
  trepreneurial activity? Journal of Finance Forthcoming.

Howell, S. T. 2017. Financing innovation: Evidence from R&D grants. American Economic Review
  107:1136­64.

Hurst, E., and A. Lusardi. 2004. Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and Entrepreneurship.
  Journal of Political Economy 112:319­47.

Hurst, E., and B. W. Pugsley. 2011. What do small businesses do? Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity Fall:73­142.

------. 2017. Wealth, tastes, and entrepreneurial choice. Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses:
  Current Knowledge and Challenges 75:111­.

Hvide, H. K., and G. A. Panos. 2014. Risk tolerance and entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial
  Economics 111:200­23.

Kerr, S. P., W. R. Kerr, and R. Nanda. 2015. House money and entrepreneurship. Harvard Business
  School Entrepreneurial Management Working Paper .

Kerr, W. R., and R. Nanda. 2009. Democratizing entry: Banking deregulations, financing con-
  straints, and entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics 94:124­49.

Kihlstrom, R. E., and J. Laffont. 1979. A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory of firm forma-
  tion based on risk aversion. Journal of Political Economy 87:719­48.

Kleiner, K., and I. Hacamo. 2019. Forced entrepreneurs. Kelley School of Business Research Paper
  No. 16-48 .

Lafontaine, F., and K. Shaw. 2016. Serial entrepreneurship: Learning by doing? Journal of Labor
  Economics 34:S217­54.

Lazear, E. P. 2004. Balanced skills and entrepreneurship. American Economic Review 94:208­11.

Levine, R., and Y. Rubinstein. 2017. Smart and illicit: Who becomes an entrepreneur and do they
  earn more? Quarterly Journal of Economics 132:963­1018.

Lindh, T., and H. Ohlsson. 1996. Self-employment and windfall gains: Evidence from the swedish
  lottery. Economic Journal 106:1515­26.

Lindqvist, E., R. Östling, and D. Cesarini. 2020. Long-run effects of lottery wealth on psychological
  well-being. The Review of Economic Studies Forthcoming.

Manso, G. 2016. Experimentation and the Returns to Entrepreneurship. Review of Financial Studies
 29:2319­40.

Mikhed, V., S. Raina, and B. Scholnick. 2019. Financial constraints of entrepreneurs and the self-
 employed. FRB of Philadelphia Working Paper 19-52.

Naaraayanan, S. L. 2019. Women's inheritance rights and entrepreneurship gender gap. Working
  paper .

                                                 29
Oster, E. 2019. Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence. Journal of
  Business and Economic Statistics 37:187­204.

Parker, S. C. 2009. The economics of entrepreneurship. Cambridge University Press.

Puri, M., and D. T. Robinson. 2007. Optimism and economic choice. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 86:71­99.

Robb, A. M., and D. T. Robinson. 2014. The capital structure decisions of new firms. Review of
  Financial Studies 27:153­79.

Schmalz, M. C., D. A. Sraer, and D. Thesmar. 2017. Housing collateral and entrepreneurship. The
  Journal of Finance 72:99­132.

Schoar, A. 2010. The divide between subsistence and transformational entrepreneurship. Innovation
  Policy and the Economy 1:209­40.




                                               30
                        Figure 1: Geographical distribution of the payment
Panel A and B contain a heatmap where each individual is represented by a square. The darker
(lighter) is the square, the more (less) density of people there is. The location of the individual is
defined as follow: it is the centroid of the 5 digit zipcode of their personal location the day they
receive their first payment. Panel A plots the spatial distribution of the people in the sample that
have received a wealth windfall above $0. Panel B plots the spatial distribution of the people in the
sample that have received an oil and gas royalty payment that is above $50,000.


                                     Panel A: Mineral owners




                                      Panel B: High payment




                                                 31
           Figure 2: Self-Employment Surveys versus Credit Bureau Self Employment
Panel A plots the fraction of the workforce that is self-employed as reported by the American Com-
munity Survey (y-axis) compared to the Credit Bureau (x­axis). The unit of observation is at the
state-year level. Panel B plots the fraction of the workforce that is self-employed as reported by the
Current Population Survey (y-axis) compared to the Credit Bureau (x­axis). The unit of observation
is at the state-year level.

                   Panel A: American Community Survey versus Credit Bureau
                                 10
                 Unincorporated self-employed (ACS)
                            6    4        8




                                                      1        2                3                 4       5
                                                                     Self-employed (CB)

                                                          State-year average              Fitted values


                                Panel B: Current Population Survey versus Credit Bureau
                                 8
                 Unincorporated self-employed (CPS)
                       2         04         6




                                                      1        2                3                 4       5
                                                                     Self-employed (CB)

                                                          State-year average              Fitted values




                                                                         32
 Figure 3: The Effect of Windfall Wealth on Self-employment and Retirement over the Lifecycle
This figure reports the effect of logged wealth windfall on self-employment (and separately retire-
ment), estimated separately for different age ranges (based on age in year 2005). The figure contains
both the point estimate effect and 95% confidence interval
      .3
      .2
      .1
      0
      -.1




            18-35            35-45              45-55                55-65                 65+
                                              age in 2005

                                     Self-employment               Retirement




                                                 33
Figure 4: Distribution Comparison: High Payment Mineral Owners vs National Representative
Sample
Panel A, B and C report the distribution of the age, credit score and W2 income between individuals
that receive a mineral payment above $50,000 and the national random sample.


                                                                     Panel A: Age




                                       .03
                                         .02
                              Age Density
                           .01         0




                                                        0      20            40                  60               80         100
                                                                                     Age

                                                              High Payment                 National Representative Sample



                                                              Panel B: Credit Score
                                       .008      .006
                              Credit Score Density
                           .002       .004
                                       0




                                                        300   400        500               600              700        800
                                                                                  Credit score

                                                              High Payment                 National Representative Sample



                                                              Panel C: W2 income
                                       .025
                                       .02
                           Income Density
                             .01   .015.005
                                       0




                                                        0              100                            200                    300
                                                                                    Income

                                                              High Payment                 National Representative Sample




                                                                                  34
                                                  Figure 5: Mineral Payment Distribution
This figure reports the distribution of payments. The first bin represents the number of people
that receive a payment between 0 and $10,000. Similarly, all other bins group people by interval
of $10,000, except for the last one that is composed of all the people that have a payment above
$150,000.         25,000
                       20,000
      Number Of People
      10,000  15,000
                  5,000
                  0




                                10K   20K   30K    40K   50K   60K   70K    80K   90K   100K   110K   120K   130K   140K   150K+

                                                    Mineral Payment Amount (in dollars)




                                                                       35
                                         Figure 6: Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment
This figure plots the propensity to be self-employed in percentage terms on the y-axis, relative to
the log wealth shock received (x-axis) in 2015. This is the raw data with no controls.
                   4
      Self-employment (in percent)
             2     1       3




                                     1                 100          1K             10K   50K 150K
                                                 Total payment (log scale, in dollars)




                                                              36
                                                                                  Figure 7: Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment in Event-Time
Panel A and B plot the dynamic graph of the impact of wealth on the decision to become self-
employed on the post 2010 sample in a event-time setting. The left (right) figure plots the decision
for the group of people that are self-employed (respectively employed) in 2010. In Panel A, the
control group is all people that have no payment or a small payment. In Panel B, the control group
is all people that have a payment below $50,000 but strictly positive. The treatment group is all
persons that receive a payment above $50,000 between 2010 and 2015. Confidence intervals at the
95% level around point estimates are plotted. Standard errors are clustered at the three-digit zipcode
level.


                                                                                                                        Panel A: Baseline
          Sample: Self-employed in 2010                                                                                                         Sample: Not self-employed in 2010
             35                                                                                                                                    35

                                                        30                                                                                                                                    30
   Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)




                                                                                                                                         Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)
                                                        25                                                                                                                                    25

                                                        20                                                                                                                                    20

                                                        15                                                                                                                                    15

                                                        10                                                                                                                                    10

                                                         5                                                                                                                                     5

                                                         0                                                                                                                                     0

                                                         -5                                                                                                                                    -5

                                                        -10                                                                                                                                   -10

                                                        -15                                                                                                                                   -15

                                                        -20                                                                                                                                   -20
                                                              -3 (or less)   -2        -1          First payment    1      2 (or more)                                                              -3 (or less)   -2   -1          First payment   1   2 (or more)
                                                                                       Event-time (years)                                                                                                               Event-time (years)




                                                                                                                   Panel B: Within treated
          Sample: Self-employed in 2010 (within treated)                                                                                        Sample: Not self-employed in 2010
             35                                                                                                                                    35

                                                        30                                                                                                                                    30
   Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)




                                                                                                                                         Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)




                                                        25                                                                                                                                    25

                                                        20                                                                                                                                    20

                                                        15                                                                                                                                    15

                                                        10                                                                                                                                    10

                                                         5                                                                                                                                     5

                                                         0                                                                                                                                     0

                                                         -5                                                                                                                                    -5

                                                        -10                                                                                                                                   -10

                                                        -15                                                                                                                                   -15

                                                        -20                                                                                                                                   -20
                                                              -3 (or less)   -2        -1          First payment    1      2 (or more)                                                              -3 (or less)   -2   -1          First payment   1   2 (or more)
                                                                                       Event-time (years)                                                                                                               Event-time (years)




                                                                                                                                  37
                                                          Figure 8: Personal Wealth, Self-Employment and Education

This figure presents the estimated effect of receiving a large wealth windfall (> $50,000) on self-
employment rates, estimated separately for subsamples of individuals by industry. The empirical
specifications are reported in Appendix Table A1.
     Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)
                                         2.00     2.50




                                                                1.66
                                  1.50




                                                                                                                     1.05
                        1.00




                                                                            0.88                     0.87


                                                                                         0.54
      0.00     0.50




                                                                       Coefficient on High Payment Dummy

                                                            <High School              High School              College Degree
                                                            Bachelors' Degree         Graduate Degree




                                                                                    38
                                                                 Figure 9: Personal Wealth, Self-Employment and Industry

This figure presents the estimated effect of receiving a large wealth windfall (> $50,000) on self-
employment rates, estimated separately for subsamples of individuals by industry. The empirical
specifications are reported in Appendix Table A2.
     Estimated coefficient (self-employment propensity)
                                                          2.50
                                                          2.00
                                                          1.50




                                                                                                                      1.44
                                                                                          1.37
                                                                                                        1.30
                                                          1.00
                                                          0.50




                                                                         0.50
                                                          0.00




                                                                                Coefficient on High Payment Dummy

                                                                           Professional / Technical            Sales service
                                                                           Blue Collar                         Other




                                                                                            39
                                                                                   Figure 10: Summary of Robustness Tests
This figure plots the point estimates and confidence intervals of the impact of wealth on the decision
to become self-employed using the 2015 cross-sectional sample across a set of robustness tests.
More specifically, "Weighted" reports the impact when the national sample weights are used. "Min-
erals owners" is when the sample on people that receive a payment strictly positive is used. That
is, the specification compares mineral owners that receive large payment windfalls with those re-
ceiving small payment windfalls. "Outside Barnett" is when we restrict the regression to the people
living outside Barnett. "Royalty" (or "Bonus") are estimated when the treatment variable is defined
as having royalty (or bonus) above $50k. "Credit inquiry" restricts the sample to people that have
had a credit inquiry in 2015. Finally, ">$10k" and ">$100k" estimate the baseline regression when
different thresholds are constructed for the treated group, respectively above $10,000 or $100,000.
                                   2.50
          Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)
                                         1.50       2.00




                                                                                                  1.14                     1.14
                             1.00




                                                                   0.94                                                                   0.98                  0.95
                                                                                   0.86                                                               0.85


                                                                                                                 0.60
       0.00       0.50




                                                               Weighted   Mineral Owners   Outside Barnett   Royalty    Bonus     Credit inquiry   >10k      >100k




                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                Figure 11: Event Time Placebo Tests
These Figures plot the dynamic graph of the impact of receiving a low wealth windfall (below
$10,000) on the decision to become self-employed using the post 2010 sample. The left (right)
figure plots the decision for the group of people that are self-employed (respectively employed) in
2010. In Panel A, the control group is all people that have no payment. In Panel B, we re-weight
the control and treated groups so that the distribution of the mean acreage matches the one when the
high payment people are included. Confidence intervals are at the 95% level.The y-axis is the same
as in Figure 6 to ease the comparison of the magnitudes.


                                                                                                              Panel A: Baseline Placebo
          Sample: Self-employed in 2010                                                                                                   Sample: Not self-employed in 2010
             35                                                                                                                              35

                                                        30                                                                                                                              30
   Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)




                                                                                                                                   Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)
                                                        25                                                                                                                              25

                                                        20                                                                                                                              20

                                                        15                                                                                                                              15

                                                        10                                                                                                                              10

                                                         5                                                                                                                               5

                                                         0                                                                                                                               0

                                                         -5                                                                                                                              -5

                                                        -10                                                                                                                             -10

                                                        -15                                                                                                                             -15

                                                        -20                                                                                                                             -20
                                                              -3 (or less)   -2   -1          First payment     1    2 (or more)                                                              -3 (or less)   -2   -1          First payment   1   2 (or more)
                                                                                  Event-time (years)                                                                                                              Event-time (years)




                                                                                                    Panel B: Matched Acreage Placebo
          Sample: Self-employed in 2010                                                                                                   Sample: Not self-employed in 2010
             35                                                                                                                              35

                                                        30                                                                                                                              30
   Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)




                                                                                                                                   Estimated Coefficient (Self-employment propensity)




                                                        25                                                                                                                              25

                                                        20                                                                                                                              20

                                                        15                                                                                                                              15

                                                        10                                                                                                                              10

                                                         5                                                                                                                               5

                                                         0                                                                                                                               0

                                                         -5                                                                                                                              -5

                                                        -10                                                                                                                             -10

                                                        -15                                                                                                                             -15

                                                        -20                                                                                                                             -20
                                                              -3 (or less)   -2   -1          First payment     1    2 (or more)                                                              -3 (or less)   -2   -1          First payment   1   2 (or more)
                                                                                  Event-time (years)                                                                                                              Event-time (years)




                                                                                                                            41
Table 1. Summary Statistics
This table reports the summary statistics for the sample used in the main cross-sectional
regressions reported in this study. The unit of observation is at the individual level as of
2015.
                                   Mean       Std Dev       p25        Median       p75
Self-Employed (%)                   1.77       13.18        0.00        0.00        0.00
Retired (%)                         4.51       20.74        0.00        0.00        0.00
Income                             57.92       25.58       41.00       52.00       67.00
Credit Score                       738.49      81.78       681.00      763.00      808.00
Age in 2005                        49.89       13.54       40.00       49.00       59.00
Debt to Income                     14.41       13.07        2.00       12.00       23.00
Derogatory Trades                   0.14        0.68        0.00        0.00        0.00
Delinquent Trades                   0.01        0.15        0.00        0.00        0.00
Total Number of Trades             19.56       11.39       11.00       18.00       26.00
Revolving Utilization               0.26        0.28        0.03        0.13        0.42
Subprime                            0.14        0.35        0.00        0.00        0.00




                                            42
Table 2. Comparisons of Treatment and Control
This table reports the differences between treatment and control individuals used in our main cross-
sectional (Panel A) and panel tests (Panel B). We define our treated group as the people who received an
amount of wealth above $50k. Our control group is made of people that received either a low amount of
wealth or no wealth at all. Standard errors for the t-test are clustered at the three digit zip code level. The
column Difference reports the raw difference and whether the raw difference is statistically significant.
The Adjusted Difference column reports differences when we control for the fixed effects used in the
econometric specifications: Age fixed effects, acre fixed effects (quartile), income fixed effects (quartile),
and credit score fixed effects (centile). *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and
1% level respectively.


Panel A: Comparison of Treatment and Control for Cross-sectional tests (2005)
                                  Treatment           Control                                   Adjusted
                                                                         Difference
                                 Group Mean        Group Mean                                   Difference
Income                              57.22              49.09              8.130***              1.654***
Credit Score                        722.78            701.89             20.889***                 0.015
Age in 2005                         51.39              49.74              1.650**                  0.000
Debt to Income                       18.87             17.47              1.403***              0.986***
Derogatory Trades                    0.12               0.19             -0.068***                -0.003
Delinquent Trades                     0.01              0.02             -0.006***                -0.001
Total Number of Trades               21.08             18.49              2.583***               0.468*
Revolving Utilization                 0.25              0.27             -0.020***                 0.000
Subprime                             0.15               0.21             -0.063***                 0.002


Panel B: Comparison of Treatment and Control for Panel Regression Tests (2010)
                                  Treatment           Control                                   Adjusted
                                                                       Difference
                                 Group Mean        Group Mean                                   Difference
Retired                                  3.61                3.75                0.14              -0.770
Self-employed                            2.34                1.99               -0.34              -0.139
Income                                  61.04              52.82              -8.22***             0.831
Credit Score                            740.23             703.98            -36.25***             0.071
Age in 2005                             51.14              48.43              2.706***             0.00
Debt to Income                           12.98              16.22              3.24***           -1.332**
Derogatory Trades                        0.10               0.29               0.19***           -0.042**
Delinquent Trades                         0.00               0.02              0.02***           -0.007**
Total Number of Trades                   18.42              17.97               -0.46            -1.284**
Revolving Utilization                     0.22               0.28              0.05***            -0.013
Subprime                                 0.13               0.21               0.08***             0.010




                                                      43
Table 3. Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment
This table reports coefficient estimates from a cross-sectional regression on all 2015 observations. The unit of observation is individual i in the year 2015. The dependent variable is an
indicator for self-employed (x 100 for percentage interpretation). High Payment Dummy is an indicator for whether the total payment exceeds $50,000. The estimates are from a linear
probability model, estimated using OLS. Age fixed effects include a fixed effect for each age. Acre and income fixed effects are at the quintile level and credit score fixed effects are
made at the centile level. Controls include 2015 values of the individual's credit score, debt-to-income, fraction of accounts 90 days past due, revolving utilization (%), and indicators
for whether the individual is subprime, has a mortgage, has collections debt, and has an auto loan. Standard errors clustered by three digit zip code are reported in parentheses. (Z)
indicates that the continuous variable has been normalized to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 1 to ease the interpretation the coefficient estimates. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

                                                                                             Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                            (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)                    (7)              (8)
(1) Total Payment (Z)i                                  2.405***         2.415***
                                                         [0.237]          [0.337]
(2) Log(Total Payment)i                                                                   0.054***         0.070***
                                                                                           [0.009]          [0.007]
(3) High Payment Dummyi                                                                                                     0.897***         0.928***
                                                                                                                             [0.146]          [0.106]
(4) Payment Dummy $5k-20ki                                                                                                                                    0.454***         0.454***
                                                                                                                                                               [0.038]          [0.048]
(5) Payment Dummy $20k-50ki                                                                                                                                   0.996***         0.971***
                                                                                                                                                               [0.304]          [0.237]
(6) Payment Dummy $50k-100ki                                                                                                                                  1.155***         1.141***
                                                                                                                                                               [0.319]          [0.257]
(7) Payment Dummy $100k-250ki                                                                                                                                 1.039***         1.157***
                                                                                                                                                               [0.157]          [0.198]
(8) Payment Dummy >$250ki                                                                                                                                     1.794***         1.746***
                                                                                                                                                               [0.317]          [0.401]
Age FE                                                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
ZIP FE                                                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Income Quintile FE                                         Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                    Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Controls                                                                    Yes                               Yes                               Yes                               Yes
 2
R                                                         0.006            0.007            0.006            0.007            0.006            0.007           0.006            0.007
N                                                        728,121          573,357          728,121          573,357          728,121          573,357         728,121          573,357




                                                                                           44
Table 4. Self Employment Transitions
This table reports coefficient estimates from a panel regression. The sample is a panel of observations of individuals between 2010 and 2015 that did not receive a payment
in 2010 or before. The unit of observation is at the individual i, year t level. The table compares the flows in and out self-employment. The dependent variable is an
indicator for self-employed (x 100 for percentage interpretation). High Payment Dummy is an indicator for whether the total payment exceeds $50,000 for a mineral owner
between 2010 and 2015. The estimates are from a linear probability model, estimated using OLS. Individual fixed effects are included in the estimate, and depending on the
specification year fixed effects and acreage quintile interacted with year fixed effects are included. Standard errors clustered by three digit zip code are reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

                                                                                    Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                                     Self-Employed as of 2010                              Regular Employed as of 2010
                                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)              (5)                       (6)
(1) Postt                                                  0.239               0.442               0.420               0.011               0.010               0.011
                                                          [0.634]             [0.560]             [0.576]             [0.009]             [0.009]             [0.009]
(2) Postt × High Payment Dummyi                          9.590***            8.403***                                  0.005               -0.045
                                                          [3.011]             [2.944]                                 [0.178]             [0.185]
(3) Postt × Payment Dummy $5k-20ki                                                                 0.893                                                       -0.004
                                                                                                  [1.914]                                                     [0.042]
(4) Postt × Payment Dummy $20k-50ki                                                                -1.413                                                      -0.032
                                                                                                  [5.935]                                                     [0.127]
(5) Postt × Payment Dummy $50k-100ki                                                              8.799**                                                      0.074
                                                                                                  [4.183]                                                     [0.306]
(6) Postt × Payment Dummy $100k-250ki                                                           13.994***                                                      -0.130
                                                                                                 [1.004]                                                      [0.204]
(7) Postt × Payment Dummy >$250ki                                                                  5.868                                                     -0.304***
                                                                                                  [7.874]                                                     [0.046]
Individual FE                                               Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Year FE                                                     Yes                                                         Yes
Acreage Quintile × Year FE                                                      Yes                 Yes                                     Yes                 Yes
 2
R Within                                                   0.624               0.624               0.624               0.560               0.560               0.560
N                                                         20,442              20,442              20,442             1,003,194           1,003,194           1,003,194




                                                                                   45
Table 5. Wealth and Self Employment: Impact of Mineral Payments Ending
This table reports coefficient estimates from a cross-sectional regression on all 2015 observations. The unit of observation is individual i in the
year 2015. The variable Run Outi is a variable that takes 1 if the payment occurred but stopped in 2015 and 0 otherwise. The dependent variable is
an indicator for self-employed (x 100 for percentage interpretation). High Payment dummy is an indicator for whether the total payment exceeds
$50,000. The estimates are from a linear probability model, estimated using OLS. Age fixed effects include a fixed effect for each age. Acre and
income fixed effects are at the quintile level and credit score fixed effects are made at the centile level. Controls include 2015 values of the
individual's credit score, debt-to-income, fraction of accounts 90 days past due, revolving utilization (%), and indicators for whether the individual
is subprime, has a mortgage, has collections debt, and has an auto loan. Standard errors clustered by three digit zip code are reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

                                                                           Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                                (1)                    (2)                    (3)                        (4)
(1) High Payment Dummyi                                      0.916***                                         0.945***
                                                              [0.144]                                          [0.103]
(2) Run Outi                                                   0.151                  0.226*                    0.151                  0.220**
                                                              [0.132]                 [0.122]                  [0.108]                 [0.098]
(3) High Payment Dummyi × Run Outi                          -2.068***                                        -1.807***
                                                             [0.587]                                          [0.672]
(4) Payment Dummy $5k-20ki                                                           0.456***                                         0.455***
                                                                                      [0.037]                                          [0.047]
(5) Payment Dummy $20k-50ki                                                          1.009***                                         0.989***
                                                                                      [0.309]                                          [0.244]
(6) Payment Dummy $50k-100ki                                                         1.194***                                         1.179***
                                                                                      [0.324]                                          [0.260]
(7) Payment Dummy $100k-250ki                                                        1.034***                                         1.147***
                                                                                      [0.152]                                          [0.192]
(8) Payment Dummy >$250ki                                                            1.814***                                         1.769***
                                                                                      [0.317]                                          [0.405]
(9) Payment Dummy $5k-20ki × Run Outi                                                  -0.081                                           0.371
                                                                                      [0.600]                                          [0.871]
(10) Payment Dummy $20k-50ki × Run Outi                                               -1.640**                                        -2.131**
                                                                                       [0.813]                                         [0.996]
(11) Payment Dummy $50k-100ki × Run Outi                                             -3.087***                                        -2.924***
                                                                                      [0.716]                                          [0.593]
(12) Payment Dummy $100k-250ki × Run Outi                                              0.704                                            1.608
                                                                                      [1.957]                                          [2.377]
(13) Payment Dummy >$250ki × Run Outi                                                -4.490***                                        -4.692***
                                                                                      [0.270]                                          [0.288]
Age FE                                                          Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
ZIP FE                                                          Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Income Quintile FE                                              Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                             Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                         Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes
Controls                                                                                                        Yes                      Yes
 2
R Within                                                       0.006                   0.006                   0.007                    0.007
N                                                             728,121                 728,121                 573,357                  573,357


                                                                        46
Table 6. Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment - Heterogeneity by Financial Constraints
This table reports coefficient estimates for mineral windfall and personal balance sheet variables from a cross-sectional
regression on all 2015 observations. The unit of observation is individual i in the year 2015. The dependent variable is an
indicator for self-employed (x 100 for percentage interpretation). High Payment Dummy is an indicator for whether the total
payment exceeds $50,000. The estimates are from a linear probability model, estimated using OLS. Acre and income fixed
effects are for at the quintile level and credit score fixed effects are made at the centile level. (Z) indicates that the continuous
variable has been normalized to a mean of zero and a standard deviation of 1 to ease the interpretation of the interactive
coefficient estimates. Standard errors clustered by three digit zip code are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.



                                                                        Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                                        (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)
(1) High Payment Dummyi                                              0.900***         1.083***         0.888***          1.030***
                                                                      [0.147]          [0.377]          [0.147]           [0.393]
(2) High Payment Dummyi × Debt to Income in 2005i                     -0.005           -0.378
                                                                      [0.094]          [0.314]
(3) High Payment Dummyi × Credit Score in 2005i                                                          0.048             0.202
                                                                                                        [0.068]           [0.294]
(4) Debt to Income in 2005i                                          -0.078***        -0.231***
                                                                      [0.026]          [0.065]
(5) Credit Score in 2005i                                                                               -0.117          -0.259***
                                                                                                        [0.082]          [0.078]
Outside of Barnett                                                                       Yes                               Yes
Age FE                                                                  Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
ZIP FE                                                                  Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Income Quintile FE                                                      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
R2 Within                                                              0.006            0.023            0.006             0.023
N                                                                     728,121          87,068           728,121           87,068




                                                                47
           Appendix to:

Personal Wealth and Self-Employment
                                                        Figure A.1: Self-employment (CPS) validation after controlling for unemployment
The left figure plots the fraction of the workforce that is self-employed as reported by the Current Population Survey
(y-axis) compared to the Credit Bureau (x­axis), after controlling for the unemployment (from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics). The unit of observation is at the state-year level. The correlation between the two variables is equal to 0.30.
The right figure plots the fraction of the workforce that is self-employed as reported by the American Community Survey
(y-axis) compared to the Credit Bureau (x­axis), after controlling for the unemployment (from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics). The unit of observation is at the state-year level. The correlation between the two variables is equal to 0.69.




                                                                                                                        Unincorporated self-employed (CPS, after controls)
    Incorporated self-employed (CPS, after controls)
                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                           2       3
                                  1




                                                                                                                                             0     1
                      0




                                                                                                                            -2      -1
       -1




                                                       -2      -1               0                 1             2                                                            -2   -1               0                 1             2
                                                                    Self-employed (CB, after controls)                                                                                 Self-employed (CB, after controls)

                                                               State-year average               Fitted values                                                                     State-year average               Fitted values




                                                                                                                    i
                                                          Figure A.2: Self-employment (CPS) validation after controlling for unemployment
The left figure plots the fraction of the workforce that is self-employed as reported by the American Community Survey
(y-axis) compared to the Credit Bureau (x­axis), after controlling for the unemployment (from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics). The unit of observation is at the state-year level. The correlation between the two variables is equal to 0.69.
The right figure plots the fraction of the workforce that is unemployed (from the Bureau of Labor Statistics) (y-axis)
compared to our measure of self-employment from Credit Bureau (x­axis). The unit of observation is at the state-year
level. The correlation between the two variables is equal to -0.35.
    Unincorporated self-employed (ACS, after controls)




                                                                                                                                      15
                                                  4




                                                                                                                           Unemployment rate (BLS)
                                   2




                                                                                                                                            10
                       0




                                                                                                                              5
        -2




                                                                                                                                      0
                                                         -2      -1               0                 1             2                                  1        2                3                 4       5
                                                                      Self-employed (CB, after controls)                                                            Self-employed (CB)

                                                                 State-year average               Fitted values                                          State-year average              Fitted values




                                                                                                                      ii
                                                                                         Figure A.3: Analysis of the flows
The left figure plots the fraction (over the active workforce) of the workforce that remained in their occupation from one
year to another one in the Credit Bureau (y-axis) to the yearly average fraction of people that stayed in their job in the
                                    JobStayS
Job-to-Job Flows (J2J) Data ( ((MainB+MainE)/2)  ) (x­axis). The unit of observation is at the state-year level. The correlation
between the two variables is equal to 0.47. The right figure plots the yearly income of people that stayed in their job in
the Job-to-Job Flows (J2J) Data (variable JobStaySEarn_Orig) (y-axis) to the yearly income of people that stayed in their
job in the credit bureau Data. The unit of observation is at the state-year level. The correlation between the two variables
is equal to 0.58.




                                                                                                                                   100000
                      .98
     People that stayed in their job (CB)
                                    .96




                                                                                                                                             80000
                                                                                                                       Stayer earnings (J2J flows)
                         .94




                                                                                                                                 60000
                .92




                                                                                                                      40000
       .9




                                                                                                                                   20000
                      .88




                                            .88   .89               .9              .91             .92   .93                                        35   40               45               50       55
                                                        People that stayed in their job (J2J flows)                                                                    Income (CB)

                                                              Fitted values       State-year average                                                           Fitted values    State-year average




                                                                                                                iii
                                  Figure A.4: Ethnicity of the treated group
This histogram plots the estimated race of the people that sign an oil and gas lease. The race is found using Nameprism,
a classification algorithm using name embeddings.
        400000
                       White
        300000
        200000
        100000




                                    Hispanic


                                                    Black
                                                                                                 Api
                                                                   Asian        Two race
        0




                                                            iv
                                                         Figure A.5: Representativeness
Panel A, B and C plot the empirical distribution of age, credit score and W2 income from our
matched sample once weights are applied to make the sample representative. The weights are
constructed using a stratified sampling methodology. First, we group each observations into 10
deciles of age, credit score and W2 income for the representative sample. Then, we calculate the
frequency of occurence for each combination of decile. We do the same for our matched sample that
includes both the treated group and the control group using the same cutoffs as in the representative
sample. Finally we multiply our matched sample by the inverse of the matched sample weights
times the weights of the representative sample. The intuition is that it gives more importance to
observations that are scarce in the matched sample but appears a lot in the representative sample.
We are careful to apply the weights to both the control and treated group, so that we do not create
an endogeneity problem.


                                                                    Panel A: Age
                                     .025
                                     .02
                                   .015
                            Age Density
                            .01      .005
                                     0




                                                   0          20            40                  60               80         100
                                                                                    Age

                                                             High Payment                 National Representative Sample



                                                            Panel B: Credit Score
                                     .006
                            Credit Score Density
                            .002     0     .004




                                                   300       400        500               600              700        800
                                                                                 Credit score

                                                             High Payment                 National Representative Sample



                                                             Panel C: W2 income
                                     .025
                                     .02
                            Income Density
                              .01   .015
                                     .005
                                     0




                                                   0                  100                            200                    300
                                                                                   Income

                                                             High Payment                 National Representative Sample

                                                                                  v
Table A1. Wealth Shocks, Self-Employment, and Education
This table reports coefficient estimates from a cross-sectional regression on all 2015 observations assessing heterogeneity linked to education and the relationship between mineral
windfalls and self-employment decisions. The unit of observation is individual i in the year 2015. The dependent variable is an indicator for self-employed (x 100 for percentage
interpretation). The estimates are from a linear probability model, estimated using OLS. Acre and income fixed effects are for the quintiles and credit score fixed effects are made at
the centile level. Standard errors clustered by three digit zip code are reported in parentheses. The dummy college degree takes the value of 1 if the individual has obtained a college
degree, and is 0 otherwise. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

                                                                                          Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                           Less Than                             Some College
                                                                                High School                               Bachelor        Graduate                          All
                                                          High School                                Degree
                                                              (1)                   (2)                (3)                  (4)              (5)                             (6)
(1) High Payment Dummyi                                    1.658***               0.875**              0.541***              0.872***              1.050***              1.131***
                                                            [0.398]               [0.392]               [0.161]               [0.255]               [0.387]               [0.354]
(2) High Payment Dummyi × College Degreei                                                                                                                                 -0.365
                                                                                                                                                                          [0.362]
(3) College Degreei                                                                                                                                                      0.175***
                                                                                                                                                                          [0.022]
Age FE                                                        Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
ZIP FE                                                        Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Income Quintile FE                                            Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                           Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                       Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 2
R                                                            0.018                 0.010                 0.014                 0.013                 0.023                 0.006
N                                                            78,513               192,245               202,264               154,807                76,629               728,121




                                                                                              vi
Table A2. Wealth Shocks, Self-Employment, and Industry
This table reports coefficient estimates from a cross-sectional regression on all 2015 observations assessing heterogeneity linked to
industry/job type and the relationship between mineral windfalls and self-employment decisions. The unit of observation is individual i
in the year 2015. The sample is a cross-sectional regression on all 2015 observations. The dependent variable is the a dummy of self-
employment as of 2015. The estimates are from a linear probability model, estimated using OLS. Age fixed effects include a fixed effect
for each age, acre and income fixed effects are at the quintile level. Standard errors clustered at the three digit zipcode are reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% level respectively.

                                                                     Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                         Professional/           Sales/
                                                                                                    Blue Collar               Other
                                                          Technical             Service
                                                              (1)                 (2)                   (3)                     (4)
(1) High Payment Dummyi                                    0.498***              1.369***               1.299*               1.438**
                                                            [0.128]               [0.358]               [0.681]              [0.566]
Age FE                                                        Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
ZIP FE                                                        Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Income Quintile FE                                            Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                           Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                       Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
R2                                                           0.012                0.014                 0.018                 0.043
N                                                           243,865              188,573               103,292                23,044




                                                                      vii
Table A3. Stability of Coefficient when adding Fixed Effects
This table reports a specification similar to specifcation (5) of Table 3, but adds additional fixed effects one-by-one across specifications to assess coefficient
stability

                                                                                 Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)                (4)                        (5)
(1) High Payment Dummyi                                     1.012***              0.967***              0.918***              0.888***              0.897***
                                                             [0.182]               [0.169]               [0.147]               [0.144]               [0.146]
Age FE                                                                                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
ZIP FE                                                                                                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Income Quintile FE                                                                                                               Yes                   Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                           Yes                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                                                                                                                Yes
 2
R                                                            0.001                 0.003                  0.005                 0.005                 0.006
N                                                           728,140               728,138                728,121               728,121               728,121




                                                                               viii
Table A4. Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment - Treated Only
This table reports similar specifications to Table 3, except on a limited sample of mineral owners only. The identification is coming from comparing mineral owners that receive high
payments versus small payments.


                                                                                          Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                          (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)                  (7)             (8)
(1) Total Paymenti                                     2.279***        2.203***
                                                        [0.260]         [0.354]
(2) Log(Total Payment)i                                                                0.174***         0.170***
                                                                                        [0.035]          [0.029]
(3) High Payment Dummyi                                                                                                 0.852***        0.860***
                                                                                                                         [0.143]         [0.103]
(4) Payment Dummy $5k-20ki                                                                                                                               0.429***        0.395***
                                                                                                                                                          [0.037]         [0.054]
(5) Payment Dummy $20k-50ki                                                                                                                              0.975***        0.898***
                                                                                                                                                          [0.305]         [0.249]
(6) Payment Dummy $50k-100ki                                                                                                                             1.141***        1.083***
                                                                                                                                                          [0.328]         [0.269]
(7) Payment Dummy $100k-250ki                                                                                                                            1.013***        1.089***
                                                                                                                                                          [0.165]         [0.197]
(8) Payment Dummy >$250ki                                                                                                                                1.803***        1.697***
                                                                                                                                                          [0.304]         [0.379]
Age FE                                                   Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
ZIP FE                                                   Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
Income Quintile FE                                       Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                      Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                  Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
Controls                                                                  Yes                             Yes                              Yes                              Yes
 2
R                                                       0.008            0.009           0.008           0.009            0.008           0.009           0.008            0.009
N                                                      356,625          300,250         356,625         300,250          356,625         300,250         356,625          300,250




                                                                                          ix
Table A5. Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment - Outside Barnett
This table reports similar specifications to Table 3, except that the sample is limited to mineral owners that reside outside of the Barnett Shale.




                                                                                               Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                             (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)               (7)        (8)
(1) Total Paymenti                                         1.485*            1.568
                                                           [0.876]          [0.958]
(2) Log(Total Payment)i                                                                     0.064***          0.070***
                                                                                             [0.020]           [0.022]
(3) High Payment Dummyi                                                                                                        1.091***         1.143***
                                                                                                                                [0.379]          [0.421]
(4) Payment Dummy $5k-20ki                                                                                                                                   0.219      0.102
                                                                                                                                                            [0.216]    [0.224]
(5) Payment Dummy $20k-50ki                                                                                                                                  0.499      0.576
                                                                                                                                                            [0.378]    [0.430]
(6) Payment Dummy $50k-100ki                                                                                                                                1.534***   1.560***
                                                                                                                                                             [0.503]    [0.551]
(7) Payment Dummy $100k-250ki                                                                                                                               1.050*      1.119
                                                                                                                                                            [0.628]    [0.697]
(8) Payment Dummy >$250ki                                                                                                                                    0.814      0.793
                                                                                                                                                            [0.908]    [0.971]
Age FE                                                      Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes     Yes        Yes
ZIP FE                                                      Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes     Yes        Yes
Income Quintile FE                                          Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes     Yes        Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                         Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes     Yes        Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                     Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes     Yes        Yes
Controls                                                                      Yes                               Yes                                   Yes                Yes
 2
R                                                          0.022            0.027             0.022            0.027            0.022            0.027       0.023      0.027
N                                                          87,068           70,745            87,068           70,745           87,068           70,745      87,068     70,745




                                                                                               x
Table A6. Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment - Payment Type Robustness
This table reports specifications similar to specifications (5) and (6) of Table 3, except payment amounts are derived from different components of the mineral payment received.
Specifications (1) and (2) derive the High Payment Dummy from the bonus payment only. Specifications (3) and (4) derive the High Payment Dummy from the total royalty amounts
received only. Specifications (5) and (6) derive the High Payment Dummy from both bonus and royalty amounts, but adjusts the royalty to assume everyone in the sample signed a
lease with a 20% royalty. Specifications (7) and (8) applies the yearly average bonus per acre and royalty percentage to the year of the first payment received to normalize the terms an
individual receives in a given sample year to compute the High Payment Dummy.


                                                                                            Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                           (1)              (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)                   (7)              (8)
(1) Bonus Only High Payment Dummyi                      0.594***        0.599***
                                                         [0.180]         [0.165]
(2) Royalty Payment Only High Payment Dummyi                                             1.076***         1.140***
                                                                                          [0.119]          [0.117]
(3) High Payment Dummy 20% Royaltyi                                                                                        1.112***        1.109***
                                                                                                                            [0.197]         [0.167]
(4) High Payment Dummy Yearly Avg Termsi                                                                                                                    1.130***         1.163***
                                                                                                                                                             [0.229]          [0.209]
Age FE                                                    Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
ZIP FE                                                    Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Income Quintile FE                                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                       Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                   Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Controls                                                                   Yes                               Yes                              Yes                               Yes
 2
R                                                        0.006            0.007            0.006            0.007           0.006            0.007            0.006            0.007
N                                                       728,121          573,357          728,121          573,357         728,121          573,357          728,121          573,357




                                                                                            xi
Table A7. Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment - Credit Inquiry Sample Only
This table reports specifications similar to Table 3, except limits the sample to 2015 observations in which a credit inquiry has occurred.




                                                                                              Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                            (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)             (7)        (8)
(1) Total Paymenti                                       2.972***         2.733***
                                                          [0.477]          [0.326]
(2) Log(Total Payment)i                                                                    0.056***         0.067***
                                                                                            [0.008]          [0.007]
(3) High Payment Dummyi                                                                                                      1.006***         0.975***
                                                                                                                              [0.237]          [0.186]
(4) Payment Dummy $5k-20ki                                                                                                                               0.466***   0.426***
                                                                                                                                                          [0.048]    [0.056]
(5) Payment Dummy $20k-50ki                                                                                                                              1.239***   1.213***
                                                                                                                                                          [0.419]    [0.361]
(6) Payment Dummy $50k-100ki                                                                                                                             1.254**    1.210**
                                                                                                                                                         [0.536]    [0.491]
(7) Payment Dummy $100k-250ki                                                                                                                            1.143***   1.176***
                                                                                                                                                          [0.189]    [0.234]
(8) Payment Dummy >$250ki                                                                                                                                2.299***   2.047***
                                                                                                                                                          [0.467]    [0.408]
Age FE                                                      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes
ZIP FE                                                      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes
Income Quintile FE                                          Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                         Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes        Yes
Controls                                                                     Yes                               Yes                              Yes                   Yes
 2
R                                                          0.008            0.010            0.008            0.010            0.008           0.010      0.008      0.010
N                                                         445,035          380,692          445,035          380,692          445,035         380,692    445,035    380,692




                                                                                               xii
Table A8. Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment - Payment Cutoff Robustness
This table reports specifications similar to Table 3 specification (6), and applies different cutoffs to compute the definition of the High Payment Dummy.



                                                                                     Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                           (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)           (5)                  (6)            (7)
(1) Payment Dummy >$10ki                                0.850***
                                                         [0.059]
(2) Payment Dummy >$20ki                                                 0.951***
                                                                          [0.136]
(3) Payment Dummy >$30ki                                                                   0.874***
                                                                                            [0.129]
(4) Payment Dummy >$40ki                                                                                   1.036***
                                                                                                            [0.132]
(5) Payment Dummy >$50ki                                                                                                    0.928***
                                                                                                                             [0.106]
(6) Payment Dummy >$100ki                                                                                                                    0.946***
                                                                                                                                              [0.194]
(7) Payment Dummy >$250ki                                                                                                                                    1.355***
                                                                                                                                                              [0.379]
Age FE                                                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
ZIP FE                                                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Income Quintile FE                                         Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                        Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                    Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
Controls                                                   Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
 2
R                                                         0.007            0.007            0.007           0.007            0.007            0.007           0.007
N                                                        573,357          573,357          573,357         573,357          573,357          573,357         573,357




                                                                                    xiii
Table A9. Wealth Shocks and Self-Employment - Weighted to National Representative Sample
This table reports similar specifications to Table 3, except that it applies weights to the regression specification such that age, income, and credit score are weighted to match a national
representative sample of individuals provided by Experian.



                                                                                                Dependent variable: 100 × Self Employment Dummy
                                                            (1)              (2)                (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)                   (7)              (8)
(1) Total Paymenti                                       1.671***         2.422***
                                                          [0.342]          [0.529]
(2) Log(Total Payment)i                                                                    0.025***         0.060***
                                                                                            [0.005]          [0.006]
(3) High Payment Dummyi                                                                                                      0.643***         0.942***
                                                                                                                              [0.213]          [0.106]
(4) Payment Dummy $5k-20ki                                                                                                                                      0.282***         0.417***
                                                                                                                                                                 [0.070]          [0.082]
(5) Payment Dummy $20k-50ki                                                                                                                                     1.097**          0.720***
                                                                                                                                                                [0.499]           [0.104]
(6) Payment Dummy $50k-100ki                                                                                                                                    0.950**          0.946***
                                                                                                                                                                [0.446]           [0.165]
(7) Payment Dummy $100k-250ki                                                                                                                                   0.758***         1.301***
                                                                                                                                                                 [0.145]          [0.222]
(8) Payment Dummy >$250ki                                                                                                                                       1.126***         1.588***
                                                                                                                                                                 [0.416]          [0.524]
Age FE                                                      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
ZIP FE                                                      Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Income Quintile FE                                          Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Acreage Quintile FE                                         Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Credit Score Centile FE                                     Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Controls                                                                     Yes                               Yes                               Yes                               Yes
 2
R                                                          0.010            0.009            0.010            0.009         0.010               0.009            0.010             0.009
N                                                                                                               Weighted Sample




                                                                                          xiv
