                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INCOME-DRIVEN LABOR MARKET POLARIZATION

                                          Diego A. Comin
                                            Ana Danieli
                                           Martí Mestieri

                                        Working Paper 27455
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27455


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




We thank Richard Rogerson and Christian Siegel for insightful discussions of the paper. We also
thank Gadi Barlevy, David Dorn, Matthias Doepke, Thibault Fally, Koichiro Ito, Ryan Kellogg,
Kiminori Matsuyama, Rachel Ngai, Yongs Shin, Michael Sposi, Chris Tonetti, Joseph Zeira, and
attendees at various seminars and conferences for helpful comments and discussions. Comin
expresses his gratitude for the financial support from the European Commission under the
FRAME project and from the NSF. Mestieri is grateful to CREI and the Chicago Fed for their
hospitality as he conducted part of this research at their locations. All errors are our own. Contact:
marti.mestieri@northwestern.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Diego A. Comin, Ana Danieli, and Martí Mestieri. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Income-driven Labor Market Polarization
Diego A. Comin, Ana Danieli, and Martí Mestieri
NBER Working Paper No. 27455
June 2020
JEL No. E21,E23,J23,J31

                                        ABSTRACT

We propose a mechanism for labor-market polarization based on the nonhomotheticity of demand
that we call the income-driven channel. Our mechanism builds on a novel empirical fact:
expenditure elasticities and production intensities in low- and high-skill occupations are
positively correlated across sectors. Thus, as income grows, demand shifts towards expenditure-
elastic sectors, and the relative demand for low- and high-skill occupations increases, causing
labor-market polarization. A calibrated general-equilibrium model suggests this mechanism
accounts for 90% and 35% of the increase in the wage-bill share of low- and high-skill
occupations observed in the US during 1980-2016, and for 64%and 28% of the rise in the
employment shares of low- and high-skill occupations. This mechanism is similarly important for
the polarization of labor markets in Western Europe during 1980-2016, as well as in the US
during earlier decades and, possibly, the near future.

Diego A. Comin                                 Martí Mestieri
Dartmouth College                              Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Economics Department                           230 South LaSalle Street
6106 Rockefeller Hall, Room 327                Chicago, Illi 60604
Hanover, NH 03755                              marti.mestieri@gmail.com
and NBER
diego.comin@dartmouth.edu

Ana Danieli
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Dr.
Evanston, IL 60208
anadanieli2020@u.northwestern.edu
1       Introduction
There has been a polarization of labor market outcomes in the US and Western Europe
since the 1980s. For example, the US wage bill of high- and low-skill workers relative to
that of middle-skill workers has more than doubled since 1980.1 This polarization of wage
bills reflects the polarization of both hours worked and wages across occupations. The social
significance of these trends has given rise to a vast literature on the drivers of polarization
that has focused on technical change, automation, trade and offshoring, and de-unionization,
among others.
    In this paper, we propose and quantify a new channel to explain labor-market polarization.
Through our mechanism, labor market outcomes become increasingly polarized as aggregate
household income rises. Consequently, we name this mechanism the income-driven channel
for polarization. The income-driven channel builds on a novel empirical fact: expenditure-
elastic sectors intensively use high- and low-skill occupations in production, whereas there
is no such correlation for middle-skill occupations. As income grows, demand shifts toward
sectors with higher expenditure elasticity. Since these sectors are intensive in high- and
low-skill occupations, the reallocation of sectoral demand causes an increase in the relative
demand for high- and low-skill occupations. This leads to a hollowing out of middle-skill
occupations and the polarization of workers' earnings.2
    Using household-level data, we document significant variation in expenditure elasticities
across sectors.3 Figure 1 shows that sectors with high-expenditure elasticities grew at a higher
rate than the US average between 1980 and 2016. The correlation between sectoral expendi-
ture elasticity and sectoral value-added growth is over 0.8. Central to our theory, Figures 2a
and 2b show that there is a strong positive correlation between the expenditure elasticity of
a sector and its intensity in low- and high-skill occupations, measured as total payments to
an occupation over sectoral value added.4 In contrast, there is a mild negative relationship
with the intensity in middle-skill occupations (Figure 2c). The corresponding correlations
are 0.93 and 0.82 for high- and low-skill occupations and -0.04 for middle-skill occupations.
Moreover, Figure 2d shows that the distribution of factor intensities across sectors is stable
    1
     See the discussion of the related literature at the end of this section for the evidence on labor-market
polarization.
   2
     As we further discuss in the related literature subsection, our mechanism is related but distinct from the
spillover hypothesis in Manning (2004), Mazzolari and Ragusa (2013), and Leonardi (2015).
   3
     We use the estimation method developed in Aguiar and Bils (2015), with expenditures defined over
value-added consumption as in Buera et al. (2015).
   4
     We follow Acemoglu and Autor (2011) and classify occupations into three skill categories (high-, middle-
and low-skill) that are defined according to their average wage in 1980. See Appendix B for details. These
correlation patterns also hold if we measure factor intensity with employment shares or if we compute the
correlation weighted by the sector value-added share in total value added. We prefer this measure of factor
intensity because it has a direct link with the model presented in Section 2.

                                                      1
  Figure 1: Sectoral Nominal Value-Added Growth 1980-2016 and Expenditure Elasticity




  Notes: Sectoral value added measures are from the BEA. Expenditure elasticities are estimated from
  cross-sectional household data using the Aguiar and Bils (2015) methodology (see Section 3.1).


over the 1980-2016 period.5 This implies that the correlation between expenditure elasticities
and factor intensities across sectors is also remarkably stable over this period.6
    We develop and quantify a multi-sector general equilibrium model to assess the impor-
tance of the income-driven channel for the polarization of labor-market outcomes. We grad-
ually introduce the elements of the model to better understand their importance for our
mechanism. In Section 2, we present the sectoral production functions, which allow us to
define factor intensities. We then conduct a shift-share decomposition of the wage-bill shares
across occupations. This exercise reveals that changes in the sectoral composition of the
economy (captured by the share term) lead to sizable reallocation in occupational wage-bill
shares. They account for 73%, 28% and 31% of the changes in the wage-bill shares of low-,
middle- and high-skill occupations from 1980 through 2016. In addition, we find that the
share terms account for 78%, 40% and 30% of the changes in the employment shares of low-,
middle-, and high-skill occupations over this span.
    Changes in the sectoral composition of the economy can be driven by many factors,
including some that may be endogenous to polarization such as technological change or off-
   5
      Figure 2d also shows how factor intensities of high-skill occupations tend to be above the 45-degree
line, while for middle-skill occupations they tend to be below. This is consistent with biased technological
change and offshoring affecting these occupations. In contrast, low-skill occupations tend to be closer to the
45-degree line, suggesting that these mechanisms may have been less important for the low-skilled.
    6
      See Table A.1 in Appendix A.

                                                      2
            Figure 2: Factor Intensity and Expenditure Elasticities across Sectors
              (a) Low-skill Occupations                              (b) Middle-skill Occupations




             (c) High-skill Occupations                         (d) Factor Intensities in 1980 and 2016




 Notes: The factor intensity of occupation j in sector s is the wage bill of occupation j in sector s over
 total value added in sector s. Employment is computed using hours worked from the Census/ACS,
 wages are from the CPS and value added, from the BEA (see Appendix B). Expenditure elasticities are
 estimated from household data using the Aguiar and Bils (2015) methodology (see Section 3.1).



shoring. To isolate the income-driven channel, we introduce in Section 3.1 a nonhomothetic
demand system with constant elasticity of substitution across sectors. We estimate the de-
mand elasticities using household-level data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX)
supplemented with imputations of household consumption of public health, education and
finance charges not covered by the CEX. Importantly, by disciplining the demand side of
our model with micro-level estimates, we avoid using data on aggregate moments of interest
to calibrate critical preference paremeters. Before turning to our general-equilibrium anal-
ysis, we use the estimated demand in a partial-equilibrium setting to quantify the role of

                                                     3
income and price effects in generating changes in the sectoral composition of the economy
and labor-market polarization. Section 3.3 reports the results of feeding the observed changes
in expenditure and prices to our estimated demand. We find that increases in expenditure
account for the bulk of changes in the sectoral composition of the economy and the share
component of the shift-share decomposition of occupational wage bills.
    Section 4 presents our full-fledged quantification of the income-driven polarization chan-
nel. The model embeds the preferences and production functions introduced in the previous
sections into a general-equilibrium setting, so that prices and income are endogenous. The
model also incorporates an occupational choice by workers that allows us to study distribu-
tional outcomes in terms of both hours worked and relative wages. Traditional explanations
of polarization are reflected in time-varying, occupation-sector-specific factor intensities and
sector-specific total factor productivity (TFP). We calibrate these parameters to match the
change in value-added shares from 1980 to 2016. The income-driven polarization channel
results from exogenous increases in neutral TFP and average worker productivity across
occupations. These changes are calibrated to match the increase in aggregate nominal ex-
penditures per capita and the change in the personal consumption expenditure deflator. We
find that the income-driven channel explains 90% of the observed change in the wage-bill
share of low-skill occupations and 35% of the change in this share of high-skill occupations
from 1980 through 2016; however it only accounts for 2% of middle-skill occupations. This
contribution to the polarization of the wage-bill distribution reflects polarization in both
hours worked and relative wages. Our calibrated model predicts that the income-driven
channel accounts for 64%, 35% and 28% of the change in the share of hours worked by low-,
middle-, and high-skill occupations, as well as for 46% and 29% of the increase in the relative
wage of low- and high- to middle-skill occupations.
    Taken together, our results suggest that a significant part of the polarization of labor
markets observed during 1980-2016 in the US is due to the income-driven channel. We find
that the income-driven channel is the main driver for low-skill occupations. In contrast,
the evolution of sectoral technologies of production account for the vast majority of the
changes for middle-skill occupations. For high-skill occupations, we find that the income-
driven channel accounts for around one-third of the overall changes. Our findings are robust
to a number of extensions, such as, allowing for a non-unitary elasticity of substitution
between occupations in production; accounting for the wedges between sectoral production
and expenditures introduced by international trade; and shifting the rules used to assign
capital income across households.
   After having established the importance of the income-driven channel for the US since the
1980s, we explore in Section 5 the relevance of the mechanism in other geographies and time

                                               4
periods. Labor-market polarization has been documented in Western Europe (Goos et al.,
2009, 2014). We use our model to study the role of nonhomotheticities in the evolution
of labor-market polarization in Western European economies since 1980. We find that the
income-driven channel contributes to polarization in these countries by a similar magnitude
to what we found in our baseline results for the US. We conclude our paper by looking again
to the US and exploring the relevance of our mechanism for the 1950-1980 period (Bárány
and Siegel, 2018, suggest an earlier onset of polarization). We also use our model to project
the effect of the income-driven channel on the transformation of labor markets from 2016 to
2035. Our model suggests that the income-driven polarization of labor markets will continue
at least at the same pace as we have observed during the last 25 years.
    Related literature Our paper is related to two different strands of the literature, one
studying labor-market polarization and the other, structural change and inequality. First,
our work is related to a vast literature in labor economics that has documented and explored
the drivers of labor-market polarization as initially suggested by Acemoglu (1999). From the
work by Autor et al. (2003), Goos and Manning (2007), Goos et al. (2009, 2014), Autor et al.
(2006, 2008), Autor and Dorn (2009, 2013) and others, technical change has emerged as the
leading explanation for labor-market polarization, with offshoring playing a secondary role.7
Goos and Manning (2007) built on the task framework developed in Autor et al. (2003) and
proposed the "routinization" hypothesis, whereby computer capital substituted for workers
in routine-intensive occupations--which tend to be middle-skill occupations. Our paper is
most closely related to Autor and Dorn (2013), Goos et al. (2014) and, more recently, Cortes
et al. (2017). These papers have incorporated the routinization hypothesis into a modelling
framework. Like these papers, we model goods demanded by consumers as gross substitutes
(generating a Baumol's cost-disease mechanism) and sectors differ in terms of their factor
intensity and their exposure to technological progress. The key difference is that our model
introduces the income-driven channel (through nonhomotheticities in preferences).8
    This strand of the literature has deemed the role of income effects to be small in accounting
for labor-market polarization (Manning, 2004, Mazzolari and Ragusa, 2013, and Leonardi,
2015). These papers emphasize a spillover or trickle-down effect, in which the demand for
low-skill services increases as a result of rich households becoming richer.9 Their empirical
   7
      Basco and Mestieri (2013) document that trade costs have declined more in middle-skill intensive indus-
tries (which are also more intensive in information technologies and routine tasks). They show that this can
lead to wage polarization in rich countries. See the references therein for trade-based accounts of polarization.
See Cozzi and Impullitti (2016) for a dynamic account of polarization and trade in a growth model.
    8
      Like Goos et al. (2014), we structure our results and model quantification around shift-share decom-
positions and emphasize that both shift and share components play an important role in accounting for
polarization.
    9
      Leonardi (2015) uses household expenditure data to show that educated households consume more high-
skill and, to a lesser extent, very low-skill services. Leonardi then links an "education-specific elasticity of

                                                       5
strategy, as well as the analysis of income effects in Autor and Dorn (2013), typically identifies
income effects by comparing the increase in demand for low-skill services between commuting
zones in which top incomes have increased substantially and those in which top incomes have
increased more modestly. Theses studies find little support for this mechanism. While this
trickle-down theory is consistent with our mechanism, it misses the level effect that rising
average household income has on the sectoral composition of demand. That is, a difference-
in-differences estimation cannot identify a common effect across commuting zones driven by
an increase in the average household income. In contrast, we use cross-sectional household
variation to estimate expenditure elasticities for different sectors.10 We then use our estimated
demand system to feed in the observed increases in household expenditures and prices. We
find that the income-driven channel is significant--especially for low-skill occupations.
    Our paper is also related to a small (but growing) complementary literature in macroe-
conomics that has linked structural change and inequality. To our knowledge, Lee and Shin
(2017) and Bárány and Siegel (2018, 2019) are the few papers that have studied the role of
the sectoral composition of the economy for labor market polarization.11 In contrast to our
paper, these papers assume that structural change is solely driven by technological progress;
there is no income-driven mechanism like ours in this previous research. For this reason,
our paper finds that structural change has played a more substantial role in accounting for
labor-market polarization than these papers. Importantly, the model in our paper includes
a conceptually different mechanism, which yields different testable predictions and is absent
in this previous research. For example, to the extent that household income keeps rising, our
framework identifies a novel economic force that is likely to drive polarization in the future.
    Other papers in the literature on structural change and inequality have focused on the
skill premium, starting with Schimmelpfennig (1998) and, more recently, Buera and Kaboski
(2012), Cravino and Sotelo (2017), Buera et al. (2018), Caron et al. (2020) and Ngai and
Sevinc (2020).12 The paper that is closest to ours is Buera et al. (2018). They calibrate
a two-skill, two-sector model and infer the contribution of structural change to the rise in
the skill premium from the calibrated growth in sectoral TFPs. Instead, using a three-skill,

demand" to the rise of the skill premium in a static general equilibrium model. He finds a small effect for
demand shifters in his calibrated model.
  10
     In the appendix of Goos et al. (2014), the authors augment a CES demand estimation with income and
population. In general, they find the effects of income and population to be statistically insignificant. In
contrast to their exercise, our demand specification is derived from a demand system, uses household variation
rather than aggregate time series, and is identified through an instrumental-variable strategy.
  11
     Cerina et al. (2017) link polarization in the US to increases in female labor force participation.
  12
     Using a shift-share design in German data, Schimmelpfenning shows that structural change accounts for
40% of the rise in the skill premium once the input-output structure of the economy is taken into account.
Cravino and Sotelo (2017) and Caron et al. (2020) study the effect of global growth and international trade
on structural change and the evolution of the skill premium.

                                                      6
eight-sector model, we quantify the contribution of the income-driven channel to polarization
in wage bills, employment, and relative wages, isolating this mechanism from the effect of
relative TFP growth across sectors. Finally, our modelling of nonhomotheticities focuses
on the overall expenditure elasticity. An alternative formulation of nonhomotheticity relates
income to the quality of goods consumed within a sector, as recently emphasized in Jaimovich
et al. (2019). This alternative manifestation of nonhomotheticities may further enhance the
effect of the income-driven channel on the polarization of labor markets.


2        Production and Wage-Bill Decompositions
This section presents the production side of our multi-sector model. We show that the produc-
tion side of the model suffices to quantify the contribution of sectoral reallocation to wage-bill
polarization. We use this insight to present a theory-grounded shift-share decomposition.


2.1      Production
We consider an economy with S = {1, . . . , S } sectors. Each sector s  S produces output Yst
at time t according to the value-added constant-returns-to-scale Cobb-Douglas production
function                                                                 st
                                                              jst              1-st
                                 Yst = Ast                   Xjst             Kst   ,                                     (1)
                                                j {L,M,H }

where st , st  (0, 1), j {L,M,H } jst = 1, Kst is the capital stock, and Xjst is the num-
ber of hours from occupation j used in sector s. We consider three occupations: Low-,
M iddle- and H igh-skill. Ast is a Solow residual that captures both Hicks-neutral technolog-
ical improvements and capital-skill complementaries not explicitly modeled. We also allow
the parameters {jst , st }sS ,j {L,M,H } to vary over time to parsimoniously capture the pat-
terns of substitution across factors of production implied by biased technological change,
routinization, offshoring, changes in production wedges, etc.13 , 14
  13
     To illustrate this point, consider a general constant-returns-to-scale production function Yst =
Fs ({Xjst }, Kst ). Given a price of sectoral output pst and wages wjt , the firm's first order conditions im-
plied by profit maximization are wjst Xjst =        ^ jst pst Yst where ^ jst = Fs /Xjst · Xjst /Yst . Therefore, the
factor intensity   ^ jst is a well-defined object that can be measured by the wage bill of occupation j in sector s
at time t. For example, consider the production function from Section 4.4, where we have a CES aggregator
                                                                 st 
                                                   1    -1        -1
                                                                        1-st
across occupations, Yst = Ast          j {L,M,H } jst Xjst
                                                         
                                                                       Kst   . The wage bill paid to occupation j is
                                       1-                                                     1-
                             wjt                                                    wjt
wjt Xjst = st    jst              1-
                             jst wjt
                                            pst Yst , where jst  jst                     1-
                                                                                    jst wjt
                                                                                                   and ^ jst = jst st .
                         j                                                      j

    14
    Capital-skill complementarity has been emphasized, among others, by Caselli (1999) and Krusell et al.
(2000). Lee and Shin (2017) and Bárány and Siegel (2019) have emphasized the importance of sector-

                                                             7
    Under perfect competition, given a price of sectoral output pst and wages wjt , the demand
for occupation j in sector s at time t is

                                     W Bjst  wjt Xjst = ^ jst V Ast ,                         (2)

where  ^ jst  jst st , W Bjst denotes the wage bill accrued by occupation j in sector s at time
t, and V Ast denotes the nominal value added in sector s (i.e., V Ast = pst Yst ). It follows from
Equation (2) that  ^ jst captures the intensity of occupation j in sector s at time t,

                                                 W Bjst
                                                        =^ jst .                              (3)
                                                 V Ast

This is the measure of factor intensity that we have presented in Figure 2 of the Introduction.
The wage-bill share of occupation j in sector s can also be expressed in terms of the factor
intensity ^ jst as
                                         W Bjst    ^ jst
                                                =        ,                                  (4)
                                         W Bst     st
where st is the labor share in sector s value added. Expression (4) shows that the wage-bill
share of occupation j in sector s only depends on factor intensities. We use this property
extensively in what follows. Next, denoting total employment in occupation j by Xjt 
   Xjst , the aggregate wage bill of occupation j can be obtained summing (2) across sectors,
sS


                                    W Bjt  wjt Xjt =               ^ jst V Ast .              (5)
                                                              sS


As we show next, these optimality conditions on the production side of the economy suffice
to assess the importance of sectoral reallocation on wage-bill polarization.


2.2     Decomposition of the Evolution of Wage Bills
Using Equation (5), we can express the total wage bill of occupation j relative to the total
wage bill in the economy as

                            W Bjt                     V Ast V At           ^ jst V Ast
                                  =           ^ jst              =                     ,      (6)
                            W Bt       sS
                                                      V At W Bt      sS
                                                                            t V At

where in the last equality we have denoted the labor share of the economy by t  W Bt /V At .
Equation (6) shows that the aggregate wage-bill share of occupation j depends both on the

occupation specific technological progress.

                                                          8
sectoral composition of the economy, V Ast /V At , and factor intensities, ^ st /t . In particular,
if sectors that are more intensive in occupation j grow faster than the average, the aggregate
wage-bill share of this occupation will increase. Indeed, this is what Figures 1 and 2 in the
Introduction suggest for low- and high-skill occupations.
    This finding contrasts with the sectoral wage-bill share of occupation j derived in Equation
(4), which only depends on factor intensities. This comparison is relevant because in a
one-sector economy, S = 1, the aggregate wage-bill share of occupation j is also given by
Equation (4). Hence, in a one-sector setting, changes in the distribution of the wage bill across
occupations can only come from changes in factor intensities {     ^ jst }. However, as originally
pointed out by Schimmelpfennig (1998) and discussed above, recognizing that the economy
is populated by multiple sectors that may grow at different rates opens the possibility for
changes in the sectoral composition of the economy to affect the distribution of wage bills
across occupations.
   To explore this possibility, we express the change in the wage-bill share of occupation j
from time 0 to t as

                          W Bjt W Bj 0                   ^ jst V Ast           ^ js0 V As0
                               -       =                             -                     .                 (7)
                          W Bt   W B0             sS
                                                          t V At         sS
                                                                                0 V A0

Using a standard shift-share approach,15 we can decompose the change in the wage-bill share
of occupation j as

            W Bjt W Bj 0                   ^ jst  ^ js0       V As0   ^ jst          V Ast V As0
                 -       =                      -                   +                     -         .        (8)
            W Bt   W B0           sS
                                            t      0          V A0 sS t              V At   V A0
                                                Shif t                                Share


The first summation in (8) is the shift term. It captures the effect of changes in factor
intensities of occupation j on the wage-bill share, holding the sectoral distribution of value
added constant. The second summation corresponds to the share term. It captures the effect
of the change in the sectoral composition of value added on the change in the wage-bill share
for occupation j , holding factor intensities constant.16
  15
      We thank Richard Rogerson for suggesting using a shift-share decomposition. Alternative decomposi-
tions, e.g., based on wage-bill growth yield very similar conclusions.
   16
      This is our preferred decomposition of the wage bill, since it is grounded in theory. We find that using
the reduced-form decomposition of the wage bill

                  W Bjt   W Bj 0                           W Bs0                 W Bst   W Bs0
                        -        =         (jst - js0 )          +       jst           -                     (9)
                  W Bt    W B0         s
                                                           W B0      s
                                                                                 W Bt    W B0

yields quantitatively similar results. The key difference with the decomposition in (8) is that, in this reduced-
form decomposition, changes in aggregate and sectoral labor shares affect the share term.

                                                          9
2.3      Assessing the Contribution of Sectoral Composition
To quantify the contribution of each term of the shift-share decomposition in Equation (8), we
group the US economy into eight broad sectors.17 We take the nominal sectoral value added
from the BEA. The occupation intensities for each sector,    ^ jst , are computed from Equation
(2) combining information on the share in the sectoral wage bill of each occupation, jst ,
with sectoral labor shares, st .18 Motivated by the US studies of polarization (e.g., Autor
et al., 2003), we start our analysis in 1980 and take the latest date with data availability,
2016, as our final year.
    We observe a stark polarization in wage bills over the 1980-2016 period. The shares of
high- and low-skill occupations in the total wage bill increased by 19 and 2 percentage points.
In contrast, the share of middle-skill occupations declined by 21 percentage points. Table 1
reports the shift-share decomposition derived in Equation (8) of these changes in wage-bill
shares. The share term, which captures the role of changes in the sectoral composition of
value added, accounts for a significant fraction of the observed changes in occupational wage-
bill shares: 31% of the increase in the wage-bill share of high-skill occupations, 28% of the
decrease in the wage-bill share of middle-skill occupations, and 73% of the increase in the
wage-bill share of low-skill occupations.19 Changes in the factor intensities of occupations
and labor account, through the shift term, for the complementary fractions. In sum, this
shift-share decomposition shows that changes in the sectoral composition of the economy play
a significant role for the change in the wage-bill shares of high- and middle-skill occupations
and a dominant role for the change in the wage-bill share of low-skill occupations.
  17
     The eight sectors are i) agriculture, ii) manufacturing, mining and utilities, iii) construction and real
estate iv) retail and wholesale trade, and transportation, v) finance, insurance, information, professional
and other services, vi) health and education, vii) food, arts and entertainment, and viii) government. This
grouping is constructed from the 15 sectors in the BEA's input-output tables after considering both the
traditional aggregation of sectors and the estimates of the income elasticity of demand for these 15 sectors.
See Appendix B for more details.
  18
     Sectoral wage-bill shares of each occupation are computed using wage data for each occupation from the
CPS and hours worked for each occupation in each sector from the ACS, as in Acemoglu and Autor (2011).
We compute sectoral labor shares as
                                           CP S/ACS
                                       W Bst            V ABEA
                                                           t        W BtBEA
                               st =                                            ,                            (10)
                                       W Bt
                                           CP S/ACS     V ABEA
                                                           st       V ABEA
                                                                       t

           CP S/ACS
        W Bst
where      CP S/ACS   is the share of sector s wage bill in the total wage bill when these are computed using
        W Bt
                                                                         V ABEA
the hours worked from the ACS and the wages per hour from the CPS,          t
                                                                         V ABEA
                                                                                   is the inverse of the share in
                                                                            st
                                             BEA
                                          W Bt
value added of sector s from the BEA;     V ABEA
                                                  is the aggregate labor share from the BEA. This procedure
                                             t
allows us to ensure that we match the aggregate BEA labor share.
   19
      The results from the reduced-form decomposition of the wage-bill shares described in Equation (9) are
quite similar. The share term accounts for 29% and 88% of the increase in the wage-bill share for high- and
low-skill occupations, as well as for 35% of the decline in the wage-bill share of middle-skill occupations.

                                                      10
     Table 1: Shift-Share Decomposition of US Wage Bill and Employment, 1980-2016

                                       Wage Bill Share            Employment Sh.
                                   Low     Middle        High    Low     Middle    High
                Total Change      0.021       -0.21      0.19   0.034      -0.16   0.13
                Shift              27%         72%       69%    22%         60%    70%
                Share              73%         28%       31%    78%         40%    30%


    The importance of the share term is due to the substantial changes in the composition
of the US economy over the 1980-2016 period (documented in Figure 1), as well as the cor-
relations between the change in sectoral value-added shares and occupation intensities. The
correlations between the change in sectoral value-added shares and the occupation intensity
of high-, middle- and low-skill occupations are 0.40, -0.52 and 0.15. These correlation pat-
terns imply that, as the sectoral composition of the economy changes, the relative demand
for high- and low-skill occupations increases, while the relative demand for middle-skill oc-
cupations declines. These changes in the relative demand for each occupation are reflected
in the changes in their wage-bill shares.
    Decomposing employment shares Even though the production side of our model is
not sufficient on its own to derive predictions for the distribution of hours worked, we can still
use a reduced-form shift-share decomposition of hours worked across occupations to explore
the relevance of the sectoral changes in the economy. Let the number of hours worked in
sector s be Xst  j {L,M,H } Xjst , and Xt  sS Xst , the total number of hours worked in
the economy. We can decompose the change in the share of hours worked by occupation j as

                     Xjt Xj 0                         Xs0               Xst Xs0
                        -     =        (jst - js0 )       + jst            -    ,            (11)
                     Xt   X0      sS
                                                      X0 sS             Xt   X0
                                           Shif t                       Share


              Xjst
where jst     Xst
                     is the share of sector s total hours corresponding to occupation j .
    The first row of results in the second panel in Table 1 shows that the distribution of
hours worked across occupations has experienced a polarization of similar magnitude to that
of the wage bill. The shares of hours corresponding to high- and low-skill occupations have
increased by 13 and 3 percentage points, while the share of hours of middle-skill occupations
has declined by 16 percentage points. The shift-share decomposition suggests that changes
in the sectoral composition of employment play a significant role in high- and middle-skill
occupations, as well as a dominant role in low-skill occupations. Specifically, the share term
accounts for 30% of the increase in the share of hours worked in high-skill occupations, 40% of

                                                    11
         Table 2: Shift-Share Decomposition for Alternative Aggregations, US 1980-2016

                                                Wage Bill Share             Employment Sh.
                                              Low       Middle     High    Low    Middle   High
         Total Change                        0.021         -0.21   0.19   0.034    -0.16    0.13
         Share/Total Change (%) with:
           8 Sectors, 3 Occupations           73%          28%     31%    78%    40%        30%
           2 Sectors, 3 Occupations           49%           3%     19%    46%    23%        17%
           2 Sectors, 2 Occupations                  -3%           19%       17%            17%


the decline in middle-skill occupations, and 78% of the increase in low-skill occupations. We
conclude from this exercise that changes in the sectoral composition of the economy contribute
similarly to the observed changes in hours worked and wage bills across occupations.
    Sectoral and Occupational Disaggregation We finish this section by exploring the
importance of using disaggregated sectors and occupations in our setting. Table 2 presents
the contribution of the share term across alternative, coarser aggregations of sectors and
skills. The first and second rows report the observed changes in wage bill and employment
shares, and the contribution of the share term in our baseline classification of eight sectors
and three occupations. The third row contains the contribution of the share term when we
aggregate our eight sectors into service- and goods-producing sectors.20 The fourth row main-
tains the two-sector classification and combines the middle- and low-skill occupations into a
single group of unskilled occupations. The main finding is that aggregating up sectors and
occupations greatly diminishes the contribution of the share term--it even reverses the sign
of the contribution to the wage bill in the case with only two skill levels of occupations. We
conclude from this exercise that it is quantitatively important to implement a disaggregated
classification of sectors and occupations to properly capture the actual contribution of the
sectoral composition of the economy to labor-market polarization.



3        Preferences and Partial-Equilibrium Quantification
This section introduces the demand side of our model. Our setting allows for supply side
forces (e.g., biased technical change, robotization, offshoring) that affect the sectoral com-
position of demand through changes in sectoral relative prices, and it also allows for income
effects that affect the composition through nonhomotheticities in demand. After presenting
    20
    In the service-producing group, we include health and education, retail and wholesale trade, finance,
insurance, real estate, information and professional services, food and entertainment, and government. In
the goods-producing group we include agriculture, mining and utilities, manufacturing, and construction.

                                                   12
the estimation of preference parameters, we use the restrictions imposed by the partial equi-
librium of the model to disentangle the contributions of income and price effects to changes
in the sectoral distribution of value added and wage-bill shares.
   In our exposition, we make two simplifying assumptions. First, we assume that all in-
come accrued by the workers is spent in consumption, abstracting from savings. Second,
we study an economy with a representative household. That is, all the resources earned by
the household are pulled together and, given the prevailing prices, the household decides its
consumption bundle. We relax this assumption in Section 4, where we develop the general
equilibrium version of the model and introduce heterogeneity in consumption across house-
holds.


3.1       Nonhomothetic Constant Elasticity of Substitution Preferences
The utility of the representative household at time t, Ut , is a nonhomothetic Constant Elas-
ticity of Substitution (CES) aggregator defined over consumption goods {cst }sS through the
constraint
                                                 1  -1
                                        (Uts s )  cst = 1.                               (12)
                                        sS

The parameter  is the (constant) elasticity of substitution across goods, the nonhomothetic-
ity parameter s controls the expenditure elasticity of sector s, and s captures the constant
taste component over s. We focus on the empirically relevant case of gross complements,
0 <  < 1, and s , s > 0 for all s  S .21 Intuitively, this formulation of preferences allows
for the level of utility Uts to enter asymmetrically in (12) as an additional taste component.
In contrast to s , this term is variable and endogenously determined. As a result, the overall
weight attached to the consumption of good s, Uts s , depends on the level of utility itself,
Ut , with an elasticity controlled by s . If s 's were constant across all s, we would obtain
homothetic CES preferences.
   Given a set of prices {pst }sS and total expenditure Et , a household maximizing utility
(12) subject to the budget constraint sS pst cst  Et chooses {cst }sS so that
                                                          
                                                    Et
                                         cst = s             Uts .                                  (13)
                                                    pst

The corresponding expenditure function is given by Et1- =                 s Uts p1 -
                                                                                 st .
                                                                     sS
       We can normalize one taste parameter s  1 (as with homothetic CES) and one income
  21
  A sufficient condition for these preferences to be well-defined is that s > 0 if 0 <  < 1, and s < 0 if
 > 1 for all s  S . See Hanoch (1975) and Comin et al. (2015) for further discussion.

                                                   13
elasticity parameter s  1 for some s  S (see Comin et al., 2015). These normalizations
cardinalize (12) and uniquely define a cost-of-living index Pt and a real consumption index
Ct of the representative household, Ut = E
                                         Pt
                                           t
                                              Ct . The cost-of-living index can be expressed
in terms of observables and demand parameters as
                                                                                   1
                                                                                  1-
                                                  -      s               1-s
                                Pt =         s p1
                                                st            xst Et1-                 ,          (14)
                                        sS


where xst = pst cst /Et denotes the expenditure share in sector s, and s  (1 -  )/s . With
this notation, the expenditure share in sector s is
                                                             1-
                                                   pst               -(1- )
                                       xst = s                    Ct s        .                   (15)
                                                   Pt

      Finally, the expenditure elasticity of sector s is

                                        ln pst cst                         s
                               st                  =  + (1 -  )                    .              (16)
                                        ln Et                             sS xst s


Thus, whether a good has an expenditure elasticity higher (or lower) than 1 depends on
whether s > (<) sS xst s , which depends on the total level of expenditure of the house-
hold, Et . This implies that the same good can be a luxury or a necessity depending on the
level of expenditure of a household.
    Equilibrium and Channels of Sectoral Reallocation We close the model by im-
posing the market clearing condition that, in each sector, the value of consumption equals
production. Using the demand for good s, Equation (13), market clearing implies that nom-
inal value added in sector s is

                                                           -  +s -s
                                    V Ast = pst cst = s p1
                                                         st Et  Pt ,                              (17)

where the total expenditure of the representative household, Et , is equal to total labor income
plus capital income (net of depreciation),

                                    Et =                      wjt Xjst + rt Kt .                  (18)
                                           sS j {L,M,H }


Equation (17) illustrates that, in our model, the evolution of sectoral value added is driven
by two forces: changes in aggregate expenditures, Et , and changes in sectoral prices, {pst }.22

 22
      Note from Equation (14) that Pt is itself a function of aggregate expenditure and prices.

                                                         14
    Supply-side drivers of polarization and inequality such as biased technical change, au-
tomation, de-unionization or offshoring affect the sectoral composition of value added through
their impact in relative sectoral prices.23 Indeed, in a model with homothetic preferences,
changes in relative prices are the only source of sectoral reallocation. To see this, we use
Equation (17) and consider the ratio of demand for two sectors, s and s , when preferences
are homothetic (i.e., s = 1 for all s  S ),

                                                                1-
                                        V Ast    s       pst
                                               =                     .
                                        V As t   s       ps t

In this case, changes in the relative sectoral composition depend on the evolution of relative
prices and are independent of the overall level of expenditure, Et .
    Nonhomotheticities introduce a distinct, income-driven mechanism that affects the evo-
lution of the sectoral composition of value added. As expenditure increases, consumers shift
the composition of expenditure from low expenditure elastic (low s ) to high expenditure
elastic sectors (high s ). Even if relative prices were equal across sectors, our demand system
would imply changes in the sectoral composition of the economy driven by aggregate expen-
diture. To see this, using again Equation (17), we have that the relative sectoral demand
when pst = ps t becomes
                                                         -
                                     V Ast     s Et s s
                                            =                 .
                                     V As t    s Pt
    Both in partial equilibrium (Section 3.3) and in general equilibrium (Section 4), the impact
of the income-driven channel on polarization operates through the effects of expenditure
on the sectoral composition of the economy. Before conducting any quantification of this
channel, we need to estimate the preference elasticity parameters that drive the income and
price effects, {s }sS and  .


3.2     Household-level Data and Estimation of Demand Elasticities
We use household-level data to provide evidence on hetereogeneity in expenditure elasticities
across broad sectors of the economy and estimate the elasticities governing our demand sys-
tem. This latter exercise will serve as a basis for the quantification of the model. Since our
estimation borrows extensively from previous literature (Aguiar and Bils, 2015 and Comin
et al., 2015 in particular), we provide a relatively concise description of our data and estima-
  23
    This account captures the effect of offshoring and international trade on labor demand through sectoral
prices and factor intensities. Additionally, offshoring and trade can affect sectoral demand by breaking the
market-clearing condition that domestic production equals domestic consumption. We study this channel in
Section 5.

                                                    15
tion exercises in the main text and relegate the details to Appendix B.2.
    Data Description Our main data source is the Consumption Expenditure survey (CEX)
for years 2000 and 2001. The CEX is a rotating panel that contains detailed information on
household quarterly expenditures and characteristics. We follow Aguiar and Bils (2015) in
their sample selection, which is standard and, in turn, very similar to the previous literature
(e.g., Krueger and Perri, 2006, among others). For example, we restrict our attention to urban
households with a present household head. We only depart from the standard sample selection
in that we do not restrict the age of the reference household, thus including all households
older than 64. We do this to account for potentially important healthcare expenditures in
the late stages of life.
    Since our model is specified over value-added consumption, we need to transform the re-
ported household expenditures into value-added consumption, as in Herrendorf et al. (2013)
and Buera et al. (2015, 2018). We follow the procedure described in Buera et al. (2015)
and map each of the over nine-hundred CEX expenditure categories to the 76 lines appear-
ing in the NIPA Personal Consumption Expenditures table. From here, we can map these
categories to the industries appearing in the 2000 BEA Input-output table and infer the
value-added consumption of each industry embodied in the CEX expenditures. In short, this
exercise breaks up expenditures into its value-added components. For example, expenditure
in restaurants is split in its value-added components coming from agriculture (food), man-
ufacturing (processing of the food), food services (cooks and waiters), utilities (electricity
usage), etc.
   One limitation of the CEX data is that it only measures out-of-pocket expenditures.
Thus, it likely provides an underestimate of expenditure categories that are partially publicly
provided, such as education and health services. Since we will use cross-sectional household
variation to estimate our demand elasticities, we could obtain biased estimates if out-of-
pocket expenditures for a given expenditure category were correlated with household total
expenditure. To partially address these concerns, we impute public expenditures in K-12,
Medicare and Medicaid to our household data. We use information on average expenditure
per pupil by school district and expenditure per patient by hospital referral region and
match it to households based on the number of school-age children and number of recepients
of Medicare and Medicaid. We also impute fund management expenses based on reported
households' pension funds and total value of stocks, bonds and other securities.24 We take
  24
    For public primary and secondary education, we take expenditure per pupil at the school district level
from the Common Core Database and regress it on household county median income, state fixed effects and a
time trend. This exercise gives a predicted expenditure per pupil as a function of household income, location
and time. We then use information on the number of kids in K-12 age of a household and impute consumption
accordingly for those households that report zero expenditures in elementary and high-school tuition. For
Medicare and Medicaid data, we use average expenditure per patient by hospital referral region from the

                                                     16
this augmented version of our data as our baseline, since it features the most comprehensive
account of household expenditures.25
   Reduced-form Evidence on Expenditure Elasticities We begin our analysis by
providing reduced-form evidence on heterogeneity in expenditure elasticities across sectors.
We follow the estimating strategy presented in Aguiar and Bils (2015). Denoting a household
by n, Aguiar and Bils propose to estimate expenditure elasticity of sector s, s , as

                                    xnst
                               ln          = str + s ln Etn + s Z n + un
                                                                       st ,                                (19)
                                    x
                                    ¯st

where xnst is the expenditure in sector s goods from household n during quarter t, x  ¯st denotes
the average expenditure in s across households during quarter t, str denotes quarter-and-
year-of-interview and region-of-residence fixed effects, Etn denotes total quarterly expenditure
of household n, Z n is a vector of demographic controls (dummies for age bins, number of
earners, and household size) and un   st is an error term. Aguiar and Bils (2015) argue that
this specification "provides a tractable framework to address for the mis-measurement in the
CEX" in which "respondent's errors (. . . ) are scaled up by their level of expenditures." 26 To
address potential measurement error in sectoral expenditures that would accumulate in the
measure of total quarterly expenditure, Etn , we follow Aguiar and Bils and instrument total
expenditures with total yearly income after taxes, and quintile dummies for the household's
income group. The rationale is that "total expenditure reflects permanent income and thus
will be correlated with current income."
    Column (3) in Table 3 reports the estimated expenditure elasticities s from Equation
(19). We find that "Education and Health Care" and "Arts, Entertainment, Recreation
and Food Services" are the most expenditure-elastic sectors. Conversely, "Construction"
and "Agriculture" appear to be the least expenditure-elastic. The range in the value of
expenditure elasticities that we find is similar to the range that Aguiar and Bils (2015) find­
with demand specified over final expenditures in their case. Similar to us, they find that
the most expenditure-elastic sector is education and that food at home is the second least
expenditure-elastic sector (after tobacco). Finally, we note that these estimates correspond
to the income elasticities reported in the Figures 1 and 2 of the Introduction.
Dartmouth Atlas data. Since the CEX reports whether a household member receives Medicare or Medicaid,
we can impute expenditures to these household members in a similar way to K-12. For financial services, we
assume an expense ratio of 90 basis points across all household pension funds and securities (French, 2008).
See Appendix B.2 for more details and a comparison of the estimates with and without imputation.
   25
      In practice, this imputation method generates more conservative estimates of the expenditure elasticity
for the Education and Health Care sector (it reduces the estimate by slightly less than 10%), while it hardly
affects the estimates for other sectors. See Appendix B.2 for the estimates without imputation.
   26
      This differencing strategy cancels out log-linearly additive errors that are good- and time-specific. Note
also that the term str controls for the effect of changing prices.

                                                      17
                   Table 3: Estimated Expenditure and Demand Elasticities

                                                    Nonhomothetic CES2           Reduced-Form3
                                                                   s       s                    s
        Sectors                                          (1)     (2)      (3)                  (4)
        Education and Health Care                                1.80     1.55               1.59
                                                               (0.07)   (0.01)             (0.06)
        Arts, Entertainment,                                     1.39     1.30               1.31
        Recreation and Food Services                           (0.03)   (0.01)             (0.03)
        Finance, Professional, Information,                      1.26     1.22               1.29
        other services (excl. gov't)                           (0.02)   (0.01)             (0.01)
        Government1                                             1.00    1.06                 1.08
                                                                  (-) (0.01)               (0.01)
        Manufacturing                                            0.69     0.88               0.91
                                                               (0.03)   (0.01)             (0.01)
        Retail, Wholesale Trade and                              0.61     0.82               0.87
        Transportation                                         (0.03)   (0.01)             (0.01)
        Construction                                             0.48   0.75                 0.80
                                                               (0.04) (0.01)               (0.02)
        Agriculture                                              0.30     0.63               0.65
                                                               (0.06)   (0.01)             (0.02)
        Elasticity of Substitution                   0.45
                                                   (0.05)
 Notes: Standard errors clustered at the household level shown in parentheses. Total number of households
 is 7,809. 1: Gov't sector is normalized to 1 in the demand estimation. 2: s in column (3) is the model-
 implied expenditure elasticity for the sample average household expenditures at the estimated parameters
 { s ,  }, see Equation (16). 3: s in column (4) corresponds to the expenditure elasticity estimated using
 the Aguiar and Bils (2015) specification.




    Estimation of Demand Parameters Next, we describe how we estimate our demand
system. We use the same household-level expenditure data, supplemented with time series
for sectoral urban prices across different US regions from the BLS (as in Comin et al., 2015).
Our estimation strategy also follows Comin et al. (2015) and it is based on the generalized
method of moments (GMM). To write our estimating equations, we leverage on the log-linear
nature of the demand system and use it to invert the demand for one sector s  ^ to obtain an
                                                               n
expression for the real consumption index of household n, Ct , in terms of observables. We
then use this expression and substitute out Ctn in the expenditure share equations for all

                                                    18
s=s
  ^ to obtain

                      s                        pn
                                                st                  s              Etn       s
   ln xn       n
       st = ln s -
                           n
                           ^ + (1 -  ) ln
                        ln s                          + (1 -  )       - 1 ln             +     ln xn
                                                                                                   ^t . (20)
                                                                                                   s
                      s
                      ^                        pn
                                                ^t
                                                s                   s
                                                                    ^              pn
                                                                                    s
                                                                                    ^t       s
                                                                                             ^


This procedure generates a system of equations for each household n and all s = s^. Equation
(20) makes clear that the system is identified up to a normalization of s and s for one
sector. We normalize s ^ = s^ = 1 for one sector without loss of generality (in our empirical

exercise we normalize to one the parameters of the Government sector).
                                                  n
    We parametrize the taste parameter as ln s       s Z n + str + un            n
                                                                     st , where Z denotes the
same household controls as in the previous estimation (dummies for age, number of earners
and family size), str are region-of-residence×sector and quarter-and-year-of-interview×sector
fixed effects, and un
                    st is an error term. After incorporating this parametrization to Equation
(20), we obtain

                                        pn
                                         st                              Etn
       ln xn
           st
                     n
                = s Z + (1 -  ) ln            + (1 -  ) (s - 1) ln             + s ln xn     n
                                                                                       ^t + ust .
                                                                                       s                 (21)
                                        pn
                                         s
                                         ^t                              pn
                                                                          s
                                                                          ^t


This resulting system of S - 1 equations for s = s
                                                 ^ defines moments in terms of observables
that we use in our estimation.27 We also use the reduced-form expenditure elasticities s
estimated using the Aguiar and Bils (2015) methodology as an additional set of moments.
Taking the expression for expenditure elasticity s from Equation (16), we have that

                                                            s
                                  ^s =  + (1 -  )
                                                                    + vs ,                               (22)
                                                              ¯n
                                                          s S x s s


where    ^s is the expenditure elasticity estimated using the Aguiar and Bils (2015) method,
¯n
x st is the sample average expenditure share in sector s, and vs denotes an error term. In
sum, we use the set of moments defined by Equations (21) and (22) to estimate the demand
parameters.
    To deal with potential measurement error and endogeneity concerns, we use instruments
for the observed measures of household expenditures and relative prices proposed in Comin
et al. (2015). As in Aguiar and Bils (2015), we use household (after-taxes) income levels
and income quintiles as instruments for quarterly expenditures. These instruments capture
the permanent household income, and are therefore correlated with household expenditures
without being affected by transitory measurement error in total expenditures. We instru-
ment household relative prices with a Hausman-style relative-price instrument. Each of the

  27
   Since a priori any sector can be used as a reference sector in (20), we use in our estimation all S (S - 1)
moments we can obtain from having each sector s  S as a reference.

                                                     19
prices used in the relative-price instrument is constructed in two steps. First, for each sub-
component of a sector, we compute the average price across regions excluding the own region.
Then, the sectoral price for a region is constructed using the average region expenditure shares
in each sub-component as weights. These price instruments capture the common trend in
U.S. prices while alleviating endogeneity concerns due to regional shocks.28
    The first and second columns of Table 3 report our estimates of the nonhomotheticity
parameters s and the elasticity of substitution  . We find a value for the elasticity of
substitution of 0.45, implying that the eight sectors are complements. This value is very
similar to the estimated elasticity of substitution of 0.42 in Goos et al. (2014), obtained using
European data for 10 sectors from 1993-2010. The nonhomotheticity parameters {s }sS
vary substantially across sectors, the highest being for "Education and Health Care" and the
lowest, "Agriculture." The third column reports the implied expenditure elasticity for each
sector for the average household in our sample. The expenditure elasticities from our model
estimates and from the Aguiar-Bils reduced are very similar.29


3.3     Partial-Equilibrium Quantification
Next, we combine the estimated demand parameters with the production side described in
Section 2 to conduct a partial-equilibrium quantification of our model. The goal is to assess
the contribution of income and price effects to changes in sectoral value-added and wage-bill
shares, taking sectoral prices and income directly from the data. This simple exercise allows
us to demonstrate the relevance of the income-driven mechanism in a stripped-down setting,
before turning to the general-equilibrium quantification with occupational choice of Section
4.
    Calibration of the Partial-Equilibrium Model Our calibration strategy consists in
matching the 1980 values of expenditure per capita, sectoral prices and sectoral composition
of value added. We then shock the model economy with the 2016 values for household expen-
diture and sectoral prices, which are the exogenous driving forces in our partial equilibrium
quantification.
   We set the demand elasticity parameters {s ,  }sS to their estimated values in Table 3.
Given the 1980 sectoral value-added deflators, {ps0 }sS , and the level of personal consumption
  28
      Using the average price in the U.S. excluding the own region addresses the concern of regional shocks,
while capturing the common component of prices across regions. Using average expenditures in the region
addresses the concern of mismeasurement of household expenditure shares in that region to the extent that
the mismeasurement averages out in the aggregate.
   29
      The correlation between the two expenditure elasticities is over 0.99. We find similar demand parameter
estimates using CEX data without imputation, other time periods, and when we only include region and year
fixed effects. See Appendix B.2.

                                                     20
expenditures (PCE) per capita, E0 , we calibrate {s }sS to match the sectoral distribution
of value added in 1980. We also match the 1980 wage bills by taking factor intensities
{js0 , s0 } from the data. To simulate the 2016 economy, we increase PCE per capita by
their growth over the 1980-2016 period, and allow prices to change to their 2016 value. We
also allow {jst , st } to change to their 2016 values. Note that we keep constant of the
demand parameters, {s , , s }.30
    Value-added growth: model vs. data We first assess the ability of the calibrated
model to replicate the changes in sectoral value-added shares observed in the data, and de-
compose the overall change in the contribution of income and price effects. We use Equations
(14) and (17) to compute the sectoral value added that results from three exercises. The first
consists in increasing total expenditure per capita Et to match the 2016 level while increas-
ing uniformly sectoral prices by the same factor as the Personal Consumption Expenditure
(PCE) deflator, so that relative sectoral prices do not change. We call this exercise a neutral
increase in expenditure. The second exercise consists in changing sectoral prices to match the
2016 level of sectoral prices relative to the PCE deflator. The third exercise simulates the ef-
fect on sectoral value added of conducting simultaneously the neutral increase in expenditure
and the change in relative sectoral prices.31
    Figure 3 plots the model sectoral value-added shares for 2016 (y-axis) against the value-
added shares in the data (x-axis) for the three exercises. Table 4 reports the standard
deviation of the model and data value-added shares, their correlation, and their covariance
normalized by the variance in the data. We begin by discussing the third exercise, which
changes both total expenditure and prices. Figure 3a shows that the model accounts quite
well for the sectoral composition of the economy in 2016. The dispersion of sectoral shares
is similar to the data (0.069 vs. 0.082), and the correlation between sectoral shares in the
data and in the model is 0.89. Consequently, the model accounts for 66% of the variation in
sectoral shares we observe in 2016.
    The two sectors that deviate the most from the 2016 value-added shares observed in
the data are Education and Health Care (sector 4 in the plot) and Finance, Professional,
Information and other services (sector 8 in the plot). In particular, the share of Education
and Health Care produced by the model in 2016 is too large (18% vs. 13%), while the share
of Finance, Professional, Information and other services is too small (20% vs. 26%). These
discrepancies can be partly the result of biases in the measurement of sectoral prices and in

  30
    The data sources for these data are the same as in previous sections, see Appendix B for more details.
  31
    For each exercise, we measure the model-implied sectoral value-added shares for 2016 as the value of
sectoral value added produced by the model relative to the aggregate value added observed in the data. In
doing so, we adjust the denominator to correct for the fact that from 1980 to 2016, PCE increased slightly
more than nominal valued added.

                                                   21
Figure 3: Change in Sectoral Value-Added, 1980-2016: Data vs. Model in Partial Equilibrium
(a) Increase in Prices and Exp.       (b) Neutral Increase in Expenditure              (c) Increase in Relative Prices




  Legend: 1. Agriculture, 2. Arts, Entertainment, Recreation and Food Services, 3. Government (excl.
  Health and Educ.), 4. Education and Health Care, 5. Manufacturing, 6. Retail, Wholesale and
  Transportation, 7. Construction, 8. Finance, Professional, Information and other services.


the estimation of income elasticity parameters.32
    What are the contributions of expenditure and relative prices to the change in sectoral
composition? Figure 3 and Table 4 help us answer this question. Both the neutral increase
in expenditure and the change in relative prices produce model sectoral value-added shares
for 2016 that are highly correlated with the data (0.81 and 0.87, respectively). The key
difference between them is that the dispersion of value-added shares induced by the neutral
increase in expenditure is much larger than the dispersion produced by the change in relative
prices (0.074 vs. 0.013). As a result, the neutral increase in expenditure accounts for a larger
fraction of the variation in sectoral shares observed in 2016 than the change in relative prices
(0.67 vs. 0.12). Because we calibrated the model to match 1980 sectoral shares, we conclude
that the increase in expenditure is the main driver of the observed changes in the sectoral
composition of the economy.
  32
    Failing to adjust for quality improvements in health will result in an upward bias in measured relative
price growth of the sector, and (since  is smaller than 1) this will lead to a larger sectoral share. Reasonable
adjustments to sectoral deflators can correct the discrepancy between model and data. For example, in
Section 4, we show that if the price deflator of Education and Health Care grew 23% more than the PCE
price deflator during the period 1980-2016, the model matches the share of Education and Health Care in
the data. Similarly, despite our efforts to impute consumption of financial services for which households
(especially those with higher income) do not pay directly, there are numerous financial fees, commissions and
services that are not reflected in the CEX, as well as business services that may be provided by employers
as part of compensation. Since those would increase the expenditures in the Finance, Professional and
Information services sector of richer households, they would imply a value of the income elasticity parameter
larger than the one we have estimated. Conversely, there are many services provided by the government to
households that are not reflected in the CEX (e.g., defense, justice, etc.). To the extent that those are enjoyed
by households regardless of their income, our estimates for the income elasticity of government services would
be biased upwards. This could explain why our model predicts a larger increase in the share of government
services than in the data.

                                                       22
      Table 4: Sectoral Value Added Shares in 2016 in the Partial-Equilibrium Model

                                                                   Model Changes:
                                                       Data {E, ps }         E      {ps }
               Std. Dev.                              0.082       0.069 0.075 0.013
               Corr(Data, Model)                                   0.89 0.84 0.87
               Cov(Data, Model)/Var(Data)                          0.66 0.67 0.12



   Decomposing Changes in wage-bill shares Substituting Equation (17) in (5), we
obtain an expression for the wage bill of workers in occupation j as a function of total
expenditure and prices,

                                                                           - -s
                     wjt Xjt =        ^ jst V Ast =
                                                           ^ jst s Et+s p1
                                                                         st Pt  .           (23)
                                 sS                   sS


Expression (23) allows us to explore the role of nonhomotheticities and prices in the evolution
of the wage-bill share across occupations. By construction, our calibration matches the shift
term in the data--given that we match initial value-added shares and take factor intensities
from the data. We thus focus on the share term.

    The second row in Table 5 reports the share term produced by the model when we change
both expenditures and relative prices from their 1980 levels to their 2016 levels. A comparison
of the model-produced share term with the share contribution in the data suggests that the
model accounts well for the share term in the data. To study the role of the income-driven
mechanism, we generate the share term by increasing expenditures to their 2016 level while
keeping relative prices at their 1980 level in the model. The results are reported in the
third row. The fourth row shows that the neutral increase in expenditure accounts for 57%
of the increase in the wage-bill share of low-skill occupations. For middle- and high-skill
occupations, we find that it accounts for 12% and 27% of the actual changes in the wage-bill
shares of these occupations.

    The results presented in this section suggest that the income-driven channel plays a
substantial role in generating both sectoral reallocation of value-added and labor-market
polarization. Importantly, the demand parameters governing the income effects and the
elasticity of substitution across sectors come from cross-sectional household estimates. Thus,
they are independent from the aggregate time-series phenomena that we are trying to explain.
Despite this, the partial equilibrium model does a good job in generating the polarization of
labor markets, with the income-driven channel playing a significant role.

                                                  23
          Table 5: Change in Wage Bill Shares, Partial-Equilibrium Quantification

                                                              Occupations
                                                        Low     Middle    High
                   Total Change (Data)                 0.021      -0.21     0.19
                   Model-generated Share Term:
                    All channels (E and prices)        0.026      -0.08     0.09
                    Only E                             0.012      -0.02     0.05
                    Only E /Data Total                  57%        12%      27%


4       General-Equilibrium Model with Occupational Choice
So far, our analysis of the income-driven mechanism has focused on occupational wage bills
in a representative-agent, partial-equilibrium setting. To provide a richer account of labor-
market polarization, we introduce heterogeneous households facing an occupational choice
à la Roy. This extension of our model generates separate predictions for hours worked and
relative wages across occupations. Additionally, by making sectoral prices and household
expenditures endogenous, the general equilibrium nature of the model can shed light on the
economic primitives through which the income-driven channel generates polarization.



4.1     Model

Our model uses the production structure and preferences presented in Sections 2.1 and 3.1.
Since this section introduces heterogeneous households that self-select into different occupa-
tions, we briefly show how we extend our framework to incorporate this heterogeneity. We
then present the occupational choice problem and define the competitive equilibrium.


4.1.1    Production

The setting is identical to Section 2.1, except that labor inputs in the production function
are now expressed in terms of efficiency units, rather than total hours. This change allows
us to account for household heterogeneity in labor supply. That is, the representative firm
in each sector s  S operates with the technology defined in Equation (1)
                                                         st

                           Yst = Ast                 ~ jst 
                                                     X          1-st
                                                               Kst   ,                   (24)
                                                       jst
                                        j {L,M,H }


                                               24
                                  ~ jst denotes the number of efficiency units of labor employed
where the only difference is that X
in occupation j sector s, and year t. All derivations can be done in an analogous way to
Section 2 and are relegated to Appendix C.


4.1.2    Household preferences, endowments and demographics

There is a continuum of mass 1 of households indexed by h  H  (0, 1). Each household
is endowed with one unit of labor and Kht units of capital. Households face an occupational
choice (which we discuss in more detail below). They choose which occupation (high-, middle-
or low-skill) to inelastically supply their unit of labor. Household income is composed of the
labor income plus the rental income accrued from the owned capital. In our baseline exercise,
we assume all capital is evenly distributed across households.33
    We maintain the static nature of our model from Section 3, and assume that household
expenditure Eht equals household income period by period. Each household maximizes utility
Uht , defined by the same nonhomothetic CES aggregator as in Equation (12),
                                                       1    -1
                                                 s
                                               (Uht s )  chst
                                                           
                                                              = 1,                                       (25)
                                          sS


subject to the household budget constraint Eht  sS pst chst . Note that all demand param-
eters, {s , s ,  }sS are the same across households and constant over time. This implies that
household heterogeneity in consumption choices is solely driven by differences in household
income at any given point in time. Since household demand can be derived as in Section 3.1,
we also relegate these derivations to Appendix C.
   Occupational Choice A key difference with the model presented in Section 3.1 is that
now hoseholds face an occupational choice which yields an endogenous labor supply at the
occupational level. Household h draws a vector (hH , hM , hL ) of potential efficiency units
to be supplied in each occupation. Given the vector of wages per efficiency unit in the
three occupations (w~Ht , w
                          ~M t , w
                                 ~Lt ), household h chooses the occupation that maximizes labor
income,
                                      argmaxj {L,M,H } {hj w
                                                           ~jt }.                          (26)

   To quantitatively evaluate the model, we assume that efficiency units for each occupation
are independently drawn from lognormal distributions. We denote the mean and standard
deviation of log j by µj and j .34 We interpret these idiosyncratic draws of efficiency units
  33
     In our robustness section, we explore an alternative setting where capital is owned by households working
in high-skill occupations.
  34
     Lognormal distributions have been used in this context, see for example Bárány and Siegel (2018) and
Cerina et al. (2017). We note that assuming a Fréchet distribution (or a multi-variate Fréchet in the max-

                                                     25
as a reduced-form mapping from ability to worker productivity across occupations. Since
this formulation assumes that all households are ex-ante identical, it abstracts from an array
of pre-existing differences across groups in the population, e.g., gender and race (Hsieh et al.,
2013) that are critical to account for labor supply decisions at the household level. We
abstract from these ex-ante differences because our goal is to parsimoniously generate a
labor supply at the occupation level.


4.1.3    Competitive Equilibrium

A competitive equilibrium is defined by a sequence of prices {{pst }sS , w
                                                                         ~Lt , w      ~Ht , rt }t
                                                                               ~M t , w           =T
                                                                                                t=0 ,
allocations {{chst }sS ,hH }T                                 T
                            t=0 , capital holdings {{Kht }hH }t=0 and household occupational
choices for each household h such that:


   1. Each household maximizes utility (25) subject to the budget constraint                     sS   pst chst =
      Eht where Eht = maxj {L,M,H } {hj w
                                        ~jt } + rt Kht .

                                                         ~ jt },Kst pst Yst -
   2. Firms maximize profits taking prices as given, max{X                                     w   ~ jt - (rt +
                                                                                               ~jt X
                                                                                           j
       )Kst , where it is understood that j  {L, M, H }.

   3. All markets clear. In particular, aggregate labor supply equals aggregate demand for
      each occupation,35 aggregate capital demand equals aggregate capital supply, and goods
                      1
      markets clear, 0 chst dh = Yst , for all s  S .


4.2     Model Calibration
To quantitatively evaluate our model, we need to specify the value of the preference parame-
ters, {s , s ,  }sS , sectoral technology parameters {st , st , Ast }sS ,t{1980,2016} , the aggregate
supply of capital Kt in t  {1980, 2016}, the depreciation rate  , and the parameters of the
lognormal distributions over which labor efficiency units {j , j }j ={L,M,H } are drawn from.
Our calibration strategy consists of two parts. First, we set the values of all model parameters
in 1980 to exactly match the 1980 economy. Second, we change some of model parameters to
match key moments in 2016, while keeping the rest of the parameters fixed at their initially
calibrated values. We outline our targets and procedure for the calibration in the main text.

stable family as described in Lind and Ramondo, 2018) in this setting would have the counterfactual prediction
that average wage per worker is equalized across occupations. Authors that have used the Fréchet distribution
in similar settings need to resort to unobserved costs or worker attributes, see e.g., Galle et al. (2017).
  35
     Aggregate demand follows from Equation (6). See Equation (21) in Appendix D for aggregate labor
supply.

                                                     26
Appendix D presents a more detailed explanation and discussion of the calibration proce-
dure. The values that result from the calibration procedure for the aggregate parameters are
reported in Table 6.
    Calibration of the 1980 Economy We set the preference parameters  , and {s }sS
to their estimated values from Table 3 and the depreciation rate  to 10%. We then calibrate
the rest of the model parameters, {s1980 , s1980 , As1980 , s }sS , the aggregate capital stock
K1980 and the distribution over draws of efficiency units to match the 1980 values of the
following moments:36

       ·   The aggregate nominal value added per capita,       sS   V As1980 ,

       ·   the sectoral distribution of value added, {V As1980 }sS ,

       ·   sectoral prices, {ps1980 }sS ,

       ·   the interest rate r1980 ,

       ·   the wages per worker in high- and low-skill occupations relative to middle-skill occu-
           pations,

       ·   the wage bills in each sector accrued by workers in each of the three occupation cate-
           gories, {w       ~ js1980 }sS ,j {L,M,H } .
                    ~js1980 X

    We next discuss our calibration procedure. Firm optimization implies that the factor
shares by occupation and sector directly correspond to the exponents in the Cobb-Douglas
production function, {sj 1980 , s1980 }sS ,j ={L,M,H } (as shown in Equation 2).37 Given sectoral
value added and the sectoral capital shares, the rental cost of capital (interest rate plus
depreciation) pins down the level of capital per capita used in each sector (Equation 3 in
Appendix C). Adding across sectors, this corresponds to the aggregate capital stock per
capita, K1980 (Equation 7).
    We calibrate the parameters governing the lognormal distributions generating the effi-
ciency draws as follows. First, since the definition of an efficiency unit for each occupa-
tion is arbitrary, we can normalize the average level of productivity for each occupation
{µj }j ={L,M,H } . We set µj equal to a common value µ1980 for all occupations to match the
level of aggregate nominal value added per capita. Since labor earnings are homogeneous
of degree one in efficiency draws {j }j ={L,M,H } , only relative efficiency draws matter for oc-
cupational choice.38 This allows us to normalize the variance of draws in one occupation
  36
     See Appendices B and C for more details on our data sources and parameter calibration.
  37
     See Equations (2) and (4) in Appendix C for the expressions with efficiency units in the production
function.
  38
     This is a well-known result in this literature. It is used, among others, by Autor and Dorn (2013).

                                                   27
(we choose low-skill). We then calibrate the variance of the productivity distributions across
middle- and high-skill occupations, {j }j ={M,H } , to match: (1) the wage-bill shares across
occupations, and (2) average wages per worker of high- and middle- relative to low-skill occu-
pations. Note that by matching the wage bills and the relative wages in 1980, we also match
the employment shares across occupations in 1980.
    Finally, we use the dependence of producers' cost function on sectoral TFP (see Equation
5 in Appendix C) and set sectoral TFP levels in 1980, {As1980 }sS , to match the observed
sectoral price deflators. Given the distribution of household income and the preference param-
eters, {s ,  }sS , we set the taste parameters {s }sS so that the model-generated aggregate
sectoral consumption matches the observed sectoral value added in 1980.
    Calibration of the 2016 Economy The second part of our calibration consists in
setting the parameters that change from 1980 to 2016 to their new values. We assume
that the preference and taste parameters {s , s ,  }sS , the depreciation rate  , and the
dispersion of productivities in each occupation, {j }j ={L,M,H } , do not change over the horizon
we study. We allow changes in the common mean of the lognormal distribution for the
three occupations, µ2016 , the sectoral TFP levels {As2016 }sS , the factor intensities in each
sector {sj 2016 , s2016 }sS ,j ={L,M,H } , and the level of capital, K2016 . The new values for these
parameters are set to match the following moments:

    ·   The 2016 share of sectoral nominal value added, {V As2016 /V A2016 }sS ,

    ·   the wage-bill shares by sector and occupation in 2016, {w       ~ js2016 }j {L,M,H } ,
                                                                ~js2016 X

    ·   the interest rate r2016 ,

    ·   the increase in aggregate nominal expenditures per capita from 1980 to 2016, E2016 /E1980 ,

    ·   the increase in the Fisher price index for personal consumption expenditures from 1980
        to 2016.

We match these targets as follows. The factor intensities {sj 2016 , s2016 }sS ,j ={L,M,H } are set
to match the 2016 labor and occupation shares in sectoral value added (as implied by the
firms' optimality conditions). Given r2016 , we obtain the aggregate level of capital per capita,
K2016 , aggregating the capital demand across sectors, which we compute combining sectoral
labor shares and value added (as in the 1980 calibration). To match sectoral value added,
we proceed as follows. Let A  ^s2016  As2016 /A2016 be the TFP level of sector s relative to
the aggregate TFP in the economy, A2016 . We calibrate simultaneously A        ^s2016      , A2016 ,
                                                                                       sS
and µ2016 to match the 2016 sectoral shares of nominal value added, the growth in aggregate
expenditures per capita, and the growth in the Fisher price index of personal consumption

                                                 28
                         Table 6: Calibrated Aggregate Parameters

                                                  1980       2016
                                                  Time-Invariant
                              Variance of Efficiency Units
                                 L               1.00        1.00
                                 M               0.81        0.81
                                 H               1.19        1.19
                              Depreciation,  0.10            0.10
                                                  Time-Varying
                              Capital pc, Kt      0.35       2.91
                              TFP, At             1.00       1.18
                              Labor Prod., µt     0.01       0.04


expenditures from 1980 to 2016. Note that by matching sectoral shares and the growth in
total expenditure per capita, we also match the sectoral distribution of value added.
    The assumption that preference parameters {s , s ,  }sS and the variances of labor pro-
ductivity across occupations {j }j ={L,M,H } remain constant to their 1980 values introduces
two significant differences between the calibrations for 1980 and 2016. First, we do not tar-
get the sectoral prices in 2016. Second, the calibration procedure is designed to match the
occupational wage-bill shares in 2016, but it does not require that the model matches the
distribution of hours worked or the relative wages across occupations in 2016.


4.3    Model Quantification Results
Untargeted moments Before analyzing the drivers of polarization, we study how well the
model fits untargeted moments such as the distribution of hours worked and relative wages
in 2016, and sectoral price growth from 1980 to 2016. Tables 7 and 8 report the relevant
data moments and model outcomes. The first three rows in Table 7 report the model-
implied changes in wage-bill and employment shares vis-à-vis the data. By construction,
our calibration matches the change in wage-bill shares and the contributions of the shift and
share terms. Despite not being a calibration target, the model captures well the polarization
in hours worked across occupations. The third line in the right panel shows that the change
in hours worked across occupations produced by the model are 82%, 91% and 93% of those
observed in the data for low-, middle- and high-skill occupations. A shift-share decomposition
(as in Equation 11 in Section 2) reveals that the slight discrepancy between model and data
is due to the shift term and that the model's implied share term is remarkably close to that
in the data (0.039 vs. 0.037 for high-skill, -0.064 vs. -0.061 for middle-skill, and 0.025 vs.

                                             29
                            Table 7: Baseline Model Quantification

                                          Change Wage Bill Sh.         Change Employ. Sh.
                                           Low    Middle      High     Low    Middle      High
      Data                               0.021     -0.209    0.188    0.034    -0.165    0.131
      Model                              0.021     -0.209    0.188    0.028     -0.15    0.122
      Model/Data(%)                      100%       100%     100%      82%       91%      94%
      Decomposition of Model:
       Shift                              0.006    -0.151     0.13    0.004    -0.089    0.085
       Share                              0.015    -0.058    0.058    0.024    -0.061    0.037
       Share/Model(%)                     73%        28%      31%      86%       41%      31%
      Contribution of Different Channels:
       Shift, E Shock                     0             0         0     0           0        0
       Shift, Biased-Tech. Shock     0.006         -0.151      0.13 0.004      -0.089    0.085
       Share, E Shock                     0.019    -0.005 0.066       0.018    -0.052     0.034
       Share, Biased-Tech. Shock         -0.008    -0.055 -0.054      0.005     0.003    -0.008
       Share, E Shock/Model (%)            90%        2%    35%        64%       34%       28%
  Notes: Numbers in blue are targeted in the calibration. The calibration strategy also matches 1980
  wage bill and employment shares. See the main text for further discussion.


0.024 for low-skill occupations). Table 8 shows that our model also generates polarization in
relative wages that is in line with the data. If anything, the model somewhat overpredicts
the relative wage in 2016 of low- to middle-skill occupations (0.86 vs. 0.8 in the data), and
high- to middle-skill occupations (1.57 vs. 1.53 in the data).
    The sectoral prices that our calibrated model generates to fit the 2016 sectoral value-
added shares are not very different to those in the data. Figure A.1a in Appendix A contains
a scatter plot of the growth in sectoral prices from 1980 to 2016 in the model and the
data. Their correlation is 0.63. The standard deviation of growth rates is 1.44 in the data,
and 1.65 in the model. The main deviations between data and model are in three sectors:
"Education and Health Care," "Government," and "Finance, Professional, Information and
Other services." In the first two, model prices grow by less than in the data, while in the
latter they grow by more. One possible interpretation of these differences in sectoral price
growth between model and data in "Education and Health Care" is that it partly reflects
unmeasured quality improvements (Jaimovich et al., 2019). In the "Finance, Professional
and Information services" and "Government" sectors, instead, the discrepancy in prices may
reflect the fact that estimates of the income elasticity parameters based on the CEX may
be somewhat inaccurate because they missed part of the actual household consumption, as
further discussed already in footnote 32.

                                                  30
                   Table 8: Baseline Model Quantification for Relative Wages

                                                      Year    wL /wM      wH /wM
                          Data                        1980        0.74         1.24
                                                      2016         0.8         1.49
                          Model                       1980        0.74         1.24
                                                      2016        0.86         1.57
                          Contribution of Different Channels:
                           Only E                2016     0.79                 1.32
                           Only Biased Tech. 2016          0.8                 1.46
                           Only E/Model (%)               46%                  29%
  Notes: Numbers in blue are targeted in the calibration. The last line reports the percent of the total
  increase in relative wages generated by the E shock plus half of the covariance when both E and
  biased-technology shocks are included.


   In sum, we conclude that our model does a remarkable job in generating the polarization
of key untargeted variables such as hours worked and wages, and produces a reasonable
evolution for relative sectoral prices.

4.3.1    Untangling Polarization Mechanisms

We next use our model to shed light on the drivers of the shift and share components of
polarization in wage bills, hours worked, and relative wages across occupations.
    Grouping parameter changes In the spirit of our partial equilibrium quantification
from Section 3.3, we group the simulated changes in parameters from 1980 through 2016
in two distinct "shocks." The first shock consists in the increases in aggregate TFP, A2016 ,
and in the common mean of the labor productivity distribution, µ2016 . This shock resembles
the neutral increase in expenditure from the partial equilibrium quantification in Section 3.3
because it is the main driver of growth in nominal expenditures and the PCE deflator. Con-
sequently, we call it the expenditure shock, or E shock for short. The second shock consists
of the changes in relative sectoral TFP, {A ^s2016 }sS ; factor intensities, {js2016 , s2016 }sS ;
and the level of capital, K2016 .39 This shock is the natural counterpart to the exogenous
changes in relative sectoral prices from the partial equilibrium exercise, and because it also
includes exogenous changes in factor intensity, we label it the biased-technology shock.40 It is
  39
     We group the change in the capital stock into the second shock because, for given nominal value added
and factor intensities (which we target in our calibration), the capital stock only impacts the rental rate and
hence sectoral prices.
  40
     The E shock induces growth in nominal expenditures by 3.53 and in the PCE deflator by 1.18, while the
biased-technology shock induces growth in nominal expenditures by 0.16 and in the PCE deflator by 0.33.
The variance of sectoral price growth induced by the biased-technology shock is 0.94, while for the E shock

                                                      31
important to note that because prices and wages are endogenous in general-equilibrium, the
biased-technology shock has an effect (albeit small) on aggregate expenditures and on the
PCE deflator, while the E shock affects sectoral prices. As we discuss below, this latter effect
is not negligible, and it contributes to the overall importance of the E shock for polarization.
    Drivers of polarization What are the contributions of the E and biased-technology
shocks to labor-market polarization? The bottom panels of Tables 7 and 8 answer this
question. The first observation to note is that, by construction, the E shock has no effect on
shift components. The contribution of the E shock to polarization, therefore, operates only
through the changes it induces in the sectoral composition of value added/employment.41
Table 7 shows that the E shock has caused 90% and 35% of the increase in the wage-bill
shares of low- and high-skill occupations, while it is responsible for only 2% of the decline
in the wage-bill share of middle-skill occupations. The E shock has driven slightly smaller
fractions of the increase in the shares of hours worked by low- and high-skill occupations
(64% and 28%), while it is responsible for 35% of the decline in the share of hours worked
in middle-skill occupations. The E shock is also key to understanding the changes in the
observed relative wages across occupations from 1980 through 2016. In particular, Table 8
shows that it is responsible for 46% of the increase in the wage of low- relative to middle-
skill occupations, and for 29% of the increase in the wage of high- relative to middle-skill
occupations.
     To understand the mechanism by which the E shock generates sectoral reallocation and
polarization, it is useful to compare the results in the partial- and general-equilibrium quan-
tification. A comparison of Tables 5 and 7 reveals that the contribution to polarization of
the income-driven channel is greater in general equilibrium than in partial equilibrium. For
example, in partial equilibrium, the income-driven channel causes an increase in the wage-
bill share of high-skill occupations of 5 percentage points, while in general equilibrium it
causes an increase of 6.6 percentage points. These differences arise because sectoral prices
are endogenous in general equilibrium. In both the partial- and general-equilibrium quantifi-
cations, the increase in aggregate expenditures directly affects polarization through the effect
of nonhomotheticities in the sectoral reallocation of value added. Since the E and neutral
expenditure shocks are calibrated to match the actual increase in aggregate expenditures in
both exercises, and the initial expenditure elasticities of demand and initial factor intensi-
ties are also the same, the direct effect of the income-driven channel is also the same in the
partial- and general-equilibrium quantifications.42

it is 0.65.
   41
      The reason is that shift terms are proportional to sectoral changes in factor intensities, which are only
affected by the biased-technology shock (e.g., see Equation 8).
   42
      Having a distribution of consumers with heterogeneous expenditures could, a priori, introduce a difference

                                                      32
    In general equilibrium, however, the income-driven channel has an indirect effect on real-
location and polarization through its impact on sectoral prices. As the income-driven channel
polarizes the distribution of wages across occupations, the relative prices of goods and ser-
vices from sectors that are more intensive in high- and low-skill occupations increase. Since
sectors are complements, this causes additional reallocation of value added towards these
sectors and amplifies the direct effect of the income-driven channel on polarization. These
effects can be appreciated in Figure A.1b in appendix ??, where we observe that the E shock
produces faster price growth in the expenditure-elastic sectors. The correlation between these
two variables is 0.8. In contrast, the correlation between the expenditure elasticity of demand
and the growth in prices induced by the biased-technology shock is -0.12 (see Figure A.1c).
As a result, the contribution of the technology-biased shock to the share term for high- and
low-skill occupations is negative.
    Of course, the biased-technology shock has an important effect on polarization through the
shift component. Consistent with the literature on biased technological change, routinization,
and capital-skill complementarities, we find that the biased-technology shock accounts for
the bulk of the decline in the wage-bill share of middle-skill occupations, and for 65% of the
increase of high-skill occupations. Taken together, these results show that the income-driven
channel and biased-technology forces have simultaneously carved both ends of the US labor
market, making it polarize over the past 40 years. While the income-driven channel played
a dominant role in shaping the outcomes for low-skill occupations, the biased-technology
forces drove the effect on middle-skill occupations, and both contributed to the outcomes for
high-skill occupations, with a 35-65 split in favor of the biased-technology forces.



4.4     Polarization by Subperiods and Robustness Checks

After having established the quantitative significance of the income-driven mechanism, we
analyze our mechanism by subperiods, and also show that our quantiative findings are robust
to extending the model to include a CES aggregator across occupations, trade or assigning
capital to high-skilled only.
    Analysis by Subperiods We explore how the importance of the drivers of polarization
may have changed over the last four decades by splitting the interval we have studied in two
subperiods: 1980-2000 and 2000-2016. We redo our analysis separately for each subperiod,
so that the model matches the evolution of the wage-bill shares, and the wage-bill shift-share

between the direct effect of the income-driven channel to polarization in the general- and partial-equilibrium
quantifications. We have found, however, that heterogeneity of the income distribution across households
does not affect the overall magnitude of the income-driven channel.

                                                     33
decomposition in both subperiods.43 Tables A.2 and A.6 in the appendix show that the model
captures well the evolution of hours worked across occupations and relative wages per worker.
The contribution of the share term in general, and of the E shock in particular, is significant
across all polarization outcomes in both subperiods. We find, however, that the share term
and the E shock are quantitatively more important in the first subperiod. For example, the
E shock increases the share of low- and high-skill occupations in the total wage bill by 0.0126
and 0.044 during the 1980-2000 period, but only by 0.005 and 0.023 during the 2000-2016
period. This larger effect of the E shock during the first subperiod is due to faster growth
in personal consumption expenditures in this period (210%) relative to the second (65%).
As a result, we calibrate a larger E shock in the first period that induces greater changes
in value-added shares towards high- and low-skill intensive sectors away from middle-skill
intensive sectors.
    CES Production Function Our baseline exercise assumes that the elasticity of sub-
stitution across different occupations is one. We relax this assumption and consider the
following sectoral production functions
                                                                              
                                                                          st  - 1
                                                                1    -1
                                       1-st                        ~  
                            Yst = Ast Kst                      jst
                                                               
                                                                   X jst            ,                     (27)
                                                  j {L,M,H }


where  is the elasticity of substitution between occupations.44 In our simulations, we set
 = 1.42, the baseline value used in Buera et al. (2018) and the point estimate obtained by
Katz and Murphy (1992).45 We calibrate {jst } to match the wage-bill share of occupation
j in sector s at time t. Table A.4 reports our results. Note that the contribution of the share
term and E shock to the changes in wage-bill shares is the same as in our baseline model.46
We find that the predicted employment shares and the contribution of the E shock both for
wage-bill and employment shares are very similar to our baseline estimates. For example,
it accounts for 91%, 2%, and 35% of the change in wage-bill shares for low-, middle- and
high-skill occupations. Likewise, we find a similar effect for relative wages (see Table A.6).
  43
     We keep constant the preference parameters throughout this exercise. In the second subperiod, we
recalibrate the dispersion in productivities for middle- and high-skill occupations,M and H , so that we can
exactly match the relative wages per worker in the subperiod that starts in 2000.
  44
     We impose the normalization that j {L,M,H } jst = 1.
  45
     This estimate assumes an aggregate production function and is based on only two skill levels. We have also
conducted our own estimation of the elasticity based on more sectors and three skill levels, using variation
across local labor markets in the US. When instrumenting labor supply with a Bartik-style instrument
for immigrants (with initial shares of immigrants by location and aggregate migration trends), we find an
elasticity of substitution of 1.2, but we cannot reject the null of 1 (i.e., Cobb-Douglas).
  46
     This is the case because, as anticipated in footnote 13, our baseline specification captures flexibly time
variation in factor intensities which (together with the sectoral composition of value added) fully determine
the share term.

                                                      34
   Accounting for International Trade Our baseline analysis assumed a closed economy.
This section extends our model to account for sectoral trade. We account for this possibility
in a parsimonious way through the use wedges. Rearranging the identity that aggregate
production equals domestic consumption plus net exports, pst Yst = pst Cst + N Xst , we have
that
                                  pst Cst = (1 - st )pst Yst ,                          (28)
              N Xst
where st  p    st Yst
                      captures the wedge between domestic production and consumption. If
net exports are positive, trade magnifies domestic demand (i.e., enhances the changes in
production and labor demand considered in the baseline model), while if net exports are
negative, domestic aggregate demand is dampened. We compute the wedges {st } as the
value-added content of US net exports over US value-added production (see Appendix E for
the details).
    Tables A.3 and A.6 present the results of simulating the E and biased-technology shocks
where the later now includes the changes in trade wedges. The main take away is that the
role played by the E shock in the polarization of labor markets remains when taking into
account the effect of international trade. For example, it accounts for 73%, 28% and 31% of
the change in the wage-bill shares for low-, middle- and high-skill occupations. The intuition
for this result is that the change in net exports is only significant for manufacturing but, even
there, its magnitude relative to overall value added is small.
    Allocation of capital holdings We study the robustness of our findings to an alterna-
tive assumption on the distribution of capital ownership across occupations. Given that most
capital is owned by the richest households, a more realistic assumption about the distribution
of capital ownership than the one made in the baseline exercise would be that capital is only
owned by the workers in high-skill occupations.47 Tables A.5 and A.6 show that our quan-
titative assessment about the drivers of polarization are robust to the rule used to allocate
capital across occupations (e.g., the E shock accounts for 74%, 27% and 31% of the change
in wage-bill shares for low-, middle- and high-skill occupations).


5        Extensions
Income growth and nonhomotheticities in demand are ubiquitous. Therefore, the income-
driven mechanism emphasized in our model should be relevant in other periods of history
and other countries. In this section, we explore this possibility. First, we study the role
of sectoral reallocation in generating polarization in other advanced economies during the
    47
   We assume that workers do not take into account the assignment of capital to high-skill occupations
when making their occupational choice.

                                                 35
 Figure 4: US vs other countries' change in value-added shares 1980-2016,  (V Ac      c
                                                                               st /V At )




  Notes: A dot represents the 2016-1980 change in value-added shares in one sector for a country (Austria,
  Spain, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, UK and US). See Appendix B.3 for details.


1980-2016 period. Second, we move the time horizon of our analysis for the US backwards
and forward. Specifically, we study the drivers of labor market polarization during the period
1950-1980, and conclude by forecasting the evolution of labor-market outcomes over the next
fifteen years.


5.1    Polarization in Other Advanced Economies
Labor-market polarization is a pervasive phenomenon across advanced economies. Europe
and Japan have experienced similar processes to the US.48 In this subsection, we explore
the role of sectoral reallocation and the income-driven channel in generating labor-market
polarization in other advanced economies. One challenge we encounter when studying other
economies is that data limitations are greater than in the US.49 For this reason, we explore
the role of the income-driven channel by showing the relevance of the share term for the
evolution of wage-bill and employment shares, and conclude with a quantification of the
income-driven channel using the partial-equilibrium framework developed in Section 3.
   We begin by showing that changes in sectoral value-added shares are highly correlated
across advanced economies. Figure 4 plots the change in value-added shares in the US from
1980 to 2016 (x-axis) and the change in value-added shares in other advanced countries over
  48
     For example, Goos et al., 2014 document polarization in hours worked for various European countries
during the period 1990-2010. Ikenaga and Kambayashi (2016) provide evidence of labor-market polarization
for Japan.
  49
     See Appendix B.3 for details about the data used in this section.

                                                    36
the same period (y-axis). Our cross-country data comes from EUKLEMS and it includes the
following countries: Austria, Spain, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,
and the UK. Figure 4 shows that the patterns of sectoral reallocation are very similar across
advanced economies. In particular, the (pooled) correlation of the changes in sectoral shares
with the US is 0.88.
    Next, we explore shift-share decompositions of wage-bill and hours-worked shares. We
begin by discussing the wage-bill shift-share decomposition. Using the EU Labour Force
Survey (LFS) and the Statistics on Income and Living Conditions (EU-SILC) micro datasets
supplemented with EUKLEMS, we compute factor shares in 2016 by sector, occupation,
and country,  ^ jstc .50 Combining factor shares for 2016, with the data on value-added shares
changes between 1980 and 2016 (shown in Figure 4), we can obtain the share term of a
shift-share decomposition for the wage bills, as the following equation shows

       W Bjtc W Bj 0c               ^ jstc  ^ js0c    V As0c   ^ jstc         V Astc V As0c
             -        =                   -                  +                      -              .      (29)
       W Btc   W B0c          sS
                                     tc      0c       V A0c sS tc             V Atc   V A0c
                                           Shif t                              Share


We find that the share term in the sample of European economies is similar to the US. For
low-skill occupations, the median share value in Europe is 0.014 vs. 0.015 in the US. For
middle- and high-skill occupations, they are -0.045 and 0.041 vs. -0.058 and 0.058 in the
US.51 This exercise shows that the share component has played a similar role to the US in
the polarization of European labor markets.
    Since our microdata does not go back to 1980, we cannot directly measure the initial
occupation factor intensities, js0c , which we need to compute the shift term in Equation
(29). We overcome this limitation by assuming that the growth rate of occupation intensities
between 1980 and 2016 is the same as in the US. That is, denoting the growth rate of US
occupation intensities by gjsU S = (js2016U S - js1980U S )/js1980U S , we assume that js1980c =
js2016c /(1 + gjsU S ). This assumption seems sensible since a key driver of factor intensities
is technology, and technology has changed similarly in Europe and the US over this time
period. With this assumption, we can compute the remaining terms in Equation (29) since
we observe sectoral labor shares, stc , and value-added shares in 1980. As the first panel
of Table 9 shows, we find that the contribution of the shift and share terms to changes in
wage-bill shares are very similar in Europe and the US. For example, the share term is 82%,
23% and 25% for low-, middle-, and high-skill occupations in Europe for 73%, 28% and 31%
  50
     Due to data availability issues we use 2015 values from the LFS and EU-SILC to compute 2016 factor
shares.
  51
     The average values for the share component are 0.0124, -0.0455 and 0.0429 for low-, middle- and high-skill
occupations.

                                                      37
                       Table 9: Shift-Share Analysis for European Countries


                                  Wage Bill 1980-2016         Employ. Sh. 1995-2016
                                  Low     Middle     High      Low     Middle        High
                     Total   0.016           -0.18    0.17    0.011          -0.10   0.09
                     % Shift  18%             77%     75%     -10%            34%    55%
                     % Share 82%              23%     25%     110%            66%    45%
  Notes: Data from EUKLEMS, EU LFS and EU SILC. See discussion in main text and Appendix B.3
  for details. Shift and Share report the median contribution in accounting for the total variation.



in the US.52
    From the LFS microdata, we obtain data on hours worked by occupation. These data
combined with the EUKLEMS allow us to conduct a shift-share analysis of the the distribu-
tion of hours worked from 1995 to 2015 in 16 European countries53

                Xjtc Xj 0c                              Xs0c                   Xstc Xs0c
                    -      =           (jstc - js0c )        +        jstc         -         ,            (30)
                Xtc   X0c         sS
                                                        X0c      sS
                                                                               Xtc   X0c

                 X
where jstc  Xjstc stc
                      . The second panel in Table 9 reports the median contributions of the
shift and share terms across the sample of 16 countries.54 We find that the share component
accounts for an important fraction of the change in employment shares for all occupations.
In particular, it accounts for 110% of the change in the share of hours worked for low-,
66% for middle- and 45% for high-skill occupations. These magnitudes are larger than the
contributions of the share term we have computed for the US from 1980 to 2016.
    As we have discussed, there are many potential drivers of the sectoral reallocation of value
added and hours worked. To directly assess the role of the income-driven channel in Europe,
we implement the partial-equilibrium quantification we have conducted for the US in Section
3.55 Specifically, we compute the effect of neutral increases in expenditure per capita of the
magnitude observed in each country from 1980 to 2016 on the distribution of wage bills across
occupations. We calibrate the preference parameters {, s } to the values we have estimated
  52
     Table A.7 in the Appendix reports the results country by country.
  53
     These countries are: Austria, Belgium, Germany, Denmark, Greece, Spain, Finland, Ireland, Iceland,
Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, and the UK.
  54
     Table A.8 in the Appendix reports the exercise country by country. We note that if we restrict the sample
to the 8 countries in our wage bill sample, we find similar patterns.
  55
     We decide not to conduct the general equilibrium quantification because of lack of data in the European
sample of countries, most prominently on wages by occupation for 1980. Of course, the partial-equilibrium
quantification cannot reflect the indirect effect of the income-driven channel on polarization through relative
sectoral prices that, as we have shown above, has been significant for the US.

                                                      38
Table 10: Wage Bill Shares for European Countries 1980-2016, Partial Equilibrium Exercise

                           Low-skill                           Middle-skill                        High-high
                Data      Model Share Term        Data          Model Share Term         Data     Model Share Term
                                         Only E                                 Only E                           Only E
                Total     All   Only E    Data
                                                  Total         All    Only E    Data
                                                                                         Total    All   Only E    Data

  Austria       0.013   0.022    0.008    63%     -0.17        -0.04    -0.02     9%      0.16   0.06     0.03    22%
  Spain         0.022   0.017    0.012    56%     -0.18        -0.03    -0.02    10%      0.16   0.05     0.04    27%
  Finland       0.016   0.033    0.013    78%     -0.19        -0.08    -0.03    17%      0.17   0.12     0.06    33%
  France        0.021   0.012    0.006    28%     -0.19        -0.06    -0.02    10%      0.17   0.05     0.03    17%
  Italy         0.017   0.015    0.006    34%     -0.17        -0.06    -0.02    10%      0.16   0.04     0.02    14%
  Germany       0.014   0.013    0.007    49%     -0.19        -0.03    -0.02     9%      0.18   0.05     0.03    18%
  Netherlands   0.010   0.018    0.006    65%     -0.18        -0.04    -0.02     9%      0.17   0.07     0.03    19%
  UK            0.023   0.024    0.011    46%     -0.21        -0.06    -0.03    15%      0.19   0.07     0.05    24%
  Median EU     0.017 0.017      0.008    52% -0.19 -0.05               -0.02    10%      0.17 0.05       0.03    20%
  US            0.021 0.026      0.012    57% -0.209 -0.078            -0.025    12%      0.19 0.09       0.05    27%

  Notes: The column "Data Total" reports the total change in wage bill shares from 1980 to 2016.
  Columm "All" reports the model-generated Share term when feeding in both changes in relative prices
  and expenditure. Column "E " reports the model-generated share term when only feeding changes in
  expenditure.




from the US CEX,56 and allow the taste parameters {s } to vary across countries to match
the 1980 value-added shares. We calibrate the factor intensities, {  ^ jstc , tc }, to the values
computed above for the shift-share decomposition. We conduct two simulations. In the first,
we change both expenditure per capita and relative prices to their observed values from 1980
to 2016. In the second, we only shock the 1980 economy with the increase in expenditure
per capita, and keep relative prices at their 1980 levels.

   Table 10 reports the change in the share term in these two simulations, and compares
them with the actual change in the wage-bill shares in the data. These simulations show
that the direct effect of the income-driven channel generates changes in wage-bill shares
across occupations that represent a significant part of the changes we have observed in the
data. For the median country, the effect of the neutral increase in expenditure in this partial
equilibrium setting accounts for 52% of the change in the wage-bill share of the low-skill
occupations, 10% of the middle-, and 20% of the high-skill occupations. These magnitudes
are very similar to those in the partial equilibrium quantification for the US. Therefore, we
conclude that the income-driven channel has played a similar role in the polarization of labor
markets in European economies as it has in the US.



  56
    Comin et al. (2015) document that the parameters that characterize nonhomothetic CES preferences are
stable across countries.

                                                          39
5.2     US Labor-Market Outcomes, 1950-2035
We conclude the paper by analyzing the relevance of our mechanism for the US in a wider
time span. We begin looking further backwards into the 1950-1980 period. Then, we project
what our mechanism entails going forward into the next fifteen years. For these exercises,
we leverage on the property documented in Comin et al. (2015) that the demand parameters
{, s }sS of nonhomothetic CES are stable for very different income levels, and keep them
fixed at their baseline values.57


5.2.1    Back-tracking 1950-1980

Much of the job polarization debate has focused on the post-1980 period when the automation
of production processes and globalization forces have been at their apex. Yet, Bárány and
Siegel (2018) suggest that labor-market polarization may have well started in the US by
the 1950s.58 A natural question to ask is what drove the US evolution of wages and hours
worked across occupations during the 1950-1980 period which did not witness such strong
biased technical change and globalization. In particular, what role did the income-driven
channel play?
    We explore this question with the calibrated general equilibrium used in Section 4.3. We
follow the same approach to calibrate the model as described in Section 4.2 with 1950 and
1980 as initial and final years. We keep the preference parameters to the values estimated
from Table 3. The taste parameters {s }sS are set to match the 1950 sectoral value-added
shares. The factor intensities and labor shares are set to match those observed in the data.
We calibrate the E -shock so that the model's level of aggregate expenditure per capita and
the Fisher price index match the levels observed in 1980.
    Tables A.9 and A.10 in Appendix A present the results from our simulation. The main
conclusion is that the income-driven channel contributed substantially to the changes in
labor-market outcomes from 1950 to 1980. In particular, it caused an increase in the wage-
bill share of high-skill occupations of 4.5 percentage points, which represents around 40%
of the actual increase observed in the data. This contribution reflects both the increase in
the share of hours worked (by 2.3 percentage points) and in the wage of high- relative to
middle-skill occupations from 1.15 in 1950 to 1.22 in 1980. The income-driven channel also
  57
     Comin et al. (2015) show that the estimated values of {, s }sS are stable across different income levels
both using micro and aggregate data. In particular, they estimate very similar nonhomotheticities parameters
{s }sS using the Indian National Sample Survey and the US Consumer Expenditure Survey.
  58
     Our data are consistent with this observation for relative wages, while for employment we observe a slight
decline in employment shares of low-skill occupations over the 1950-1980 period. As pointed out by Cerina
et al. (2017), this discrepancy is due to the fact that we include all occupations in our sample, while Bárány
and Siegel exclude agricultural occupations.

                                                      40
led to an increase in the wage-bill share of low-skill occupations by 2.5 percentage points,
both through an increase in the share of hours worked (2.4 percentage points) and in the
relative wage which increased from 70% of the wage accrued by middle-skill occupations to
75%.59 Finally, the income-driven channel also contributed to the decline of the share of
hours worked by middle-skill occupations (4.7 percentage points of a total of 7.8), but did
not contribute to the decline in the wage-bill share accrued by middle-skill occupations.


5.2.2    Looking into the future of US labor markets: 2016-2035

We conclude by using our framework to forecast labor-market outcomes in 2035. We calibrate
our model to 2016 using an empirical strategy analogous to our baseline calibration for 1980.
As a result, our calibrated model matches the wage-bill shares, employment shares and
relative wages in 2016.60 We then simulate an E shock so that household expenditures and
the Fisher price index increase by half of the observed increase from 1980 to 2016. While it
seems reasonable to assume that household expenditures will increase over the next fifteen
years, it is less clear what patterns innovation, offshoring and other elements of the biased-
technology shock will follow. For this reason, we keep constant factor intensities, labor shares
and relative sectoral TFP at their 2016 levels.
    Table A.11 in the appendix shows that our model predicts an exacerbation of labor-market
polarization. The model suggests that the wage-bill shares of low- and high-skill occupations
will increase from 8.8% to 9.9% and from 49% to 53%, while the wage-bill share of middle-
skill occupations will decrease from 42% to 37%. This polarization of the distribution of
wage bills will be reflected in both a polarization of hours worked and wage rates across
occupations. The share of hours worked by low- and high-skill occupations will increase
from 12.9% to 14.2% and from 38% to 41%. Similarly, the average wage earned in low- and
high-skill occupations relative to the average wage earned by middle-skill occupations will
increase from 0.8 to 0.84, and from 1.49 to 1.57.
    Comparing these changes with those produced by the income-driven channel from 1980
to 2016, we observe that the forecasted polarization increases more than proportionally rel-
ative to the size assumed for the E shock. This convexity of polarization in the E shock
arises because, as the economy becomes richer, household expenditures concentrate further
on the most expenditure-elastic sectors. This result is connected to our discussion of the
expenditure elasticity formula in Equation (16). There, we showed that, as total household
  59
     In the data, we observe a slight decline in the labor share and wage-bill shares of low-skill occupations.
This is due mostly to the shift term, which reflects the decline in the factor intensity of low-skill occupations
across sectors.
  60
     We obtain very similar predictions if we keep running forward our baseline model with the same shock
rather than recalibrating it to match 2016 exactly.

                                                       41
expenditure rises, some sectors which used to be luxuries become necessities (i.e., the expen-
diture elasticity goes from above to below 1). Moreover, goods that were already necessities
reduce their expenditure elasticities even further. This induces a non-linear effect of income
on expenditure shares whereby expenditure shares only grow in the remaining luxury sectors
and decrease in all other sectors. This is indeed what we observe in our calibrated model.
The expenditure elasticity of the Government sector goes below 1, and it further decreases
for sectors that were already a necessity, such as Agriculture or Manufacturing. Only the
three most expenditure-elastic sectors remain with an expenditure elasticity above 1 by year
2035. Since these are precisely the sectors that are more intensive in low- and high-skill
occupations, the effect of the E shock is exacerbated relative to our baseline period.



6    Conclusion
This paper has explored the role of the income-driven channel in labor-market polarization.
We have developed a general-equilibrium model that allows for heterogeneity in expenditure
elasticities of demand across sectors, endogenous job assignment, time-varying factor inten-
sities, and sector-specific TFP. This last two elements of our model capture standard drivers
of polarization such as factor-biased technical change, routinization and other capital-skill
complementarities, and offshoring. Importantly, we have calibrated the key preference pa-
rameters using micro-level estimates and, hence, we have pinned them down independently
of the aggregate phenomena we have explored with the model.
    Our quantitative exercise has revealed that the income-driven channel has played a sig-
nificant role in the polarization of US labor markets. It has been the main driver of the
increase in the share of low-skill occupations in the total wage bill and total hours worked.
Specifically, the income-driven channel has caused 90% and 64% of the increase in the share
of low-skill occupations in total wage bill and hours worked, 2% and 34% of the decline in
the share of middle-skill occupations in total wage bill and hours worked, and 35% and 28%
of the increase in the share of high-skill occupations in total wage bill and hours worked.
Additionally, the income-driven channel accounts for 46% and 29% of the increases of the
average wage of low- and high-skill occupations relative to middle-skill occupations from 1980
through 2016.
    We have extended our analysis to explore the drivers of polarization in the US during
the 1950-80 period, in European countries during the 1980-2016 period, and to forecast the
evolution of polarization in the US over the next fifteen years. In the first two exercises,
we find that the income-driven channel has played remarkably similar roles for polarization
to the US over the 1980-2016 period.Our simulations for the next fifteen years suggest that

                                             42
polarization coming from the income-driven channel will continue at least at the same pace
as in the past forty years.
    Finally, this paper has taken the evolution of factor intensities and sectoral TFP as exoge-
nous, and focused on identifying the effect of nonhomotheticities on polarization. However,
the direction of innovation is endogenous--as the literature on endogenous technological
change points out. This dichotomy between technological progress and income-driven polar-
ization is, at least in part, fallacious. The direction of innovation is endogenous and responds
to the size of the market. Therefore, in a nonhomothetic world, sectoral TFP and factor
intensities depend on the level of income. Comin et al. (2016) have undertaken part of this
analysis in the context of a growth model. Extending their framework to heterogeneous
occupations may provide new avenues for the income-driven channel to affect labor-market
polarization.




References
Acemoglu, D. (1999): "Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: An Alternative
  Theory and Some Evidence," American Economic Review, 89, 1259­1278.
Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011): Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
  Employment and Earnings, Elsevier, vol. 4 of Handbook of Labor Economics, chap. 12,
  1043­1171.
Aguiar, M. and M. Bils (2015): "Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequal-
  ity?" American Economic Review, 105, 2725­56.
Autor, D. and D. Dorn (2009): "This Job Is "Getting Old": Measuring Changes in Job
  Opportunities Using Occupational Age Structure," American Economic Review, 99, 45­51.
Autor, D. H. and D. Dorn (2013): "The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the
  Polarization of the US Labor Market," American Economic Review, 103, 1553­97.
Autor, D. H., L. F. Katz, and M. S. Kearney (2006): "The Polarization of the U.S.
  Labor Market," American Economic Review, 96, 189­194.
------ (2008): "Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality: Revising the Revisionists," The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 90, 300­323.
Autor, D. H., F. Levy, and R. J. Murnane (2003): "The Skill Content of Recent
  Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  118, 1279­1333.
Bárány, Z. and C. Siegel (2019): "Engines of Sectoral Labor Productivity Growth," 2019
  Meeting Papers 872, Society for Economic Dynamics.

                                              43
Bárány, Z. L. and C. Siegel (2018): "Job Polarization and Structural Change," American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 10, 57­89.
Basco, S. and M. Mestieri (2013): "Heterogeneous trade costs and wage inequality: A
  model of two globalizations," Journal of International Economics, 89, 393­406.
Buera, F. J. and J. P. Kaboski (2012): "The Rise of the Service Economy," American
  Economic Review, 102, 2540­69.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and R. Rogerson (2015): "Skill Biased Structural Change,"
  Working Paper 21165, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, R. Rogerson, and J. Vizcaino (2018): "Skill Biased
  Structural Change," Working paper, CEPR.
Caron, J., T. Fally, and J. Markusen (2020): "Per capita income and the demand for
  skills," Journal of International Economics, 123.
Caselli, F. (1999): "Technological Revolutions," American Economic Review, 89, 78­102.
Cerina, F., A. Moro, and M. Petersen Rendall (2017): "The role of gender in
  employment polarization," LSE Online Documents on Economics 86170, LSE.
Comin, D., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri (2016): "Demand-Pull, Technology-Push,
  and the Sectoral Direction of Innovation," 2016 Meeting Papers 1287, Society for Economic
  Dynamics.
Comin, D. A., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri (2015): "Structural Change with Long-run
  Income and Price Effects," NBER Working Papers 21595, National Bureau of Economic
  Research. Accepted at Econometrica.
Cortes, G. M., N. Jaimovich, and H. E. Siu (2017): "Disappearing routine jobs: Who,
  how, and why?" Journal of Monetary Economics, 91, 69­87.
Cozzi, G. and G. Impullitti (2016): "Globalization and Wage Polarization," The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 98, 984­1000.
Cravino, J. and S. Sotelo (2017): "Trade Induced Structural Change and the Skill
  Premium," NBER Working Papers 23503, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
French, K. (2008): "Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing," Journal of Fi-
  nance, 63, 1537­1573.
Galle, S., A. Rodríguez-Clare, and M. Yi (2017): "Slicing the Pie: Quantifying the
  Aggregate and Distributional Effects of Trade," NBER Working Papers 23737, NBER, Inc.
Goos, M. and A. Manning (2007): "Lousy and Lovely Jobs: The Rising Polarization of
  Work in Britain," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 89, 118­133.
Goos, M., A. Manning, and A. Salomons (2009): "Job Polarization in Europe," Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 99, 58­63.
------ (2014): "Explaining Job Polarization: Routine-Biased Technological Change and


                                            44
  Offshoring," American Economic Review, 104, 2509­2526.
Hanoch, G. (1975): "Production and Demand Models with Direct or Indirect Implicit
  Additivity," Econometrica, 43, 395­419.
Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi (2013): "Two Perspectives on
  Preferences and Structural Transformation," American Economic Review, 103, 2752­2789.
Hsieh, C.-T., E. Hurst, C. I. Jones, and P. J. Klenow (2013): "The Allocation of
  Talent and U.S. Economic Growth," NBER Working Papers 18693, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Inc.
Ikenaga, T. and R. Kambayashi (2016): "Task Polarization in the Japanese Labor Mar-
  ket: Evidence of a Long-Term Trend," Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and
  Society, 55, 267­293.
Jaimovich, N., S. Rebelo, and A. Wong (2019): "Trading down and the business cycle,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 102, 96 ­ 121, carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference Series.
Katz, L. F. and K. M. Murphy (1992): "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
  and Demand Factors," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 35­78.
Krueger, D. and F. Perri (2006): "Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption In-
  equality? Evidence and Theory1," The Review of Economic Studies, 73, 163­193.
Krusell, P., L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. Ríos-Rull, and G. L. Violante (2000): "Capital-
  Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis," Econometrica, 68,
  1029­1053.
Lee, S. Y. and Y. Shin (2017): "Horizontal and Vertical Polarization: Task-Specific Tech-
  nological Change in a Multi-Sector Economy," Working Paper 23283, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.
Leonardi, M. (2015): "The Effect of Product Demand on Inequality: Evidence from the
  United States and the United Kingdom," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  7, 221­47.
Lind, N. and N. Ramondo (2018): "Trade with Correlation," NBER Working Papers
  24380, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
Manning, A. (2004): "We Can Work It Out: the Impact of Technological Change on the
  Demand for Low Skill Workers," Cep discussion papers, CEP, LSE.
Mazzolari, F. and G. Ragusa (2013): "Spillovers from High-Skill Consumption to Low-
  Skill Labor Markets," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 95, 74­86.
Ngai, L. R. and O. Sevinc (2020): "A Multisector Perspective on Wage Stagnation,"
  Working Paper 14855, CEPR.
Schimmelpfennig, A. (1998): "Skill-biased technical change vs. structural change: Insights
  from a new view of the structure of an economy," Kiel Institute Working Papers 868.


                                           45
          Online Appendix for
Income-Driven Labor-Market Polarization
      Diego Comin               Ana Danieli                         Martí Mestieri
    Dartmouth College          Northwestern                FRB Chicago & Northwestern

                                      June 26, 2020



A    Tables and Figures

Table A.1: Correlation of Occupation Wage Bill over Total VA and Expenditure Elasticity

                                          Occupation Skill
                               Year     Low    Middle       High
                               1980     0.57       -0.13     0.92
                               1990     0.51       -0.23     0.93
                               2000     0.52       -0.26     0.92
                               2016     0.51       -0.25     0.93
                     Notes: See discussion in Figure 2 in the main text for
                     data sources.




                                               1
                                Table A.2: Robustness: Simulations by Subperiods

                                         Period 1980-2000                                  Period 2000-2016
                      Change Wage Bill Sh.           Change Employ. Sh.       Change Wage Bill Sh.     Change Employ. Sh.
                          Low    Mid.       High      Low    Mid.    High       Low     Mid.   High    Low    Mid.   High
Data (1980-2016)     0.0023     -0.116     0.113     0.005 -0.077    0.072    0.0185 -0.094 0.075 0.029 -0.088 0.059
Model                0.0023     -0.116     0.114     0.005 -0.079    0.074    0.0185 -0.094 0.075 0.023 -0.071 0.048
Model/Data (%)        100%       100%      100%      100% 102%       102%      100% 100% 100% 79%         81% 82%
Decomposition of Model:
Shift                -0.0053    -0.067     0.083    -0.003 -0.054    0.058    0.0134 -0.072     0.06 0.008 -0.036 0.028
Share                 0.0076    -0.049     0.031     0.008 -0.025    0.016    0.0051 -0.022    0.015 0.015 -0.035 0.02
Share/Model (%)        330%       42%       27%      169%    31%      22%       28%    23%      20% 65%      50% 42%
Contribution of Different Channels:
Share, E               0.0126 0.0002 0.044 0.011 -0.033 0.022 0.0048 -0.003                    0.023 0.004 -0.015 0.011
Share, Biased Tech. -0.0021 -0.052 -0.019 0.0001 0.005 -0.005 -0.0027 -0.017                   -0.02 0.008 -0.014 0.006
Share, E/Model (%)      548%       0% 39% 233%     42%   29%     26%     3%                     31% 19%      21% 22%




                          Table A.3: Robustness: Including Trade Flows to our Baseline

                                                   Change Wage Bill Sh.           Change Empl. Sh.
                                                    Low     Middle    High       Low     Middle       High
                   Data (1980-2016)                0.021    -0.209    0.188     0.034     -0.165      0.131
                   Model                           0.021    -0.209    0.188     0.020     -0.146      0.126
                   Model/Data (%)                  100%      100%     100%       59%        89%        97%
                   Decomposition of Model Outcomes:
                   Shift                0.006 -0.151                  0.130 -0.001        -0.087      0.088
                   Share                0.015 -0.058                  0.058 0.022         -0.060      0.038
                   Share/Model (%)       73%     28%                   31% 107%             39%        30%
                   Contribution of Different Channels to Share:
                   Share, E               0.021 -0.006 0.073                    0.020     -0.057 0.038
                   Share, Biased Tech. -0.012 -0.057 -0.071                     0.001      0.014 -0.015
                   Share, E/Model (%) 102%           3%     39%                  99%        39%    30%




                                                               2
         Table A.4: Robustness: CES Aggregator for Labor

                      Change Wage Bill Sh.     Change Empl. Sh.
                       Low    Middle   High   Low    Middle   High
Data (1980-2016)      0.021    -0.21 0.19 0.034       -0.16    0.13
Model                 0.021    -0.21 0.19 0.024       -0.18    0.16
Model/Data (%)        100%     100% 100% 72%          110%    120%
Decomposition of Model Outcomes:
Shift                0.006   -0.15     0.13 0.006     -0.12    0.12
Share                0.015   -0.06     0.06 0.019     -0.06    0.04
Share/Model (%)       73%     28%      31% 77%         33%     26%
Contribution of Different Channels to Share:
Share, E               0.019     0.00   0.07 0.014    -0.05    0.03
Share, Biased Tech. -0.008      -0.05 -0.06 0.003      0.01   -0.01
Share, E/Model (%)      91%       2% 35% 59%           27%     22%




    Table A.5: Robustness: Only High-skill Workers Hold Capital

                     Change Wage Bill Sh.      Change Empl. Sh.
                      Low     Middle   High   Low    Middle    High
Data (1980-2016)     0.021    -0.209   0.188 0.034   -0.165   0.131
Model                0.021    -0.209   0.188 0.028   -0.151   0.122
Model/Data (%)       100%      100%    100% 82%        91%     94%
Decomposition of Model Outcomes:
Shift                0.006 -0.152      0.129 0.004   -0.089   0.085
Share                0.015 -0.057      0.059 0.024   -0.062   0.038
Share/Model (%)       74%     27%       31% 86%        41%     31%
Contribution of Different Channels to Share:
Share, E               0.018 -0.001 0.063 0.016      -0.048 0.031
Share, Biased Tech. -0.007 -0.056 -0.047 0.006       -0.001 -0.005
Share, E/Model (%)      87%       1%     33% 59%       32%    26%




                                 3
                            Figure A.1: Sectoral Price Growth Data vs. Model, 1980-2016
                    (a) Full Model                          (b) Only E                         (c) Only Biased Technology




             Legend: 1. Agriculture, Mining and Utilities, 2. Arts, Entertainment, Recreation and Food Services, 3.
             Government (excl. Health and Educ.), 4. Health and Education, 5. Manufacturing, 6. Retail, Wholesale
             and Transportation, 7. Construction, 8. Finance, Professional, Information and other services.




                                     Table A.6: Robustness: Results for Relative Wages

                                1980-2000            2000-2016               Trade                CES            K to High-Skill
                     Year    wL /wM     wH /wM    wL /wM    wH /wM       wL /wM   wH /wM    wL /wM    wH /wM     wL /wM      wH /wM
Data                 1980       0.74       1.24      0.79       1.44       0.74      1.24      0.74       1.24        0.74     1.24
                     2016       0.79       1.44       0.8       1.53        0.8      1.53       0.8       1.53         0.8     1.53
Model                1980       0.74       1.24      0.79       1.44       0.74      1.24      0.74       1.24        0.74     1.24
                     2016       0.78       1.42      0.86       1.58       0.93      1.56      0.86       1.57        0.86     1.57
Contribution of Different Channels:
Only E                          0.77       1.29       0.8       1.46       0.79      1.33      0.78        1.3        0.78     1.31
Only Biased Tech.               0.76       1.38      0.84       1.55       0.88      1.45      0.81       1.48        0.81     1.47
Only E/Model (%)                63%        25%       21%        18%        26%       31%       38%        23%         38%      26%




                                                                4
Table A.7: Shift-Share Analysis of the Wage Bill Change for European Countries, 1980-2016

                     Low-Skill                          Middle-Skill                     High-Skill
                                      Share                             Share                             Share
          Total    Shift    Share     Total
                                                Total   Shift   Share   Total
                                                                                Total   Shift    Share    Total

  AUT     0.013     0.001   0.013     0.96      -0.17   -0.15   -0.03   0.15     0.16   0.11      0.05    0.29
  GER     0.014     0.009   0.005     0.36      -0.19   -0.16   -0.03   0.16     0.18   0.14      0.03    0.19
  ESP     0.022    -0.002   0.024     1.10      -0.18   -0.16   -0.02   0.12     0.16   0.10      0.06    0.35
  FIN     0.016     0.002   0.014     0.88      -0.19   -0.12   -0.07   0.35     0.17   0.10      0.07    0.39
  FRA     0.021     0.005   0.017     0.78      -0.19   -0.13   -0.06   0.31     0.17   0.13      0.04    0.23
  ITA     0.017     0.003   0.015     0.85      -0.17   -0.10   -0.07   0.42     0.16   0.14      0.02    0.11
  NLD     0.010     0.006   0.004     0.37      -0.18   -0.17   -0.01   0.06     0.17   0.12      0.04    0.27
  UK      0.023     0.015   0.008     0.35      -0.21   -0.14   -0.08   0.36     0.19   0.15      0.04    0.19

                                                                                      c
Notes: Data for 2016 comes from EUKLEMS 2019 with occupation factors shares js          2016 computed from EU
Labour Force Survey LFS micro dataset. Data for 1980 comes from EUKLEMS 2012, and occupation factor
shares in 1980 are computed taking the occupation factor shares from 2016 and assuming that their growth
                                             c                       U S,1980-2016
rate is the same as that of the US. That is, js 1980 = js2016 /(1 + gjs            ).




            Table A.8: Employment Shift-Share for European Countries, 1995-2016

                      Low-Skill                             Middle-Skill                        High-Skill
                                        Share                               Share                                 Share
          Total     Shift     Share     Total
                                                  Total     Shift   Share   Total
                                                                                    Total   Shift     Share       Total

 AUT       0.010 -0.003       0.013 1.30          -0.10     -0.06   -0.05   0.46     0.09 0.06           0.03 0.37
 BEL       0.036 0.014        0.023 0.62          -0.07     -0.01   -0.06   0.84     0.04 0.00           0.04 1.04
 GER       0.005 -0.007       0.012 2.52          -0.09     -0.04   -0.05   0.56     0.09 0.05           0.04 0.45
 DNK       0.003 -0.023       0.026 8.62          -0.11     -0.03   -0.08   0.70     0.11 0.06           0.05 0.48
 EL        0.054 0.019        0.034 0.64          -0.02      0.07   -0.09   4.07    -0.03 -0.09          0.06 -1.82
 ESP       0.038 0.001        0.037 0.98          -0.09     -0.01   -0.08   0.86     0.06 0.01           0.04 0.78
 FRA       0.015 -0.014       0.029 1.87          -0.16     -0.12   -0.05   0.30     0.15 0.13           0.02 0.13
 IE        0.022 0.006        0.016 0.74          -0.15     -0.08   -0.07   0.44     0.12 0.08           0.05 0.39
 IT        0.011 -0.021       0.032 2.89          -0.12     -0.05   -0.06   0.54     0.11 0.08           0.03 0.30
 LUX      -0.009 -0.019       0.010 -1.17         -0.20     -0.10   -0.10   0.49     0.21 0.12           0.09 0.43
 NLD       0.009 -0.003       0.011 1.32          -0.07     -0.01   -0.06   0.85     0.06 0.01           0.05 0.79
 PT       -0.006 -0.036       0.030 -4.78         -0.10     -0.02   -0.08   0.77     0.11 0.06           0.05 0.45
 UK        0.023 -0.002       0.025 1.10          -0.10     -0.03   -0.07   0.66     0.08 0.04           0.04 0.53

Notes: Data on hours and wages from the EU LFS and EU SILC microdata sets. See description in Appendix
B.3 for details.




                                                        5
Table A.9: Backtracking the US Economy, 1950-1980, Wage Bill and Employment Shares

                                      Change Wage Bill Sh.           Change Employ. Sh.
                                  Low          Middle High         Low          Middle   High
        Data                          -0.007   -0.106    0.113     -0.011       -0.078      0.089
        Model                         -0.007   -0.106    0.113     -0.006       -0.067      0.073
        Model/Data(%)                  100%     100%     100%        57%          86%        82%
        Decomposition of Model Outcomes:
        Shift              -0.0161 -0.092                0.080 -0.018           -0.035      0.054
        Share               0.0091 -0.014                0.034 0.012            -0.032      0.020
        Share/Model(%)      -130%     13%                 30% -195%               47%        27%
        Contribution of Different Channels to Share:
        Share, E               0.0252   0.009 0.045 0.024                       -0.047 0.023
        Share, biased tech    -0.0123 -0.048 -0.044 -0.007                       0.019 -0.013
        Share E/Model (%) -360%           -8%    40% -393%                        71%    32%


         Table A.10: Backtracking the US Economy, 1950-1980, Relative Wages

                                                 Year    wL /wM        wH /wM
                        Data                     1950       0.7          1.15
                                                 1980       0.74         1.24
                        Model                    1950       0.7          1.15
                                                 1980       0.72         1.35
                        Contribution of Different Channels:
                        Only E               1980     0.75               1.22
                        Only Biased Tech. 1980        0.67               1.27
                        Only E/Model (%)             250%                38%


                       Table A.11: Forecast of 2035 US Labor Market

                                          Wage Bill Share          Employment Shares          Relative Wages
                               Year    Low     Middle   High     Low     Middle     High     wL /wM    wH /wM
Data                           2016    0.088     0.42    0.49    0.129       0.49    0.38       0.80     1.49
Model                          2016    0.088     0.42    0.49    0.129       0.49    0.38       0.80     1.49
Model/Data (%)                         100%     100%    100%     100%       100%    100%       100%     100%
Model (E shock)          2035          0.099     0.37    0.53    0.142       0.45    0.41       0.84     1.57
Model 2035/Data 2016 (%)               113%      89%    108%     110%        92%    106%       105%     105%
Notes: The table reports outcomes after simulating an E shock that generates half of the magnitude of
the baseline increase in expenditure and Fisher price index.


                                                  6
B       Data Description
In this section we briefly detail our data sources. We take it from previous work, and thus,
we provide relatively brief descriptions and point the interested reader to the original papers
for further details.


B.1     Labor-Market Outcomes
We follow Acemoglu and Autor (2011) in the construction of the baseline data on occupations,
wages, and employment shares. Here we provide a brief overview and refer the reader to the
original work by Acemoglu and Autor for the details. The data for employment comes
from IPUMS USA and it includes the decennial censuses between 1980-2000 (with 10 years
intervals) and annual data from the American Community Survey (ACS) between 2000-2016.
The sample is restricted to individuals aged 16-64 who were employed in the previous year
and are assigned to a known occupation (i.e., not n/a or unemployed). We further restrict the
sample to exclude the top and bottom 5% of the hourly wage distribution. Wage data comes
from the Current Population Survey (CPS) to compute wages per occupation. We follow
Acemlogu and Autor on this choice because the data in the ACS has only intervals starting in
2007. Occupations and industries are classified based on the 1990 Census Bureau classification
scheme, which gives a consistent classification for all sample years. These industries are
mapped to the BEA industry classification through mutual mapping to the NAICS codes.
For each BEA industry, we compute the share of individuals within each occupation.
    Our occupation classification is also taken from Acemoglu and Autor (2011). They di-
vide the 382 original occupations into 4 broader categories that are characterized by their
skill level: (1) managerial, professional and technical occupations; (2) sales, clerical and ad-
ministrative support occupations; (3) production, craft, repair and operative occupations;
and (4) service occupations. The first group is characterized by high-skill occupations, the
second and third groups are characterized by middle-skill occupations and the last group is
characterized by low-skill occupations. They measure skill by the average hourly wage of
individuals in the occupation in 1980 where the mean wage in each occupation is calculated
using workers' hours of annual labor supply times the Census sampling weights.1


B.2     Construction of Household Value-added Consumption Data
We start from household expenditure from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). We use
data from the 2000-2001 period for our baseline results, and report estimates for 2000-2006
    1
    Our results on the negative correlation between occupation shares in middle-skill workers and income
elasticity parameters are robust to decomposing middle-skill between groups (2) and (3).

                                                   7
as a robustness check.2 We follow the procedure described in Aguiar and Bils (2015) to clean
the data. We restrict our sample to urban households. We drop households if they report
spending less than 100 dollars in food per individual in the household over a three month
time span, they have negative total or food consumption expenditure, total income is reported
incomplete, they have not responded to all (four quarterly) interviews, income is below 50%
of minimum wage, or if they earn money but do not work. To mitigate measurement error
concerns, we drop the top and bottom 5% households according to their total income (after
taxes) and we winsorize top and bottom 5% sectoral expenditures.3 The only difference from
Aguiar and Bils is that we keep all households with age of the reference person above 18.
This allows us to capture the consumption of the elderly.
    We then follow the procedure described in Buera et al. (2015) and convert the final
good expenditures reported in the CEX into value-added expenditures using the BEA's 2000
input-output tables.4 We do so by matching the finest level of expenditure categories in the
CEX (called UCCs) to each sector in the BEA table. We start from the correspondence
used in Buera et al. (2015), which takes the BLS crosswalk from UCC codes to PCE lines
(supplemented with some expert judgement).5 Then, as in Buera et al. (2015), we use the
BEA crosswalk from PCE (table 245) to industries in the Input/Output table. For the few
cases in which there are UCCs from 2000-2006 missing from their original list, we make the
assignment to PCE lines based on our judgement. We attach the correspondence in the
authors' websites. Following Comin et al. (2015), we also use sectoral, regional urban price
series provided by the BLS.6
   The Input-Output BEA sector codes in the Input-Output table that correspond to our
groupings are:

       ·   6 for Education and Health Care, plus state and local expenditures in health and
           education. More specifically, we add the lines in the detail of the BEA value-added
           table "U.Value Added by Industry" "State and local government educational services"
           (line 185) and "State and local government hospitals and health services" (line 186).
   2
     We have experimented with different time frame periods between 1999 and 2007. The estimates are very
stable across subsamples. Aguiar and Bils (2015) also report a similar finding in their estimated income
elasticities.
   3
     Total income after taxes is computed as in Aguiar and Bils (2015).
   4
     We have also experimented using the detailed 2007 table, which contains over four hundred industries
rather than sixty-nine. We obtain similar results. This exercise allows us to unpack industries such us "325
Chemical Products" into pharmaceuticals and the rest.
   5
     This correspondence is available from the authors' website.
   6
     When possible, we create a household-specific Stone price index for each sector from more disaggregated
possible price series categories that belong to each sector. We then also convert final expenditure prices to
value-added prices by assuming a Cobb-Douglas production function and perfect competition, such that the
log price of a sector is the input-share weighted mean of log-prices.

                                                     8
       The BEA Table does not provide a break-down for Federal expenditure in Education
       and Health, and we do not include it.

   ·   7 for Arts, Entertainment, Recreation and Food Services.

   ·   G for Government (excluding the lines corresponding to state and local education and
       health care value added mentioned above).

   ·   FIRE, PROF, 51, 81 for Finance, Professional, Information and other services (exclud-
       ing gov't), excluding real estate (line 129, which includes housing and other real estate)
       in the BEA value-added table U.Value Added by Industry.

   ·   22, 23, 31G for Manufacturing, Mining and Utilities.

   ·   42, 44RT, 48T for Retail, Wholesale Trade and Transportation.

   ·   21 for Construction and Real Estate (line 129 in BEA Table U.Value Added by Indus-
       try).

   ·   11 for Agriculture.

B.2.1    Reduced Form Exercise: Comparison with Aguiar and Bils (2015)

We want to mention two important differences from Aguiar and Bils (2015). First, we discuss
the mapping of UCCs to Health expenditures, which is different in Buera et al. (2015) and
Aguiar and Bils (2015). Second, we discuss the role of the approximation to the left-hand-side
that Aguiar and Bils take as baseline.

Mapping of Health Expenditures Aguiar and Bils (2015) take the expenditure group-
ings for health and education from the CEX groupings. Instead, as we have discussed, we
follow Buera et al. (2015) and map each expenditure category at the finest level of reporting
in the CEX (called UCC) to different PCE lines and, ultimately, different NIPA lines. This
does not make a difference for most of expenditure categories (e.g., education), but it makes
a difference for health.
    Health services in our data are composed of the categories that are mapped to lines
starting with 62 in the BEA Input Output table (or lines 60 to 67 in NIPA table 2.4.5).
These UCCs are: 340906 Care for elderly, invalids, handicapped, etc. (in the home), 560110
Physicians' services, 560210 Dental services, 560330 Lab tests, x-rays, 560400 Service by
professionals other than physicians, 570110 Hospital room (thru 2005 Q1), 570111 Hospital
room and service (introduced 2005 Q2), 570210 Hospital service other than room (thru 2005

                                                9
Q1), 570220 Care in convalescent or nursing home, 570230 Other medical care services,
570230 Other medical care services, 570240 Medical care incl. in homeowners expenses,
570901 Rental of medical equipment, 570903 Rental of supportive/convalescent equipment,
571230 Other medical care services, 572230 Other medical care services.
   Instead, Aguiar and Bils follow the CEX grouping for "Health." This grouping contains
UCCs from 540000 to 580902. This grouping includes expenditures in prescription drugs
and medical supplies (UCC's 540000-550340, 570901, 570903) and Health Insurance (UCCs
580110-580902) as part of "Health." Instead, we match the UCC's corresponding prescription
drugs to "Pharmaceutical and other medical products" (lines 40 and 41 in NIPA table 2.4.5)
and health insurance to "Health Insurance" (line 93 in NIPA table 2.4.5). We are also in-
cluding UCC "340906 Home health care" as a health service (which is not included in Aguiar
and Bils).


Approximation of the log-ratio in the left-hand-side of Equation (19) Aguiar and
Bils (2015) present their theory and justification for their estimating equation by having on
the left-hand side of the regression ln(xhst /x¯st ) (Equation 4 in their paper). However, in their
empirical analysis, they substitute ln(xhst /x  ¯st ) by its first-order approximation around x¯st ,
(xhst - x¯st )/x
               ¯st . They justify their choice because the presence of zeros in the data (e.g., for
education alone zeros account for around 50% of the observations). However, we do not have
zeros in our data because it is (1) more aggregated (eight sectors rather than twenty) and (2)
the input-output matrix makes it so that there is always some (albeit small) consumption
of all eight industries (e.g., education and health is an input to other sectors and thus all
households have positive value-added consumption of it).
    Since we do not find a problem of zeroes arising in our value-added measure of consump-
tion, we proceed with the estimation of the exact equation that has on the left-hand-side
ln(xhst /x
         ¯st ). If we run our regression with the same approximation in the left-hand-side as
Aguiar and Bils, we find similar coefficients. However, for the categories in which there is
more dispersion in expenditures (which tend to be the more expenditure-elastic categories),
this first-order approximation becomes worse and results in smaller estimates of the expen-
diture elasticity. This is especially true for Health and Education, in which we find that the
coefficient can drop by almost 30%.


B.2.2    Demand Estimation: Robustness Checks

Our baseline estimation uses imputed consumption value-added for health, education and
finance. In column (2) of Table B.1 we report the estimates that we obtain without the
imputation. The key difference is that the nonhomotheticity parameter for Education and

                                                10
Health Care increases from 1.80 to 2.08. This implies an increase from 1.59 to 1.75 in the
implied expenditure elasticity of the average household. The rest of the parameters are very
similar. In particular, the imputation for Finance is not quantitatively important, with the
parameter estimate changing from 1.39 in our baseline to 1.36. Columns (3) and (4) of Table
B.1 show that the estimated parameters are similar to our baseline if we remove year-round
fixed effects and use the within year variation to also identify expenditure elasticities, or if
we extend our sample period from 2000 to 2006.7


Details on the Imputation Procedure We start discussing the imputation of education
expenditures. We use expenditure per pupil at the school district-level for years 2000-2001
from the Common Core Database. For the median household income at the county level,
we use the IPUMS-ACS. For counties with missing median household income, we impute
the state median household income. We merge school districts to counties and regress log-
expenditure per pupil on log household income with state fixed effects and a time trend.
We then use the predicted values from the regression to impute the value of education of a
student in K-12. We use the family files from the CEX to find out the number of children in
each household in K-12 age. We impute the expenditure according to the number of children
in K-12 age if the household does not report paying any elementary or high-school tuition.
We impute it to UCC code 670210 "elementary and high-school tuition."
    For Medicare and Medicaid expenditures we follow an analogous procedure. We use
data in the Dartmouth Atlas on average expenditure per patient by hospital referral region
(these data were generously shared and described to us by Douglas and Betsy Staiger and
Jonathan Skinner). We then merge these information to county household average income.
Since hospital referral regions do not coincide with counties, we use population in the referral
region and county as a weight for computing the average expenditure per county. After this
step, we proceed with the imputation in the same way as for education. Once we have a
measure of expenditures per person in a given county, we use information in the CEX on the
number of household members under Medicaid and Medicare to make the imputation. In this
case, we assign the expenditure to UCC 580901, which corresponds to "Medicare payments"
(there is no analogous Medicaid payments in the CEX interview files until 2017).
    Finally, we also explore the role of financial services that may potentially be underreported
in the CEX. In particular, expenses in fund management that are subtracted from the fund
payout appear to be missing in the CEX. For this reason, we proceed by assuming an expense
ratio of 90 basis points over the year in all funds owned by a household and we evenly spread
   7
    The reason why we start in 2000 and not earlier is that this is the start for disaggregated sectoral city
price indices from the BLS.

                                                     11
           Table B.1: Estimated Demand and Income Elasticities: Robustness Checks

                                                       Demand Parameters                    Red. Form
                                                    (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)
       Nonhomotheticity Parameters s                                                      Inc. Elast. s
       Education and Health Care                   1.80      2.08      1.93      2.15   1.59         1.75
                                                 (0.07)    (0.13)    (0.06)    (0.14) (0.06)       (0.05)
       Arts, Entertainment,                        1.39   1.36         1.42      1.51       1.31     1.25
       Recreation and Food Services              (0.03) (0.04)       (0.03)    (0.06)     (0.03)   (0.03)
       Finance, Professional, Information,   1.26            1.25      1.26   1.21          1.29     1.25
       other services (excl. gov't)        (0.02)          (0.03)    (0.02) (0.03)        (0.01)   (0.01)
       Government1                                 1.00      1.00      1.00      1.00       1.08     1.07
                                                     (-)       (-)       (-)       (-)    (0.01)   (0.01)
       Manufacturing                               0.69      0.71   0.61         0.67   0.91         0.92
                                                 (0.03)    (0.03) (0.03)       (0.04) (0.01)       (0.01)
       Retail, Wholesale Trade and                 0.61      0.66      0.55      0.61       0.87     0.88
       Transportation                            (0.03)    (0.04)    (0.03)    (0.05)     (0.01)   (0.01)
       Construction                                0.48      0.49      0.44      0.47   0.80         0.80
                                                 (0.04)    (0.06)    (0.04)    (0.06) (0.02)       (0.02)
       Agriculture                                 0.30      0.35     .21 0      0.23   0.65         0.66
                                                 (0.06)    (0.08)    (0.05)    (0.09) (0.02)       (0.01)
       Elasticity of Substitution                  0.45      0.43      0.53   0.58
                                                 (0.05)    (0.08)    (0.04) (0.06)
       Region & Round FE                            Y         Y         N         N            Y       Y
       Region & Year FE                             Y         Y         Y         Y            Y       Y
       Sample Years                              00-01     00-01     00-01     00-06       00-01   00-01
       Imputed Expenditures                          Y         N         Y         Y           Y       N
                                                                                   1
       Notes: Standard errors clustered at the household level in parentheses.         : The Government
       nonhomotheticity parameter is normalized to 1.



the expense over the 4 quarters (French, 2008).8 These funds are pension funds (including
amount of money placed in a self-employed retirement plan) and the estimated market value
of all stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and others such as securities. These expenses are imputed
in UCC 710110 "Finance charges excluding mortgage and vehicle."

   8
    The Investment Company Insitute and Lipper report that the average expense ratios for bond funds in
2000 were 76 basis points, 89 for hybrid funds and 99 for equity funds. We take 90 which is a rough average
between the three. In their study, they also document a substantial decline in these expense ratios over time.
In 2015 they were 54, 77 and 68.

                                                     12
B.3         European Countries Data
We use microdata from the LFS and SILC in order to estimate the wages, hours worked
and implied sector intensities {jstc }j ={L,M,H },sS ,cC (where C denotes the set of countries).
Specifically, we use the LFS data to calculate the hours worked by each skill level in each
sector. In order to do so, we map the NACE Rev 1.1 and 2 to our sector classification
using the NACE-NAICS correspondence tables provided by Eurostat. For the occupation
classification, we keep the same classification as high-, middle- and low-skill as for the US.
We focus on individuals that are employed and are not family workers between the ages
16-64. Next, we use the SILC data to calculate the mean wage for each skill type across all
industries. We use the same sample restrictions and skill classification. We calculate the wage
per hour by dividing the monthly or annual labor income, depending on data availability, by
the hours worked in the relevant period. For this purpose we use usual weekly hours worked,
multiplied by number of months worked in a year and assuming individuals worked 4 weeks
in each month since these data are not directly provided. To make sure the annual labor
income was earned while working in the current occupation, we further restrict the sample
to individuals that did not switch work since the previous year.
    For total labor compensation share and value-added share in each sector we use EU
KLEMS data. Since there is no single version of EU KLEMS that spans the 1980 and 2016
(except for France), we merge the EU KLEMS 2012 and 2019 versions. We compute these
ratios using sectoral value added, total value added, and total labor compensation.9 Finally,
we aggregate the sectors (which are originally given in different revisions of the ISIC codes)
into the same 8 main sectors as we do for the US baseline. In this case, we can impute all
public expenditures in health and education.



C          Detailed Derivations of Production and Demand for
           Section 4

C.1         Production
A representative firm in each sector produces final output according to
                                             st
               1-st 
    Yst = Ast Kst                        ~ jst 
                                         X        ,     where                  jst = 1,   st  (0, 1),   (1)
                                           jst
                            j {L,M,H }                            j {L,M,H }


    9
        We use the variable LAB, which is present in both datasets.

                                                       13
and X~ jst denotes the number of efficiency units of labor employed in occupation j sector
s, and year t. This setting is identical to that of Section 2.1, except that the production
function is expressed in terms of efficiency units rather than total hours. Cost minimization
from the representative firm implies that

                                      w   ~ jst = st jst pst Yst ,
                                      ~jt X                                                   (2)
                                  (rt +  )Kst = (1 - st ) pst Yst ,                           (3)

where w  ~jt denotes wage per efficiency unit, and the rental rate is equal to the interest rate,
rt , plus the depreciation rate  . Aggregating across labor inputs within the same sector, we
find that st corresponds to the labor share of that sector,

                                                                  w   ~ jst
                                                                  ~jt X
                                               j {L,M,H }
                                     st =                                       .             (4)
                                                              pst Yst

In a competitive equilibrium, the price of the sectoral output coincides with the unit cost of
production,
                                                  jst st
                                             w~jt
                                                                     1-st
                                 j ={L,M,H } jst             rt + 
                  pst = A- st
                             1                                            .                (5)
                                         st                 1 - st

Next, we use the first order condition across sectors to compute total factor payments. Ag-
gregating efficiency units of the same occupation across sectors and introducing the notation
        S
~ jt 
X             ~ jst , we find that the total compensation for workers employed in occupation j is
              X
        s=1

                                                     S
                                       w   ~ jt =
                                       ~jt X                  ^ jst pst Yst ,                 (6)
                                                    s=1


where ^ jst  st jst . Similarly, the total payments to capital owners are

                                                    S
                                  (rt +  )Kt =            (1 - st ) pst Yst .                 (7)
                                                    s=1




C.2      Household preferences, endowments and demographics

Each household maximizes utility Uht defined by the nonhomothetic CES aggregator
                                                          1      -1
                                               s
                                             (Uht s )  chst
                                                         
                                                            = 1,                              (8)
                                        sS


                                                     14
subject to the household budget constraint Eht                   s   pst chst . Household's h optimal demand
for good s is
                                                              
                                             Eht                  s
                                  chst = s                       Uht ,                                   (9)
                                             pst
                                          1-                        s 1-
and the associated expenditure function, Eht =                   s Uht pst .
                                                            sS
    As we have discussed in Section 3.1, we cardinalize preferences normalizing one taste
parameter s = 1 and one income elasticity parameter s = 1 for some s. This cardinalization
defines a household-specific real consumption index Cht  Eht
                                                         Pht
                                                             and corresponding price index
Pht
                                                                                   1
                                                                                  1-
                                               - s                1- 1-s
                          Pht =           s p1
                                             st             xhst Eht                   ,               (10)
                                     sS


where xhst  pst chst /Eht denotes the expenditure share in sector s, and s  (1 -  )/s .
Note that given knowledge of the demand parameters {s , s ,  }sS , sectoral prices {pst }sS ,
and household expenditures and expenditure shares, {xhst , Eht }, we can use Equation (10)
to obtain the household-specific price index Pht . Then, the aggregate demand for sectoral
output s can be obtained by integrating over the demand of all households,
                                               1
                                                       +s - -s
                                  Cst =            s Eht pst Pht dh.                                   (11)
                                           0



D      Calibration of Model Parameters
To calibrate our model parameters for 1980, we need to specify the values of {s , s ,  }sS ,
 , sectoral technologies {s1980 , s1980 , As1980 }sS , initial capital stock per capita K1980 ,10 and
the distribution of productivity parameters in each occupation {j }j ={L,M,H } .
   First, we set the values of  and {s }sS to the estimates we obtained in Table 3. Second,
we set the values of {sj 1980 , s1980 }sS to match the share of each occupation in the sectoral
wage bill and the wage-bill share in sectoral value added for all sectors

                                               j {L,M,H }   wj 1980 Xjs1980
                                s1980 =                                       ,                        (12)
                                                       V As1980

and
                                                   wj 1980 Xjs1980
                              js1980 =                                     .                           (13)
                                               j {L,M,H } wj 1980 Xj s1980

  10
    Since the production functions are homogeneous of degree one, we define all aggregate and sectoral
variables in per capita terms.

                                                      15
   Third, we set the depreciation rate  to 10% per year. Given the interest rate, which we
measure by the lending rate from FRED,11 sectoral value added and the capital shares in
each sector, we calculate the aggregate stock of capital as

                                                             sS (1   - s1980 )V As1980
                          K1980 =         Ks1980 =                                     .                 (14)
                                     sS
                                                                     r1980 + 

    The fourth step consists in calibrating the parameters in the distribution of efficiency
units {j }j ={L,M,H } . We assume that efficiency units are drawn from independently dis-
tributed lognormal distributions with mean and variance of the log-efficiency unit denoted
by {µj , j }j ={L,M,H } . Since the definition of an efficiency unit of each type of labor (L, M
and H ) is indeterminate, the average level of efficiency units in each occupation µj is a free
parameter that can be normalized without loss of generality. Equivalently, given the level
of value added across sectors and the factor intensities, a renormalization of µj by a factor
 will result in a reduction in the wage per efficiency unit of occupation j , w  ~j , by the same
amount.12 Building on this property, we set the values of the mean of the efficiency unit
parameters {µj }j ={L,M,H } to a common level µ1980 . We discuss below how we calibrate this
value.
    The wage-bill share of occupation j in the total wage bill is given by the right hand side
of Equation (16)

                                             w
                                             ~j 1980                                  wj
                         W Bjdata
                                             ~L1980
                                             w          0
                                                              fj (y )      i=j   Fi   wi
                                                                                         y   dy
                              1980
                               data
                                      =        w
                                               ~j 1980                                  w
                                                                                        ~j
                                                                                                    ,    (16)
                           W B                                   fj (y )     i=j Fi          y dy
                         j     j 1980
                                             j w
                                               ~L1980        0                          wi


where fi and Fi denote the pdf and the cdf of a lognormal distribution. These functions
are fully characterized by {µj , j }j ={L,M,H } . Given those, the RHS of (16) depends only
on the relative wages per efficiency unit. This observation implies that for any given set
of parameters that characterize the distribution of productivities across occupations, the
requirement that the model matches the observed relative wage bills in 1980 uniquely pins
down the equilibrium relative wage per efficiency unit (w  ~j 1980 /w
                                                                    ~L1980 ). The next step is to
use the observed relative wage per hour in 1980 to calibrate the variance of the distribution
  11
     The interest rate values in the baseline exercise are 15% and 3.5% for 1980 and 2016, respectively. The
interest values for the extensions are 4.8% and 9.2% for 1950 and 2000, respectively.
  12
     To see this, note that the demand for efficiency units of occupation j is

                                           ~ jt w
                                           X    ~jt =        ^ jst V Ast .                               (15)
                                                         s


Hence, for given factor intensity and sectoral value added, an increase in µj increases X~ jt , but leaves un-
changed the wage bill accrued by occupation j , leading to an inversely proportional change in w ~jt .

                                                        16
of productivity across occupations. Given {w      ~Lt }j ={L,M } and {µj }j ={L,M,H } , the average
                                             ~jt /w
wage per hour in occupation j relative to occupation L can be expressed as indicated in the
far RHS expression of (17):

                                               w        ~ j 1980
                                                ~j 1980 X                         ~ j 1980
                                                                                  X
                                   data
                                  wj 1980           j 1980            w
                                                                      ~j 1980     j 1980
                                   data
                                          =             ~ L1980
                                                                    =             ~ L1980
                                                                                             .        (17)
                                  wL1980       w
                                               ~L1980 X               w
                                                                      ~L1980      X
                                                    L1980                         L1980


The first factor in the far RHS expression is the relative wage per efficiency unit which, given
the distribution of the wage bill across occupations and {µj }j ={L,M,H } , only depends on the
variance of productivity {j }j ={L,M,H } . The second term is the average number of efficiency
units per worker in occupation j relative to L. For the case of H , in our model this is equal
to
                                                    w
                                                    ~H
                           X~ H 1980   y Y
                                            yFH y, w~M
                                                       y, . . . , w
                                                                  w
                                                                   ~H
                                                                   ~L
                                                                      y dy
                                     =                                     ,                (18)
                            H 1980          F   y, w
                                                   ~H
                                                      y, . . . , w~H
                                                                     y  dy
                                        y Y   H    w
                                                   ~M            w~L

where FH denotes the partial derivative with respect to H -draws of the joint cumulative dis-
tribution.13 The expression for other skill levels is analogous. Given {w       ~Lt }j ={L,M,H } and
                                                                           ~jt /w
{µj }j ={L,M,H } , this term also depends only on {j }j ={L,M,H } . By requiring that the model
matches the average wage per hour of occupations M and H relative to L observed in 1980,
we can pin down two of the three variances of productivity across occupations. In other
words, we can match the observed wage bill distribution and relative wages per hour by
setting the relative variance of productivity across occupations. Accordingly, we normalize

  13
    Let F (H , M , L ) be the CDF of the joint distribution of the efficiency units across occupations. The
density of a household choosing occupation H is

                                                         w
                                                         ~H            w
                                                                       ~H
                                             FH     y,      y, . . . ,    y ,                          (19)
                                                         w
                                                         ~M            w
                                                                       ~L
             F (H ,M ,L )
where FH =      H         .   Thus, the share of households choosing occupation H is

                                                                w
                                                                ~H            w
                                                                              ~H
                                    H =            FH      y,      y, . . . ,    y dy                  (20)
                                             y Y                w
                                                                ~M            w
                                                                              ~L

where Y denotes the support of the distribution for H . The supply of efficiency units in occupation H is

                                    ~ jt =                       w
                                                                 ~H            w
                                                                               ~H
                                    X              yFH      y,      y, . . . ,    y dy                 (21)
                                             y Y                 w
                                                                 ~M            w
                                                                               ~L

and the wage bill accrued by workers in occupation H is

                                   ~ jt = w                            w
                                                                       ~H            w
                                                                                     ~H
                                w
                                ~H X      ~H             yFH      y,      y, . . . ,    y dy           (22)
                                                   y Y                 w
                                                                       ~M            w
                                                                                     ~L

Analogous expressions to (20), (21), and (22) hold for the other occupations.

                                                             17
L = 1 and set {j }j ={M,H } to match the 1980 relative wage per hour. Note that, since
we match the relative wage per hour and the distribution of wage bills across occupations,
automatically we also match the distribution of hours across occupations.
    Fifth, given the wage per efficiency unit for each occupation, the rental cost of capital
and the factor shares, we can calibrate the sectoral TFP levels As1980 to match the sectoral
prices in 1980 which in the model are given by equation (5). Note, however, that we have
not yet determined how to pin down the level of efficiency wages for low-skill occupations
w
~L1980 . We will discuss this in step seven of the calibration below.
    The sixth step in our calibration procedure is to set the values of the taste parame-
ters {s }S
         s=1 to match the 1980 sectoral shares in value added. To do this, note first that
household's h total income is equal to its labor income plus its capital income

                               h                        h
                              E1980 =      max {w
                                                ~j 1980 j 1980 } + r1980 K1980 .                               (23)
                                         j {L,M,H }


                           h
Given the distribution of E1980 , the share of sector s value added in aggregate value added is

                                                                                   -                    +s
           ps1980 Ys1980   ps1980      ch ({s }, E1980
                                      h s1980
                                                  h
                                                       , {ps1980 })dh           p1
                                                                                 s1980    
                                                                                         h s
                                                                                                h
                                                                                               E1980          h
                                                                                                             P1980 dh
xs1980   =               =                                                  =
              E1980                               E1980                                        E1980
                                                                                      (24)
where     ch
           s1980 (.)
               is household h real consumption of sector s, and                   h
                                                                                 P1980
                                                                    is the household-level
price index for 1980.14 Given aggregate expenditure E1980 , we set {s }Ss=1 so that xs1980
matches the BEA shares of sectoral value added in 1980.
   The seventh step consists in setting µ1980 so that the level of aggregate expenditure per
capita in the model (26) matches the BEA level of aggregate nominal value added in 1980,

                                 E1980 =           ~ h dh + (r1980 +  )K1980 .
                                                 ~hX
                                                 w                                                             (26)
                                             h


Note that, by increasing µ2016 , we also change the level of efficiency wage w~Lt . As we discussed
in detail in footnote 12, conditional on the total wage bill of low-skill occupations, there is a
one-to-one relationship between the level of efficiency units supplied X  ~ L2016 and the efficency
wage w~Lt .
       To calibrate the model for 2016, we assume that the preference parameters {s , s ,  }sS ,
  14
       The corresponding expression is
                                                                                    1
                                                                                   1-
                                                -      s                  1- 1-s
                             h
                            P1980 =        s p 1
                                               s1980       xh      h
                                                            s1980 E1980                                         (25)
                                      sS


where xh
       s1980 is the share of sector s in its expenditure


                                                           18
the depreciation rate  , and the dispersion in the distributions of occupational productivities
{j }j ={L,M,H } do not vary from their 1980 values. We allow changes in the values of the
factor intensities, {sj 2016 , s2016 }, the (constant) average productivity in each occupation µ,
the sectoral, {As2016 }sS , and aggregate, A2016 , TFP levels, and the capital stock per capita,
K2016 .

   As in 1980, we recalibrate the values of the factor intensity parameters, {sj 2016 , s2016 },
to match the share of each occupation in the sectoral wage bill and the wage-bill share in
value added for all sectors

                                            j {L,M,H }   wj 2016 Xjs2016
                              s2016 =                                      ,                (27)
                                                   V As2016

and
                                                wj 2016 Xjs2016
                             js2016 =                                   .                   (28)
                                            j {L,M,H } wj 2016 Xj s2016

Using the information on the rental rate of capital, labor shares and value-added shares across
sectors, the aggregate nominal value added per capita in 1980, and the increase in per capita
expenditure from 1980 to 2016, we can calibrate the aggregate level of capital per capita in
2016 as:
                                                       V As2016
                                       s (1 - s2016 )   V A2016           E2016
               K2016 =    Ks2016 =                                V A1980       .          (29)
                       sS
                                              r2016 +                     E1980

Note that, if as in our model, aggregate personal expenditure and value added grew at
the same rate from 1980 to 2016, (r2016 +  )K2016 would match the level of gross capital
income per capita in the data. However, since the growth of nominal value added does
not exactly coincide with the growth in personal consumption expenditure, our calibration
will not perfectly match that. It will however match the sectoral distribution of capital (i.e.,
Ks2016 /K2016 ), as this does not depend on the relative growth of value added and expenditures.

        ^s2016 = As2016 /A2016 be the relative TFP level in sector s. We calibrate simultane-
    Let A
ously A ^s2016 , A2016 , and µ2016 so that we match the 2016 sectoral shares on nominal value
               s
added {xs2016 }s , the growth in aggregate expenditures per capita, and in the Fisher price
index of personal consumption expenditures from 1980 to 2016. Next we present the equa-
tions that we use to determine the values at which we set these model parameters to match
the targeted moments in the data. Given the distribution of occupational productivities
(including µ2016 ), and the level of capital per capita K2016 , household h income is

                          h
                         E2016 =     max {w       ~ h } + r2016 K2016 .
                                          ~j 2016 X                                         (30)
                                                    j 2016
                                   j {L,M,H }


                                                 19
Given aggregate expenditure per capita (E2016 ), the share of sector s in aggregate expenditure
(or nominal value added) is

                                       ps2016     ch ({s }s , E2016
                                                 h s
                                                               h
                                                                    , {ps2016 }s )dh
                            xs2016 =                                                                        (31)
                                                                E2016

where the function ch
                    s is defined in equation 24. Note that sectoral prices ps2016 are given by

                                                                                   
                                     -1                                 ^ js2016                  1-s2016
                           ^s2016                           wj 2016                   r2016 + 
          ps2016   = A2016 A                                                                                (32)
                                                            ^ js2016                  1 - s2016
                                             j ={L,M,H }


and the Fisher price deflator from 1980 to 2016 is

                                             s P2016 · Y1980            s P2016 · Y2016
                         F2016 =                                                        .                   (33)
                                             s P1980 · Y1980            s P1980 · Y2016


It follows from equations (30), (31) and (32) that, given factor inputs and shares, capital per
capita and the aggregate TFP level, relative sectoral TFP pins down the sectoral shares in
value added. Additionally, given the values of these variables plus the sectoral shares in value
added for 1980 and 2016, the mean log-level of productivity in each of the three occupations
µ2016 , or equivalently the level of the wage per efficiency units for low skilled occupation
(w~L2016 ), can be pinned down so that the model-implied Fisher price index (33) matches the
data. Finally, the overall growth of the economy from 1980 to 2016 is determined by the
calibration of the level of aggregate TFP in 2016. We set this parameter so that the growth in
personal consumption expenditures per capita in our model (34) matches the value observed
in the data as reported by the BEA,
                                                               h
                                             E2016          h
                                                             E2016 dh
                                                   =                  .                                     (34)
                                             E1980          V A1980


E      Construction of the Value-Added Trade Data
We use the consolidated Input-Output table for the US from the World Input Output
Database (available at http://www.wiod.org) to compute the share of value-added relative
to total gross inputs by sector, s , s = 1, . . . , S . We compute the average across all years
available for the 2013 WIOD release (1995-2011).15 Armed with the sectoral value-added
  15
    We have checked that there are no significant trends in value-added shares for agriculture and manu-
facturing. If we regress value-added shares on year and a constant we find a non-significant coefficient on
time for agriculture and a significant but economically very small coefficient of 0.18% for manufacturing (this

                                                           20
shares {s }sS , we compute the value-added content of net exports by sector and year. We
use COMTRADE data on sectoral trade flows for 1980 and 2016 (since the WIOD input
output table does not span a sufficiently long horizon). We also map sectoral trade flows
and value-added shares into our eight sectors. The only sectors with positive trade flows are:
Agriculture, Mining, and Utilities and Manufacturing.
   Note that we are imputing the US value-added shares to US imports (in addition to
exports). The reason is that we are interested in understanding the effects of trade diversion
on the US economy. Thus, a reduction in demand to US producers due to increased imports
translates into a decline in labor demand of US producers. In order to capture this effect
appropriately we need to use US value-added shares for imports.


Calibration Details To account for international trade we calibrate {s } and the sector
specific TFP terms. We calibrate {s } so that the domestic aggregate demand in the model
matches the domestic VA shares in each sector observed in 1980. We calibrate the sector
specific TFP terms that so that the domestic demand augmented by the factor (1 - s1980 )-1
as discussed in equation (28) matches the total VA share in each sector observed in 1980.
The calibration of the distribution parameters of efficiency units are done to match relative
average wages and employment shares. They are done as in the baseline calibration since
this part is independent from the trade module. In our main exercise for 2016 we augment
each sector specific TFP term by a factor of (1 - s,2016 ), as well as adjust factor and labor
intensity parameters st , st and then re-calibrate the change in µt and aggregate TFP to
match the increase in nominal personal consumption expenditures per capita and the price
index.



References
Acemoglu, D. and D. Autor (2011): Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for
 Employment and Earnings, Elsevier, vol. 4 of Handbook of Labor Economics, chap. 12,
 1043­1171.
Aguiar, M. and M. Bils (2015): "Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequal-
 ity?" American Economic Review, 105, 2725­56.
Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and R. Rogerson (2015): "Skill Biased Structural Change,"
 Working Paper 21165, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Comin, D. A., D. Lashkari, and M. Mestieri (2015): "Structural Change with Long-run

coefficient implies an increase over 16 years of 2.9% over a base of 34.6%).

                                                     21
 Income and Price Effects," NBER Working Papers 21595, National Bureau of Economic
 Research. Accepted at Econometrica.
French, K. (2008): "Presidential Address: The Cost of Active Investing," Journal of Fi-
 nance, 63, 1537­1573.




                                          22
