                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE FRANCHISE, POLICING, AND RACE:
          EVIDENCE FROM ARRESTS DATA AND THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT

                                        Giovanni Facchini
                                         Brian G. Knight
                                          Cecilia Testa

                                       Working Paper 27463
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27463


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




We would like to thank Pedro Dal Bo, Joan Llull, Hannes Mueller, Abdul Noury, Kevin
O'Rourke, Albert Sole-Olle, Etienne Wasmer and seminar audiences at the Universitat Autonoma
de Barcelona, Brown University, IEB Universitat de Barcelona, Nottingham University and
NYU-Abu Dhabi for very useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Giovanni Facchini, Brian G. Knight, and Cecilia Testa. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Franchise, Policing, and Race: Evidence from Arrests Data and the Voting Rights Act
Giovanni Facchini, Brian G. Knight, and Cecilia Testa
NBER Working Paper No. 27463
July 2020
JEL No. D7,J15

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the relationship between the franchise and law enforcement practices
using evidence from the Voting Rights Act (VRA) of 1965. We find that, following the VRA,
black arrest rates fell in counties that were both covered by the legislation and had a large number
of newly enfranchised black voters. We uncover no corresponding patterns for white arrest rates.
The reduction in black arrest rates is driven by less serious offenses, for which police might have
more enforcement discretion. Importantly, our results are driven by arrests carried out by sheriffs
- who are always elected. While there are no corresponding changes for municipal police chiefs
in aggregate, we do find similar patterns in covered counties with elected rather than appointed
chiefs. We also show that our findings cannot be rationalized by alternative explanations, such as
differences in collective bargaining, changes in the underlying propensity to commit crimes,
responses to changes in policing practices, and changes in the suppression of civil right protests.
Taken together, these results document that voting rights, when combined with elected, rather
than appointed, chief law enforcement officers, can lead to improved treatment of minority
groups by police.

Giovanni Facchini                                Cecilia Testa
University of Nottingham                         University of Nottingham
and CEPR                                         cecilia.testa@nottingham.ac.uk
Giovanni.Facchini@nottingham.ac.uk

Brian G. Knight
Brown University
Department of Economics, Box B
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
Brian_Knight@brown.edu
"So as opposed to a sheriff being appointed by a mayor or city council and being beholden to that city

council, we are beholden to the people. We see our bosses as the citizens that elect us." (Greg Champagne,

President of the National Sheriffs'Association)1




1     Introduction

The treatment of under-represented minority groups by police in the U.S. is a perennially con-

troversial topic. The violent assault of Rodney King by a group of white police officers in Los

Angeles during the 1990s led to significant protests, looting, and a national debate over race and

policing. The fatal shooting by police, in 2014, of Michael Brown, a black resident of Ferguson,

Missouri, also sparked a national debate, with significant protests and a subsequent investigation

by the U.S. Department of Justice. The recent death of George Floyd, while restrained by police

officers in Minneapolis, has sparked protests and riots across the country, and President Trump has

threatened to call in the military to quell the disorders.2

    While there is substantial and compelling anecdotal evidence of differential treatment of blacks

by police, a lopsided pattern of arrests according to race is also reflected in aggregate data. In

particular, despite 5.7 whites for every black in the overall population, there are only 2.5 white

arrests for every black arrest and only 1.6 whites inmates for every black inmate. Thus, blacks are

arrested and incarcerated at much higher rates than whites.3,4

    An important academic literature has investigated the relationship between race and policing.
    1 source:      https://www.usnews.com/news/politics/articles/2016-11-04/joe-arpaio-david-clarke-and-why-the-us-
still-elect-sheriffs
      2 The incident happened on May 25, 2020.
      3 Inmate data are from the Federal Bureau of Prisons (https://www.bop.gov/about/statistics/statistics_inmate_race.jsp,

accessed        September      24,      2019),      population       data   are    from       the     Census      Bureau
(https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US/RHI625218#RHI625218, accessed September 24, 2019), and
arrests data are taken from the FBI UCR statistics (https://ucr.fbi.gov/crime-in-the-u.s/2017/crime-in-the-u.s.-
2017/tables/table-43, accessed September 24, 2019).
      4 Anwar, Bayer, and Hjalmarsson (2012) document the presence of a racial bias by white jurors against black

defendants, whereas Alesina and La Ferrara (2014) uncover racial bias in capital sentencing.



                                                           2
This body of work has largely focused on the role of the racial composition of the police force,

which has historically been dominated by white officers, and examined whether diversifying police

forces leads to a shift in arrest patterns according to race. For example, Donohue and Levitt (2001)

analyze the relationship between the racial composition of police forces and arrests, finding that an

increase in the number of minority police officers is associated with increases in white arrests, but

that it does not affect arrest rates for non-whites. McCrary (2007) exploits the timing of federal

lawsuits that mandated affirmative action on municipal police departments via hiring quotas. He

finds that such litigation does increase the diversity of the police force and subsequently lowers

black arrest rates for serious offenses. Bulman (2019) finds that agencies led by black sheriffs,

compared to those led by white sheriffs, are associated with a lower black-to-white arrest ratio,

and this relationship is driven by less serious offenses.5

    While significant progress has been made in understanding the effect of the racial composition

of both the police force and its leadership on the treatment of black citizens, less is known about

the role played by elections and political accountability, a natural topic given that policing is an

important public service. This link is important for at least three reasons. First, many chief law

enforcement officers (CLEOs) in the United States ­ all sheriffs in the South and some municipal

police chiefs ­ are directly elected, rather than appointed. Second, CLEOs are in charge of policing

practices that have direct effects on the treatment of minorities and might also change departmental

culture through their leadership (United States Commission On Civil Rights 2000).6 Third, there
    5 Another    related literature examines whether the differential treatment of blacks by police officers represents
statistical discrimination or preference-based discrimination. Knowles, Persico, and Todd (2001) develop an outcomes
test, documenting that the outcomes of searches by police during traffic stops does not vary according to race. In the
context of their model, this finding is consistent with statistical discrimination. Antonovics and Knight (2009) and
Anwar and Fang (2006) also employ information on the race of police officers in these interactions. Antonovics and
Knight (2009) find that cross-race interactions, i.e. traffic stops of black drivers by white officers and of white drivers
by black officers, are more likely to lead to police searches and argue that this finding is consistent with preference-
based discrimination.
     6 Leadership within organizations can fundamentally shape outcomes (Bertrand and Schoar 2003, Bolton, Brun-

nermeier, and Veldkamp 2012) and the implications of different methods of selection of chief executives have been
studied in a variety of domains (Besley and Coate 2003, Iaryczower, Garrett, and Shum 2013). Surprisingly, very little
is known about the implication of different procedures for the selection of US CLEOs. In this paper we make a first
step towards addressing this question by focussing on one controversial dimension of enforcement ­ the treatment of


                                                            3
have been significant changes over time in the franchise for blacks: their right to vote was first

granted after the Civil War, then restricted during the Jim Crow era in the U.S. South, and finally

reinstated in the South during the 1960s. Even today, there are significant debates over restrictions

on voting resulting from, for example, voter ID laws and the disenfranchisement of felons, both of

which are believed to disproportionately impact black voters.

    To empirically investigate the link between voters, government officials, and the treatment of

minority groups by police, we exploit the dramatic change in voting rights brought about by the

1965 Voting Right Act (VRA), which compelled a group of Southern jurisdictions ("covered"

under Section 4 of the Act) to remove restrictions on the voting franchise and seek federal au-

thorization for any change of their voting laws (under Section 5 of the same Act). As a result,

previously disenfranchised black voters in covered states were newly able to cast their ballot, and

thus potentially influence the selection of elected officials. Crucially, given segregated neighbor-

hoods, police treatment of blacks was an important policy area in which white politicians could

take steps to improve the lives of black voters, while not necessarily generating backlash from the

white electorate (Button 1989).

    Anecdotally, a number of CLEOs known for their harsh treatment of blacks were removed

from office by voters in the South following the enactment of the VRA in 1965. One particularly

emblematic example involves Jim Clark ­ the sheriff of majority black Dallas County, Alabama ­

who gained notoriety in the "Bloody Sunday" events of 1965, when a group of civil right activists

attempting to cross the Pettus Bridge near Selma were brutally beaten by Clark's infamous Sheriff

Posse. In the subsequent election held in 1966 ­ which saw a record number of blacks registering to

vote for the first time ­ he lost office.7 Clark was replaced by Wilson Baker, a white moderate over-

whelmingly supported by the black electorate. While serving as the public safety director for the
minority groups.
   7 In 1965, just before the passage of the VRA, 314 blacks were registered to vote in Dallas county. By 1966, the

number of registered blacks increased to 10,267, while the number of registered whites stood at 12,128 (Los Angeles
Times, April 17, 1966).


                                                        4
city of Selma at the time of the march, Baker had distanced himself from Clark's actions (Wright

2013, page 189). Importantly, one of Baker's first initiatives as the new sheriff was to dismantle

the Posse and "...turn the sheriff's department upside down" (Los Angeles Times, November 10,

1966). The dismissal of Clark was not unique. A similar fate awaited a number of other notorious

CLEOs across the U.S. South.8 More generally, as the black vote became salient in many electoral

races, white sheriffs needed to appeal to this newly enfranchised group. For example, as pointed

out by Peirce (1974) "The white sheriff in heavily black Holmes county [Mississippi] won ... by

doing an about-face from the old Southern stereotype. "He is terrific", Robert G. Clark, a promi-

nent black politician, acknowledged, "He treats everybody like a man. If he comes to your house

with a search warrant, he is polite, and if he has to arrest you, he apologizes for this." (page 189).9

    In our analysis, we attempt to move beyond anecdotal evidence on changes brought about by

the VRA via a systematic causal analysis of the effects of the franchise on treatment of blacks by

police. To do so, we examine data on the patterns of arrests by race from the FBI Uniform Crime

Reports. If coverage has an effect, areas with larger shares of African Americans should experience

a decline in their arrest rates compared to those of whites. However, as the racial composition of

arrests in those areas might have changed independently of the federal intervention, the comparison

of patterns of arrests by race before and after the VRA is combined in our analysis with the addition

of a control group, including jurisdictions of the former Confederacy that were not covered by the

VRA. Thus, our baseline analysis compares: 1) arrest patterns for blacks versus whites, 2) before

and after the VRA, 3) in covered vs. non-covered areas, and 4) in counties with significant black

populations, which are more impacted by the VRA, versus less black counties. Exploiting this
    8 Other examples include Clifton Hester (sheriff of Madison County, Louisiana) who fiercely opposed black voters
registration drives, stating that "...as long as I am Sheriff, there won't be any niggers registered on the books..."
(see Kaplan and Stanzler 1971, page 748), and Lawrence Rayney (sheriff of Neshoba county, Mississippi) who was
investigated for alleged involvement in the murder of civil rights activists during the freedom summer campaign in
1964.
    9 In 1967, Robert G. Clark became the first black elected to the Mississippi House of Representative since the

Reconstruction era.




                                                         5
variation, our key finding is that arrest rates for blacks fell in counties that were both covered and

had a high concentration of black residents. We find no corresponding patterns for white arrest

rates. Furthermore, our results are driven by less serious misdemeanor offenses ­ over which

police have more discretion ­ rather than more serious felonies.

    We then turn to explore possible mechanisms. We start by further investigating the electoral

channel, by analyzing whether our basic findings differ according to the rules whereby CLEOs

are selected. We document that our baseline results are driven by arrests carried out by sheriffs ­

who are always elected ­ rather than by police chiefs ­ who are typically appointed. Furthermore,

exploiting variation in local statutes and charters prescribing whether police chiefs are appointed

or elected, we find that the aggregate pattern we have uncovered is in fact driven by counties where

police chiefs are exclusively appointed. In the presence of elected police chiefs, instead, arrests

of blacks carried out by municipal police do fall in counties that were both covered and with a

high concentration of blacks. All of these results provide prima facie evidence that the VRA, by

increasing the accountability of CLEOs to the black electorate, led to changes in police behavior

resulting in different racial patterns of arrests.

    Although there is abundant evidence that the actions of law enforcement officers in the field

are heavily influenced by the practices developed by CLEOs (United States Commission On Civil

Rights 2000), it is still possible that our results might be directly driven by the race of CLEOs,

other local elected officials, or the police.10 To shed light on these alternative mechanisms we

start by analyzing the race of CLEOs, documenting the near complete absence of blacks twenty
    10 Other elected officials in local jurisdictions, such as commissioners in county governments, and mayors and city

council members in municipal governments, might also play a role in developing policing guidelines and practices.
For example, in the aftermath of the shooting in Ferguson, some commentators noted that the city council was pre-
dominantly white, despite the city being 70 percent black, and that a change in local leadership might be necessary to
change policing practices. (see https://www.cnn.com/2015/04/08/us/ferguson-election/index.html, accessed July 10,
2019). Motivated by this argument, the mother of the deceased Michael Brown ran for a seat on the City Council
even if her campaign was ultimately unsuccessful. At the same time, the link between these other elected officials
and policing practices is unclear, as law enforcement is one of the many functions of local governments in these
jurisdictions.




                                                          6
years after the passage of the VRA. This allows us to rule out the identity politics channel for

sheriffs or police chiefs. As for other elected officials, we find that covered counties with larger

pre­existing shares of African Americans do indeed elect more black county commissioners, but

only in the presence of single member districts. Importantly, we do not find any evidence of a

differential pattern of arrests in these counties. On the contrary, our results are driven by covered

counties that do not experience any increase in the share of black commissioners. Hence, the race

of other local office holders does not play an important role in explaining our findings. Last, we

investigate whether covered counties experienced a change in the racial composition of the police

force that could drive our results. While there was an increase in the South in the number of black

police officers, we find no role for the interaction between covered status and the percent of blacks,

suggesting that the racial composition of the police force did not play a key role in this period.

   We then turn to four alternative explanations for our findings. First, if certain jurisdictions,

such as municipalities are more likely to have unionized police forces, CLEO's might be less

able to discipline their workforce in case of misconduct. Second, our results could be driven by

changes in the blacks' underlying propensity to commit crimes resulting from other changes in

the characteristics of the black associated with the VRA: changes in migration, improvements in

schooling, or improvements in labor market conditions. Third, crime patterns might respond to

changes in policing patterns following the VRA. Fourth, our results could be driven by elevated

arrests of blacks at protests during the pre-VRA era. We address each of these in turn and show

that our results, especially involving differences in arrest patterns between elected and appointed

officials, are not driven by these alternative explanations.

   The Civil Rights era brought about a massive realignment of political allegiances in the U.S.

South (Kuziemko and Washington 2018). A recent and growing literature has exploited the geo-

graphic variation in the VRA provisions to analyze the effect of enfranchisement on the distribution

of state funds (Cascio and Washington 2014), on white backlash against the Democratic party (Ang


                                                  7
2019), on black elected officials in local governments and government spending (Bernini, Facchini,

and Testa 2018) and on labor market outcomes (Aneja and Avenancio-Leon 2019). We contribute

to this literature by studying the impact of the VRA on the police treatment of blacks. In particular,

similarly to Cascio and Washington (2014) ­ who show how the VRA led to a shift in the allocation

of state funds toward black communities by making white politicians more responsive to the in-

terests of black voters ­ we provide evidence of increased accountability of elected white CLEO's

to the black electorate. By doing so, our contribution sheds lights on an issue ­ the treatment of

minorities by the police ­ lying at the heart of the civil rights movement. In his iconic "I Have a

Dream" speech of 1963, Dr. King denounced the unspeakable horrors of police brutality against

blacks, while also advocating for their right to vote.11 Our findings indicate that the latter proved

important in bettering the working of law enforcement, even though much is still left to be done.

     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides general background

on the organization of local police enforcement in the US and on the VRA. Section 3 develops

a simple probabilistic voting model to develop our key hypotheses. Section 4 presents the data

used in our analysis, whereas section 5 lays out our identification strategy. Section 6 presents our

main results, section 7 investigates the alternative mechanisms behind our findings, and section 8

addresses alternative explanations for our results. Section 9 concludes.



2      Background

In the US, law enforcement at the local level falls under the authority of sheriff offices ­ which

have county-wide jurisdiction ­ and municipal police departments ­ providing police services only

within incorporated municipal limits. Despite their county­wide powers, sheriffs mainly focus

on policing unincorporated areas, and thus police functions tend to be shared by the two bodies
    11 "We can never be satisfied as long as the Negro is the victim of the unspeakable horrors of police brutality." (M.L.

King 1963).



                                                            8
according to a rural­urban divide.12 Besides policing different areas, the two bodies also differ in

terms of functions and in the degree of independence from other local governments. In particular,

the sheriffs' duties are broader since ­ besides law enforcement ­ they are also in charge of county

jails and correctional facilities, carry out bailiff duties, and, in some instances, are responsible for

the collection of county fees and taxes and the sale of licenses and permits. The office of the sheriff

­ as an independent entity within county government ­ also enjoys greater autonomy compared to

police departments, whose powers and duties are determined by the administrative branch under

which they are authorized and by whom they are in most cases appointed.

    Historically modeled after the English sheriff, in colonial America the sheriff was a royal officer

appointed by governors. In the post­revolutionary period, the office underwent a major transfor-

mation and the election of the sheriff was enshrined in the constitution of many states to make it

directly accountable to the local community, rather than to a distant executive. As a result, contem-

porary sheriffs are popularly elected in nearly 3100 jurisdictions across the US (Falcone and Wells

1995),13 and the National Sheriffs' Association strongly supports election as the `best option' for

selecting a county's CLEO, although evidence substantiating the desirability of popular election

remains in rather short supply.14

    As mentioned above, we exploit the dramatic shift in the exercise of the voting franchise of

African Americans brought about by the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Ushered through Congress

by the Johnson's Administration a few months after the dramatic events in Selma, the momentous

federal legislation placed several jurisdictions in the US South under strict federal monitoring of

their voting laws and procedures. Under Section 4 of the VRA, jurisdictions that both imposed a
   12 In general, police and sheriffs can only make arrests within their respective areas of jurisdiction. The one excep-
tion involves hot pursuit, whereby police and sheriffs can arrest criminals in neighboring jurisdictions, but only when
the chase began and a crime was committed within their respective jurisdictions.
    13 Sheriffs are appointed in Rhode Island, in two Colorado counties and in Dade County (Florida). There

are no sheriffs in Alaska and the office was abolished in the year 2000 in Connecticut. For more de-
tails see: https://www.sheriffs.org/sites/default/files/tb/The_Elected_Office_of_Sheriff_-_
An_Executive_Summary.pdf.
    14 See https://www.sheriffs.org/sites/default/files/tb/resolutions/2010-1.pdf.




                                                           9
test or device restricting the right to vote and experienced a turnout below 50 percent in the 1964

Presidential election were placed under strict federal monitoring. As a result, six of the eleven

Confederate states ­ Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, and Virginia ­

were fully covered and one ­ North Carolina ­ was partially covered.15 Under Section 5 of the

same act, covered jurisdictions had to seek pre-clearance by the US District Court for the District

of Columbia or by the Attorney General of any change in legislation affecting voting. Further-

more, the Attorney General could dispatch federal examiners to monitor the activities within these

jurisdictions' polling places, and all covered jurisdictions were forced to eliminate literacy test

provisions.

    As barriers that were a major obstacle to voter registrations were removed, black voters reg-

istration and turnout soared (Cascio and Washington 2014; Wright 2013), bringing about an ex-

pectation of fundamental changes in policy areas in which the black electorate did not have any

voice. The administration of justice was one of such domains. In the US South, where counties

were the most important unit of local government, sheriffs ­ particularly in rural areas ­ were often

the most powerful local officials and the `principle enforcers of the social and legal convention of

the Jim Crow Society...the sheriff sent a signal to the black community: any black citizen enter-

taining thoughts of challenging the system had only to walk by the local jail to see the hierarchy of

race' (Moore 1997, page 53). Under the watch of white sheriffs, black-on-black crime was usually

ignored, white-on-black crime was typically not punished, and black-on-white crime was often ad-

dressed by extra-legal practices of lynching. In 1961, the report of the US Civil Right Commission

on Justice widely acknowledged the issues of widespread police brutality against African Ameri-
   15 More  precisely, of the 100 North Carolina counties, 39 were covered. Cascio and Washington (2014) focus
instead on the removal of literacy test provisions ­ that were in force in all the six covered states plus North Carolina.
In the 1975 re-authorization of the VRA, coverage was extended as to take into account potential discrimination against
language minorities. As a result the provision was extended to any jurisdiction where a single language minority group
comprised more than 5 percent of the voting age population in 1970 in addition to the turnout threshold and required
ballots to be bilingual. Given that our focus is on the effect of the VRA on the arrest rates of African Americans, we
adopt the 1965 definition.




                                                           10
cans, advocating for change in leadership as an important way forward to address discrimination in

the administration of justice.16 The Voting Rights Act, giving voice to previously disenfranchised

blacks, provided the tools to bring to power a new type of sheriff. Yet, as white elites resisted

change, according to a less benign view, the administration of U.S. criminal justice system in the

aftermath of the VRA has become instrumental to the disenfranchisement of African Americans

(Alexander 2010). Whether the right to vote led to tangible improvements in the administration

of justice in black communities remains therefore an open empirical question that we address,

focusing on the analysis of the pattern of arrest by race within constituencies in the Deep South.



3      Theoretical Model

This section develops our hypotheses in the context of a simple probabilistic voting model. Let p

denote police treatment of blacks, with increases representing harsher treatment. Voters fall into

one of two racial groups (Blacks and Whites), e.g. J = B, W , where everyone in a given group

has the same bliss point over policies, pJ , with pB < pW . The difference in policy preferences

might reflect both cultural factors, such as racism on the part of whites, or economic factors, such

as an attempt by whites to artificially hold black wages below marginal product via suppression.17

Blacks comprise a fraction of the population  , with whites a fraction 1 -  . Two candidates (c = 1

and c = 2) announce credible platforms over policy ( p1 and p2 ). Voters care about both policy and

the ideology of candidates. Specifically, voter i in group J prefers candidate 1 if:


                                        V J ( p1 ) > V J ( p2 ) +  iJ + 
    16 For
         more details see United States Commission on Civil Rights (1961)
    17 Acemoglu  and Wolitzky (2011) develop a model in which employers use coercion, labeled as "guns", to limit
outside options for workers and discuss the role of law enforcement in the U.S. South in coercing black workers.




                                                       11
where  iJ  U - 21   1
                 , 2 with density  denotes ideological bias toward candidate 2, and is the

average popularity of candidate 2 in the population and is assumed to follow the normal distribution

with mean zero and precision  , with F and f representing the standard normal CDF and density,

respectively.18 Voters experience a quadratic loss as the platform of candidate c moves away from

their bliss point, so that V J ( pc ) = -0.5( pc - pJ )2 . Let J = V J ( p1 ) - V J ( p2 ) represent the payoff

difference to group J from the platform of candidate 1 relative to candidate 2.

    In terms of timing, two candidates simultaneously announce their policy platforms: p1 , p2 .

They know voter preferences and the distributions of  iJ and  . The value of  is realized and

elections are held, with the winning candidate implementing his or her platform. Given all of this,

the vote share for candidate 1, conditional on  , equals:


                                      1 = 0.5 +   B + (1 -  ) W -  


Integrating over  , candidate 1's probability of winning equals:


                               Q1 = Pr( 1  0.5) = F [ B +  (1 -  )W ]


    Candidates care about winning the election but are also citizens and have preferences over

policy. In particular, candidates are white, with bliss point pW . Candidates place weight  on

winning and weight (1 -  ) on policy. Thus, the objective for candidate 1 equals:



                        Q1 - (1 -  )[Q1 0.5( p1 - pW )2 + (1 - Q1 )0.5( p2 - pW )2 ]


The first term represents the payoff associated with winning the election, and the second term
   18 While we label  iJ as ideological bias, other interpretations are possible, and this is relevant since elections for
CLEOs are sometimes non-partisan. The key role of  iJ is that it smooths out candidate vote shares, so that small
changes in policies do not lead to discontinuous changes in vote shares.



                                                           12
represents the payoff associated with the policy implemented, which equals p1 with probability Q1

and p2 with probability 1 - Q.

    Pre-VRA, only whites can vote, and the probability of candidate 1 winning simplifies to Q1 =

F [ W ]. Given that candidates are white and blacks are disenfranchised, candidates simply cater

to the preferences of white voters and set equilibrium policies to those preferred by whites ( p =

pW ).19

    Post-VRA, both groups can vote, with blacks representing a fraction  of the electorate. In this

case, white candidates moderate their platforms to account for the demands of black voters. This

result is summarized in the following Proposition, with a proof in the Appendix.


Proposition 1 Equilibrium polices can be characterized by a weighted average of black and white

bliss points (p =  pB + (1 -  ) pW ), with the weight on the black bliss point ( ) increasing in the

black share of the population ( ).


    Intuitively, equilibrium platforms now account for the preferences of both groups, and the

franchise extension effect becomes more pronounced as the black share of the population increases.

Thus, the introduction of the VRA improves police treatment of blacks. Moreover, the post-VRA

shift in policy towards the preferences of black voters is more significant in places with a larger

share of blacks.

    We next extend the model to compare elected and appointed CLEOs. There are now two

policies: police treatment of blacks ( p) and a general policy (g), which can be interpreted as a

public good. With elected CLEOs, there are four candidates, two competing over the general policy

and two competing over police treatment of blacks. With an appointed CLEO, two candidates

compete over the general policy and each commits to appointing a CLEO who will implement an
   19 To                                                                                        Q1             W     W
        derive this result, note that the electoral effect of making the policy harsher equals                       
                                                                                                p1 = - ( p1 - p ) f [  ].
Plugging this into the candidate equilibrium condition and using symmetry ( p1 = p2 , W = 0 and Q1 = 0.5), equilib-
rium policies ( p ) can be characterized by  ( pW - p ) f [0] = (1 -  )0.5( p - pW ). This can only be satisfied when
p = pW .


                                                          13
announced police treatment of blacks. We assume that the full menu of policy options is available

when appointing officials. We continue to assume that all officials are white and thus have bliss

points gW and pW . We also assume that officials can be grouped by parties and that ideology  iJ

applies to parties as a whole and not specific candidates. Candidates continue to receive popularity

shocks  (g) and  ( p), which we assume are independent across candidates.20 Voters care about

both policies, with separable preferences: V J (g1 , p1 ) = -0.5(g1 - gJ )2 - 0.5( p1 - pJ )2 . With

an elected official as CLEO, candidates compete dimension-by-dimension, given the separability

assumption, and the probability of winning for the CLEO from party 1 equals:


                                      Q1 = F [ B ( p) +  (1 -  )W ( p)]


where J ( p) = -0.5( p1 - pJ )2 - 0.5( p2 - pJ )2 represents the difference in utility between candi-

dates for group J in the policing dimension and similarly for J (g). Given that the probability of

winning is identical to that with a single policy dimension, the results are unchanged from above.

   With appointed CLEOs, voters must choose a bundle of officials, or equivalently, a party. Im-
                                                                                        
portantly, the precision of the combined popularity shock  (g) +  ( p) now equals ~ =  / 2 and

is thus lower than under unbundled elections, meaning that there is more electoral uncertainty un-

der appointed officials than under elected officials. This is due to the fact that voters only have one

choice but must consider multiple factors. Given this, candidate 1's probability of winning equals:


                         Q1 = F {~ [B ( p) + B (g)] + ~ (1 -  )[W ( p) + W (g)]}



Since there is now more electoral uncertainty (~ <  ), a given shift in policies now translates into

smaller changes in the probability of winning. That is, with appointed officials, electoral competi-

tion is weakened on a dimension-by-dimension basis, and candidates, with citizen preferences pW ,
  20 This   independence assumption can be relaxed so long as preferences are not perfectly correlated.


                                                          14
are less responsive to the preferences of black voters.21,22 This leads to the following Proposition,

with a proof in the Appendix:


Proposition 2 An increase in the share of black voters ( ) leads to a larger reduction, or shift

towards the preferences of black voters, in p under elected, rather than appointed, CLEOs.


     To summarize, the model makes two key predictions. First, treatment of blacks by police im-

proves following the VRA, and the size of this shift is increasing in the black share of the popula-

tion. Second, these relationships are more pronounced in jurisdictions with directly elected CLEOs

than with appointed CLEOs. We next turn to an empirical investigation of these predictions.



4      Data

Our goal is to study how the enfranchisement of African Americans affected racial patterns of law

enforcement in the eleven states of the former Confederacy, sharing a similar history of slavery

and black disenfranchisement. To do so, we exploit geographic variation in one of the VRA key

provisions (coverage) to define a treatment group ­ including counties that fell under the special

provisions of Section 4 ­ and a control group (those who did not). Figure 1 illustrates the geo-

graphic pattern of coverage. As previously discussed, all counties of Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana,

Mississippi, South Carolina, and Virginia and 39 counties of North Carolina were covered in 1965,

whereas Arkansas, Florida, Tennessee, Texas and 61 counties in North Carolina were not.

     To carry out our analysis, we have assembled a dataset on arrests executed by local police of-

fices between 1960-1981. While these data do not include any detailed information on the context
    21 Besley and Coate (2003) obtain a similar result in a model with citizen candidates. In particular, with a mul-
tidimensional policy space, policy is bundled into one option when officials are appointed, leading them to cater to
stakeholders. With elected officials, by contrast, policy becomes unbundled and officials have an incentive to run on
pro-voter platforms. Thus, voters have more influence with elected officials relative to appointed ones.
    22 Indeed, as the number of officials appointed by a single elected official grows large, the weight placed on black

voters goes to zero and officials do not moderate their platforms towards those preferred by black voters even when
the size of the group is large.


                                                          15
around the arrest, such as police use of force, arrests can be considered as a measure of mistreat-

ment of blacks by police. Indeed, as pointed out by Mazumder (2019), arrests and incarceration

have been used by white elites in the South as a tool to exert social control over African Americans.

The arrests data have been obtained from the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) ­ and in particular the

"Arrest by County" compilation ­ which contain information on arrests reported by participating

agencies for 29 offense categories by race and age group (adults and juveniles), starting in 1960.23

Using these data, we average over the 1960-1965 period to create pre-VRA arrest measures and

over the 1975-1980 period to create post-VRA arrest measures.

    As we have already discussed, sheriffs have county­wide authority, whereas municipal police

has jurisdiction over incorporated areas. In our analysis we use data on arrests at the county level,

as this is the administrative unit for which we have information on coverage. County level data on

other socio-economic characteristics have been obtained from the Census.24

    UCR data are based on voluntary filing. As a result, the number of reporting agencies varies

over time, and our analysis uses a balanced panel of reporting agencies for 590 counties (out of

a universe of 1137), for which we have observations before and after the passage of the VRA.25

The geographic coverage of our sample is illustrated in Figure 2, and the number of reporting

agencies appears to be scattered throughout the region. Importantly, as shown in Table 1, the key

socio­demographic characteristics of the counties included in our analysis are broadly comparable

to those of the overall South, even if counties included in our analysis have larger populations

and tend to be more urban.26 Using these data on arrests, we create race-specific arrest rates per

thousand in the population. To measure pre-VRA population, we use the number of blacks and

whites in the county in 1960 and, to measure post-VRA population, we use corresponding data on
   23 Crime  by county data are available from the UCR only starting from 1974.
   24 See the Appendix for the definitions of variables and sources.
   25 See the Appendix for details.
   26 As discussed in Section 5, the analysis carried out in Table A1 and Table A2 shows the absence of selection on

observables.



                                                        16
population from the 1980 census

    Table 2 presents summary statistics. Before the introduction of the VRA, the overall average

arrest rate is 6.29 per thousand for blacks, whereas the corresponding figure for whites is 1.99.

After the passage of the act the number of arrests increases for both subgroups of the population,

reaching on average 6.59 per thousand for blacks, and 3.07 for whites. The growth in the arrest

rates, defined as the difference in the natural log of arrest rates by county, is on average almost

twice as high for whites than for blacks. Municipal police carries out more arrests than sheriff

offices, and this is true for both blacks and whites. This is consistent with the fact that sheriffs

are policing more rural areas, whereas police departments are in charge of law enforcement in

urban areas. In fact, as shown in the top panel of Table 2, counties in the sheriff sample are on

average less populated and more rural than those in the police sample. On the other hand, they

are broadly comparable on other important characteristics, such as the black population share and

the unemployment rate, although the number of families below the poverty line and the share of

unskilled is slightly higher in the sheriff sample.



5    Identification Strategy

Our main goal is to study the effect of enfranchising black voters on the racial patterns of arrests.

If the VRA had an effect, we would expect that areas with a greater share of African Americans

should experience an improvement in the treatment of blacks (i.e., a decline in their arrest rates

compared to those of whites). However, since areas with a larger concentration of blacks might

have seen changes in the racial composition of arrests even in the absence of the specific provi-

sions included in the VRA (coverage), we combine the strategy discussed above with the creation

of a control group including the four states of the former Confederacy (Arkansas, Florida, Ten-

nessee and Texas) and 61 counties in North Carolina, with a similar history of slavery and black



                                                  17
disenfranchisement, which were not covered in 1965. Our baseline strategy is thus based upon

a fourfold comparison: 1) arrest patterns for blacks versus whites, 2) before and after the Voting

Rights Act, 3) in counties covered by the VRA versus comparable counties in the South, and 4) in

counties with significant black populations, which are more affected by the VRA, versus less black

counties, which are less affected by it. The first three comparisons are discrete in nature, while the

final comparison is based upon a continuous measure, the fraction of blacks in the jurisdiction.

We later add two additional comparisons: county versus municipal jurisdictions and more serious

versus less serious charges leading to any arrests.

   Our identifying assumption is that, in the absence of federal intervention, covered and non­

covered jurisdictions would have experienced the same trends in the racial patterns of arrest rates.

Although covered and non-covered areas shared a very similar history of racial discrimination and

black disenfranchisement, we are concerned that the control group might still exhibit different pre-

trends in other important outcomes that could be correlated with subsequent changes in the racial

patterns of arrests.

   To address this concern and to corroborate the validity of our counterfactual, we investigate

whether the assumption of parallel trends holds when we consider other important outcomes, such

as black political activism, political participation and white racial attitudes between 1950 and 1960

(that is, during the pre-VRA era). The results of this analysis are reported in the Appendix. In par-

ticular, Table A.1 documents that covered counties do not display pre-VRA trends in civil rights

activism, political participation, and racial attitudes in either our or the U.S. South entire sample.

Similarly, Table A.2 documents a similar pattern in the sheriff and police samples. Tables A.3 and

A.4 investigate pre-VRA trends in economics and demographic outcomes. We find no changes be-

tween covered and non-covered areas in the black population share. Regarding other demographic

and economic characteristics, we find statistically significant growth in the population, but only

for the sheriff sample (Table A.3) and in the percent rural, but only in the police sample (Table


                                                 18
A.4). We find instead no evidence of differences in either sample when measuring pre-trends in

unemployment, the proportion of unskilled, the share of poor in the population and cotton yield,

a proxy for agricultural productivity. Thus, on the whole, we do not find evidence of consistent

pre-trends, lending support to our identifying assumption.



6      Baseline Analysis

We begin our analysis of the effects of the VRA on the pattern of arrests with Figure 3. In particular,

we relate the long-run difference in arrest rates (pre-VRA versus post-VRA) to the share of blacks

in the county as of 1960. Using bin scatter diagrams, we perform this analysis separately for

covered and non-covered counties, and also for black and white arrests. As shown in the upper left

panel, black arrest rates are growing more quickly in areas with larger shares of African Americans

in both covered and non-covered counties. But, importantly, the growth is less pronounced in

covered areas, consistent with our hypothesis that enfranchisement leads to better treatment of

black residents by police, and especially so in counties with larger shares of African Americans.

White arrest rates, by contrast, appear to be independent of the black population in the county, and

this is the case for both covered and non-covered areas (see upper right panel). The bottom panel

reproduces the same analysis, but using residual growth rates instead, which account for changes

in arrests rates that can be explained by observable county characteristics.27 As shown, the results

are similar to those in the top panels, with rising arrest rates for blacks in counties with more

African Americans but, importantly, with slower growth in covered areas. Likewise, there are no

differences in the slope of arrest rates for whites with respect to the share of blacks in 1960 for

either covered or non-covered counties.

     To test for the statistical significance of these long run changes in arrest rates, we next investi-
    27 Thesecontrols include pre­VRA population (in logs), unemployment rates, poverty rates, percent unskilled,
percent rural, cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black and anti-black protest activity and black
police.


                                                        19
gate their patterns in a regression framework. In particular, we estimate the following specification:


              ArrestRatesc =  1 Black60 +  2Covc +  3 Black60 × Covc + Xc  + Is +  rc                                  (1)


where ArrestRatesc measures the change, from pre-VRA to post-VRA, in the natural log of arrest

rates of either black or white individuals in county c; Black60 is the share of blacks in the county

as recorded in the 1960 US Census and Covc in an indicator taking a value of one if the county was

covered in 1965 under Section 4 of the VRA, and zero otherwise. Xc is a set of pre VRA county

characteristics ­ including unemployment rate, share of families below the poverty line, share of

unskilled, county population (in logs), share of individuals living in rural areas, measures of pro­

and anti­black activism, cotton suitability, farm size and the number of blacks in the police force

in 1959. In some specification we also allow the impact of these controls to vary by treatment

status. Finally, Is are state fixed effects ­ capturing state specific trends in this long difference

specification. The main parameter of interest is  3 , which captures the difference in the gradient

of the 1960 black population between the treatment and control counties, after controlling for the

main effects of the share of blacks in 1960 and coverage status.28

    Our baseline results are presented in Table 3. Columns 1 and 2 report our most parsimonious

specifications, including only the variables of interest and basic economic and demographic con-

trols. In columns 3 and 4, we allow the effects of the additional controls to vary by treatment status.

In columns 5-8 we follow the same structure, but we now account also for proxies of black political

activism (pro­black activism), white racial attitudes (anti-black activism), historic prevalence of

slave labor (cotton suitability), land ownership concentration and presence of blacks in the police

force.29 As shown, black arrest rates are growing more slowly in covered areas with significant

black populations, and these differences are statistically significant when including interactions
   28 Note  that coverage status does not vary within states, and is thus already incorporated into the state fixed effect,
for all cases except North Carolina. Thus, the parameter  2 is identified only by variation within North Carolina.
    29 Table A5 reports all coefficients for columns (1)-(4).



                                                           20
between coverage and controls (columns 3 and 7). This effect is large in magnitude: an increase in

the black share of the population by 10 percentage points, from, say, 20 percent to 30 percent, leads

to a 17-23 percent reduction (columns 3 and 7) in the growth of the arrest rate for blacks in covered

counties, relative to non-covered counties.30 The corresponding analysis using white arrest rates

never produces statistically significant differences.         31   Thus, the regression results also support our

main hypothesis, that black arrest rates, relative to white arrest rates, decline in covered counties

with significant populations of newly enfranchised black voters, relative to non-covered areas and

with smaller black populations.

    In Table 4, we introduce an additional comparison: county versus municipal governments.

Given that sheriffs are always elected in the South and that municipal police chiefs are often ap-

pointed, we expect our baseline results to be driven by county governments. As shown in Table

4, this is indeed the case. Across the four specifications we consider, black versus white arrest

rates and county versus municipal governments, the only statistically significant difference in ar-

rest patterns involves the growth in arrests of blacks by sheriffs, who are elected, as documented

in column 1. This effect is again large in magnitude: an increase in the black share of the county

population by 10 percentage points, from, say, 20 percent to 30 percent, leads to a 31 percent re-

duction in the growth of the black arrest rate in covered counties, relative to non-covered counties.

Differences are small and statistically insignificant for blacks arrested by municipal police (column

3) as well as for whites arrests by both sheriffs (column 2) and municipal police (column 4). The

fact that the result is driven by differences in black arrest rates in jurisdictions with elected officials

most closely linked to law enforcement (sheriffs) yields credence to our electoral interpretation.

In particular, the enfranchisement of blacks led to a change in black arrest rates, and, moreover,
   30 Recall that the black share is measured from 0 to 100 and the dependent variable is the log difference, which can

be interpreted as the percent growth in the arrest rate.
   31 As for the additional controls - see Table A5 ­ our results indicate that the arrest rates ­ for both whites and

blacks ­ grew less in counties with larger initial populations. We also find that counties experiencing more episodes
of pro­black activism before the VRA exhibit slower growth in arrest rates for both blacks and whites, as do counties
with a larger pre-existing black police force.


                                                         21
this result appears to be driven by elected, rather than appointed officials, with jurisdiction over

policing practices.

    Our next extension involves the type of offense underlying the arrest. In the U.S., crimes

are typically classified into two categories, misdemeanors, which are less serious in nature, and

felonies, which are more serious in nature. If our results are driven by changes in policing practices

following enfranchisement of black voters, it is natural that such practices should be most strongly

reflected in misdemeanor crimes, given that police have more discretion over arrests in these cases.

Conversely, we would expect that police have less discretion over whether or not to arrest suspects

charged with more serious felony crimes. As shown in Table 5, this does appear to be the case.

That is, our baseline results are driven by changes in non-felony arrest rates for blacks, and these

results are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. We also uncover a decline in felony arrest

rates for blacks, but this result is not statistically significant at conventional levels.32 For white

arrest rates, we again find no systematic patterns with respect to whether or not the jurisdiction is

covered and the size of the black population.

    In Table 6, we examine the results separately for type of jurisdiction (county versus municipal

government) and type of crime. As shown, our results are driven by non-felony arrests of blacks

by county governments (column 2 of the upper panel). This effect is the largest that we have

documented. In particular, an increase in the black share of the county population by 10 percentage

points, from, say, 20 percent to 30 percent, leads to a 38 percent reduction in the growth of the black

arrest rate in covered counties, relative to non-covered counties. While our sample sizes here are

small and the results are noisy, we find smaller effects for all coefficients involving municipal

governments (columns 1-4 of the lower panel).               33

   32 While the magnitude of the effect is smaller for felonies, these two coefficients are not statistically different from

one another, likely because of the small size of our sample
   33 In the Appendix, we also investigate whether our results are driven by arrests of adults versus juveniles. As

shown in Tables A6 and A7, the decline in arrest rates in the Sheriff sample is essentially driven by adult arrest rates.




                                                            22
7      Mechanisms

Our results thus far document that the enfranchisement of black voters leads to a reduction in

black arrest rates, but only when CLEOs are elected, rather than appointed. In this section, we

carry out additional exercises to shed light on the mechanisms underlying our findings. We first

explore further the role of appointed versus elected CLEOs. We then examine whether our results

are driven by an increase in black elected officials. Finally, we study whether changes in the racial

composition of police forces could contribute towards our findings.

     Starting with the role of different CLEOs selection procedures, we use state-level variation in

local statutes and charters allowing for police chiefs in municipal governments to be elected or

appointed.34 Given our interpretation that electoral systems changed policing practices, we expect

that arrests by municipal police in the presence of elected CLEOs should mirror our results re-

garding arrests by elected sheriffs. Appointed police chiefs, by contrast, are further separated from

voters, and we thus expect less responsive policing practices when they are in charge. As shown

in the top panel of Table 7, which focuses on municipal governments with elected police chiefs,

this is indeed the case: we document reductions in the growth of blacks arrested by municipal

police with elected CLEOs, in areas that are covered by VRA and with significant black popu-

lation shares as of 1960. Although some of these coefficients are less precisely estimated, they

are similar in magnitude to those for county governments: an increase in the black share of the

county population by 10 percentage points, from, say, 20 percent to 30 percent, leads to an 18­21

percent reduction in the growth of the black arrest rate in covered areas, relative to non-covered

areas. In the bottom panel of Table 7, by contrast, we find no differences between black and white

arrest rates when police chiefs are appointed. That is, there is no differential decrease in arrests of

blacks by municipal police in covered counties, relative to non-covered counties, with significant
    34 The information on rules for the selection of police chiefs is taken from the Census of Government "Elected
offices of State and local governments" in 1957 and "Popularly elected officials of State and local governments" for
the subsequent years. See Appendix for details.


                                                        23
black populations, relative to less black areas. Taken together, these results indicate that the overall

patterns uncovered in Table 3 are driven by areas with elected law enforcement officials and are

thus consistent with our hypothesis that enfranchising black voters might have changed policing

practices enacted by elected officials and ultimately changed black arrest rates.

    Second, we investigate whether our baseline results are due to a change in the race of elected

officials or a change in policies holding fixed politicians' race. Towards this end, we use informa-

tion on the race of elected officials in both county and municipal governments. As explained more

in detail in Bernini, Facchini, and Testa (2018), data for the pre­VRA period have been obtained

from the Southern Regional Council papers and local newspapers archives, whereas those for sub-

sequent years have been digitized from the National Roster of Black Elected Officials (NRBEO).

This information has been combined with Census data on the total number of officials elected to

county governments and municipal governments to construct the share of black elected officials in

County Commissions, Judicial bodies, CLEOs and Municipal bodies.35

    Using these data, we find no black sheriffs or elected police chiefs during the pre-VRA era.

In 1980, we find only two black sheriffs, both in covered counties, and only three elected police

chiefs and marshals (two in covered counties and one in a non-covered county). The small number

of sheriffs is likely due to the fact that they tend to be elected county-wide, and very few Southern

counties are majority black. Thus, given these very small counts of black elected CLEOs, our

documented reduction in black arrest rates following the VRA must be driven by a change in the

type or behavior of elected white sheriffs.
   35 More   precisely let
                                                             BlackElectedcot
                                    ShareBlackElectedcot =                                                     (2)
                                                               Electedcot
where c, o and t denote county, office and year, respectively. For the numerator, we use the information we have
collected from the NRBEO, whereas for the denominator we use data from the Census of Governments for 1967 and
1977. The Census reports the total number of elected officials for county governments (e.g. commission, judiciary
and enforcement, and other offices) and municipalities, aggregated at the county level. Unfortunately, there is no
separate information available for each county government category. As a result, to compute the share of blacks in
each different type of county government we use the total number of elected officials in county governments as the
denominator.


                                                       24
   We next investigate the role played by the race of other elected local officials, above and beyond

CLEOs. Using again our triple-differences estimation strategy, we regress the long run difference

in the share of black elected officials between 1962 and 1981 on the pre­VRA share of blacks and

its interaction with the coverage indicator. As shown in Table 8, we do find some evidence of a

larger increase in the share of black elected officials at the local level within covered jurisdictions

compared to non­covered ones. In particular, we find statistically significant increases in the share

of black commissioners (column 1) at the county level, and these effects are large in magnitude.

At the same time, we find no effect when we focus on judges. Similarly, we do not uncover an

increase in black elected officials in municipal governments.

   Given the increase in black county commissioners within covered counties with larger share

of blacks, the reduction in black arrests rates we have documented in covered counties could be

driven by this greater black representation. To explore whether this is the case, we exploit an ad-

ditional source of variation, namely the type of rules disciplining local elections, which have been

shown to affect minority representation (Trebbi, Aghion, and Alesina 2008). In particular, local

officials were elected either by a plurality rule in a unique district covering the entire jurisdiction

("at-large elections"), or in multiple districts ("district system"). The latter system, under which

each district elects a single representative, has come to be seen as being in practice more favorable

towards minorities (Bernini, Facchini, and Testa 2018). To carry out our analysis, we split the sam-

ple distinguishing between elections held by single member districts (SMDs) and other systems.

Comparing the results in column 1 in the top and bottom panels of Table 9, the increase in the

share of African American commissioners documented above is driven entirely by counties with

SMDs elections. By contrast, the decline in black arrests takes place only in non-single member

district counties (column 2), despite the fact that such counties do not experience a corresponding

increase in black commissioners. In columns 3 and 4, when we additionally allow for the effect

of our controls to differ by coverage status, we uncover the same patterns. Taken together, these


                                                  25
additional findings suggest that our baseline results are driven by white officials (via changes in

the behavior of white officials or via newly elected white officials whose views more closely align

with those of black voters), rather than by newly elected black officials.

    Third, we consider the role of the racial composition of the police force, a factor already inves-

tigated by Donohue and Levitt (2001) and McCrary (2007). In particular, it could be that elected

officials post-VRA responded by altering the racial composition of the police force to address the

demands of black voters, rather than attempting to change the practices of white officers directly.

In the first four columns of Table 10 we investigate this question both in the short (columns 1

and 2) and in the long run (columns 3 and 4). The dependent variable in all our regressions is

the change in the number of black police officers per capita. The data for the short run analysis

have been digitized from Rudwick (1962) and Southern Regional Council (1983) and span the

period 1959-1969. The end period data for the long run analysis have been instead obtained from

the 1987 Law Enforcement Management and Administrative Statistics (LEMAS) survey (ICPSR

9222), which was administered to all enforcement agencies with at least 100 employees and to a

nationally representative sample for smaller entities. As a result, the long run analysis covers a

smaller sample.36 The short run analysis does not find any relationship between changes in the

racial composition of the police force and the pre­existing share of blacks either in the treatment

or in the control group. On the other hand, the long run analysis indicates that the number of black

police officers (per capita) increased with the share of African Americans in the 1960 population.37

This pattern is consistent with the positive time trend uncovered in other studies.38 At the same

time, we do not find a differential effect between covered and non­covered counties. This evidence
   36 We also attempted to access data from EEOC but our FOIA request was denied due to a recent elimination of the
data sharing program for researchers.
   37 These coefficients are available upon request.
   38 Donohue and Levitt (2001) who document an increase in the share of black police from 21 percent in 1977 to 38

percent in 1993 (based upon a sample of the 10 largest cities for which they have data). Using a broader sample of
314 cities McCrary (2007) documents an increase in the share of black police from 6 percent in 1970 to 18 percent in
1999.




                                                        26
in consistent with the idea that the change in the racial patterns of arrests is primarily driven by

changes in police practices implemented by CLEOs elected after the VRA. Our findings thus cor-

roborate the qualitative evidence reported by the United States Commission On Civil Rights (2000)

highlighting that police officers' performance of their duties in the field are "...heavily influenced

by the leadership of their department... When incidents of brutality, misconduct or racism occur,

the chiefs immediate reaction to these incidents will have a great impact on whether the incident

will be repeated in the future" (page 30).39



8       Alternative Explanations

While our results point to changes in policing practices, there are several alternative explanations

for the documented reduction in arrest rates for blacks in covered jurisdictions. First, the ability

of CLEOs to change police practices might be constrained by the nature of employment relations

in the police force. Since unions may hinder the ability of CLEOs to discipline their workforce

following misconduct, and police chiefs tend to face a more unionized force than sheriffs (Zoorob

2020), unionization might drive the observed pattern in arrests rates. Second, it could be that

there are changes in the underlying black population following the VRA, leading to changes in

the propensity to commit crimes, and hence arrest rates. Third, even in the absence of changes in

the black population, the "supply" of crime could vary because of changes in policing practices.

Fourth, our results could be driven by elevated levels of black arrests associated with protests

during the pre-VRA era. In this section, we attempt to address these alternative explanations in

turn.

     The first alternative explanation implies that post­VRA changes in unionization may drive the
    39 Furthersupport for the role of CLEOs is provided by a survey of randomly selected law enforcement officers
carried out by the Police Foundation, summarized in United States Commission On Civil Rights 2000. The main
findings was that "approximately 85 percent of the respondents agreed or strongly agreed that a police chief's strong
position against the abuse of authority can make a big difference in deterring officers from abusing their authority."



                                                         27
arrest patterns. Note that trade unions have been historically weak in the South and before the pas-

sage of the VRA police bargaining rights in this area of the country were severely restricted. None

of the former Confederate states had any collective bargaining laws for police in place pre-VRA,

and even after 1965 the South continued to lag behind the rest of the country. In fact, as of 1978,

only two States ­ Florida and Louisiana ­ had introduced state collective bargaining laws for police

forces (Ichniowsky 1982). Thus it is unlikely that the effect of elected CLEOs we have uncovered

could be driven by patterns of union bargaining power rather than electoral accountability. Never-

theless, in the last two columns of Table 10 we explore this possibility by exploiting information

from the 1987 LEMAS survey on agencies covered by collective bargaining agreements to build

an indicator of unionization. The latter can be interpreted as a change, given that in the pre­VRA

period the number of such agreements is effectively zero. As we can see, patterns of collective bar-

gaining are unrelated to the pre-existing share of blacks, both in the treatment and control groups,

and this is true for both the police and the sheriff sample. Hence, while police trade unionism

might well play a role elsewhere in the country or in later years, we can rule it out as an important

factor in the South during our sample period.

   The second alternative explanation involves post-VRA changes in the underlying black popula-

tion that could lead to changes in propensities to commit crimes unrelated to policing patterns. The

underlying black population could change following the VRA for at least three reasons: changes

in migration patterns, improvements in education, and improvements in labor market conditions.

Regarding migration, as shown in columns (1) and (2) of Table 11, covered counties in the sheriff

sample experienced both a significant increase in population and in the share of blacks, whereas we

see no differential demographic change in the police sample. This pure population change cannot

explain our results, however, since we use time-varying and race-specific measures of population

when measuring crime rates. There could be, however, a change in the composition of the African

American population, with newly arriving blacks less likely to commit crimes, leading to lower


                                                 28
arrest rates. To tackle this question, in columns 3-8, we investigate patterns of socio­demographic

outcomes that are likely to be related to the propensity to commit crimes (e.g. unemployment,

educational attainment and poverty). Our analysis indicates the absence of differential effects be-

tween covered and uncovered counties both in the sheriff and in the police samples. This is true

when we consider characteristics of the entire population (columns (3)-(5)) and those of blacks

alone (columns 6-8), which are reported by the Census for counties with more than 1,000 African

Americans.

   The third alternative explanation involves changes in the propensity to commit crime by blacks,

relative to whites, following the VRA. To the extent that crime responds to enforcement, we might

expect an increase in the supply of black crime in response to a reduction in mistreatment of blacks

by police. Thus, if anything, changes in the supply of crime should work against our identification

strategy, leading us to understate the reduction in black arrests associated with better treatment of

blacks by police in covered areas following the VRA.

   The fourth alternative explanation involves the suppression of civil rights protests. During the

VRA era, there were widespread reports of arrests of African American protesters, perhaps inflat-

ing black arrest rates during our pre-period in covered areas and contributing to our documented

reduction in black arrests following the VRA. We have attempted to address this issue by con-

trolling for black activism at the county level and interacting this measure of black activism with

coverage status. In addition, our results are driven by arrests in the sheriff sample, and, if any-

thing, protests were concentrated in more urban areas, those under the jurisdiction of municipal

police chiefs. Thus, arrests of black protesters during the pre-VRA era also cannot explain our key

findings.




                                                 29
9    Conclusion

In this paper, we investigate the effect of the enfranchisement of black voters on police practices, as

captured by race-specific arrest rates. Following the VRA, which enfranchised black voters, black

arrest rates fell in areas both covered by the VRA and with a large number of newly enfranchised

black voters. We find no corresponding patterns for white arrest rates. These results are driven

by less serious offenses, for which police might naturally have more discretion in arrest decisions,

relative to more serious offenses. These results are driven by arrests by county governments,

which have elected sheriffs. We do not find corresponding differences on the whole for arrests

by municipal governments, but do uncover evidence of our baseline differences in the subset of

municipal governments with elected police chiefs, yielding credence to our hypothesized electoral

mechanism. We also argue that our results cannot be explained by changes in black's propensity to

commit crimes due to either changes in the underlying population or police practices following the

VRA, or to a fall in arrests associated with the decline in civil rights protests. Taken together, our

results suggest that enfranchisement of minority groups can lead to improved treatment by police

but only when CLEOs are elected, rather than appointed.

    While historical in nature, these results have significant policy implications today, especially

given the ongoing national debates over race and policing and also over voting. On the one hand,

although blacks continue to be disproportionately targeted by law enforcement, our results indicate

that the election of CLEOs affects accountability and improves the treatment of minority groups

by police. On the other, since the franchise matters, should recently enacted changes in the costs

of voting, such as voter ID laws, have disproportionate effects on black voters, this might lead to a

further worsening of the treatment of minorities by police. Taken together these results emphasize

the important link between the administration of justice and the democratic process.




                                                  30
References

 Acemoglu, D. and A. Wolitzky (2011). The economics of labor coercion. Econometrica 79(2),

    555­600.

 Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2014). A test of racial bias in capital sentencing. American

    Economic Review 104, 3397­3433.

 Alexander, M. (2010). The New Jim Crow : Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness.

    New Press.

 Aneja, A. P. and C. F. Avenancio-Leon (2019). The effect of political power on labor market

    inequality: Evidence from the 1965 Voting Rights Act. mimeo, UC Berkeley.

 Ang, D. (2019). Do 40-year-old facts still matter? Long-run effects of federal oversight under

    the Voting Rights Act. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11, 1­53.

 Antonovics, K. and B. G. Knight (2009). A new look at racial profiling: Evidence from the

    Boston police department. The Review of Economics and Statistics 91, 163­177.

 Anwar, S., P. Bayer, and R. Hjalmarsson (2012). The impact of jury race in criminal trials. The

    Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1017­1055.

 Anwar, S. and H. Fang (2006). An alternative test of racial prejudice in motor vehicle searches:

    Theory and evidence. American Economic Review 96, 127­151.

 Bernini, A., G. Facchini, and C. Testa (2018). Race, representation and local governments in

    the US South: the effect of the Voting Rights Act. CEPR Discussion Paper 12774.

 Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar (2003). Managing with style: the effect of managers on firm poli-

    cies. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169­1208.

 Besley, T. and S. Coate (2003). Elected versus appointed regulators: Theory and evidence.

    Journal of the European Economic Association 1, 1176­1206.

                                              31
Bolton, P., M. K. Brunnermeier, and L. Veldkamp (2012). Leadership, Coordination, and Cor-

   porate Culture. The Review of Economic Studies 80, 512­537.

Bulman, G. (2019). Law enforcement leaders and the racial composition of arrests. Economic

   Inquiry 57, 1842­1858.

Button, J. W. (1989). Blacks and Social Change: Impact of the Civil Rights Movement in South-

   ern Communities. Princenton, NJ: Princeton Univreity Press.

Cascio, E. U. and E. Washington (2014). Valuing the vote: The redistribution of voting

   rights and state funds following the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Quarterly Journal of Eco-

   nomics 129, 376­433.

Donohue, J. J. and S. Levitt (2001). The impact of race on policing and arrests. Journal of Law

   and Economics 44, 367­394.

Falcone, D. and L. Wells (1995). The county sheriff as a distinctive policing modality. American

   Journal of Police 14, 123­149.

Hornbeck, R. and S. Naidu (2014). When the levee breaks: Black migration and economic

   development in the American South. American Economic Review 104, 963­90.

Iaryczower, M., L. Garrett, and M. Shum (2013). To elect or to appoint? Bias, information, and

   responsiveness of bureaucrats and politicians. Journal of Public Economics 97, 230­244.

Ichniowsky, C. (1982). Arbitration and police bargaining: Prescriptions for the blue flu. Indus-

   trial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society 21, 149­166.

Kaplan, E. and J. Stanzler (1971). Voting rights: A Case Study of Madison Parish, Louisiana.

   University of Chicago Law Review 38, 726­787.

Knowles, J., N. Persico, and P. Todd (2001). Racial bias in motor vehicle searches: Theory and

   evidence. Journal of Political Economy 109, 203­229.


                                             32
Kuziemko, I. and E. Washington (2018). Why did the democrats lose the South? Bringing new

   data to an old debate. American Economic Review 108, 2830­67.

Mazumder, S. (2019). A brief moment in the sun: Politics, race, punishment, and the rise of the

   proto­carceral state. mimeo, Harvard University.

McCrary, J. (2007). The effect of court-ordered hiring quotas on the composition and quality of

   police. American Economic Review 97, 318­353.

Moore, T. (1997). Race and the county sheriff in the American South. International Social

   Science Review 72, 50­61.

Peirce, N. R. (1974). The Deep South States of America: People, Politics, and Power in the

   Seven Deep South States. New York and London: W.W.Norton.

Rudwick, E. M. (1962). The unequal badge; Negro policemen in the South. Atlanta: Southern

   Regional Council.

Southern Regional Council (1983). Southern Regional Council Papers, 1944­1968, Volume

   Reel 111. New York: NYT Microfilming Corporation of America.

Trebbi, F., P. Aghion, and A. Alesina (2008). Electoral rules and minority representation in U.S.

   cities. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 325­357.

United States Commission on Civil Rights (1961). United States Commission on Civil Rights

   report: Justice. Washington, DC.

United States Commission On Civil Rights (2000). Revisiting Who is guarding the guardians?

   A report on police practices and civil rights in America. Washington, DC: U.S. Commission

   on Civil Rights.

Wright, G. (2013). Sharing the Prize: The Economics of the Civil Rights Revolution in the

   American South. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


                                             33
Zoorob, M. (2020). There's (rarely) a new sheriff in town: The incumbency advantage for local

   law enforcement. mimeo, Harvard University.




                                           34
      Figure 1: Coverage in 1965




                                                 Non covered
                                                 Covered




Figure 2: Arrest rates, sample 1960-1981




                                           No data
                                           Arrest data by race




                  35
                                                      Figure 3: Change in arrest rates (1960-1981), by coverage



                                 Black arrests, without controls                                                     White arrests, without controls




                                                                                                                         1.3
                                    1.3
        Long run Diff. ln Arrests rates




                                                                                            Long run Diff. ln Arrests rates
                                                                                                              .8
                          .8




                                                                                                  .3
              .3




                                                                         Not covered                                                                         Not covered

                                                                         Covered                                                                             Covered
                  -.2




                                                                                                      -.2
                                                  0    10 20 30 40 50                                                                 0        10 20 30 40 50
                                                       Share of blacks, 1960                                                                  Share of blacks, 1960


                                                         Black arrests                                                                         White arrests
        Long run Difference in ln Arrests rates




                                                                                            Long run Difference in ln Arrests rates
                              .8




                                                                                                                 .8
                    .3




                                                                                                      .3
          -.2




                                                                         Not covered                                                                         Not covered

                                                                         Covered                                                                             Covered
                                                                                            -.2




                                                  0    10 20 30 40 50 60                                                                  0    10 20 30 40 50 60
                                                       Share of blacks, 1960                                                                  Share of blacks, 1960


Note: The two figures are binned scatterplot with 10 equally sized bins obtained regressing the long run
difference in Ln arrests rates on the share of blacks in 1960. Controls include state trends and the following
1960 county characteristics: population (in logs), unemployment rate, percent family below the poverty
line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests,
anti-black protests, black police in 1959.




                                                                                       36
        Table 1: Sheriff and Police sample vs. US South sample
                                          Police and Sheriff sample             US South entire sample

                                          Mean            St. Dev.              Mean       St. Dev.

    County characteristics

    Percent black, 1960                   21.50               17.73             23.23       19.89
    Unemployment rate, 1960                5.00                 1.87             4.92        2.05
    Families below poverty line, 1960     41.03                14.10            44.96       15.65
    Percent unskilled, 1960               69.98                 9.10            72.35        9.27
    County population (1,000), 1960       54.40               100.52            37.69       81.95
    Percent rural, 1960                   17.09                13.90            21.04       15.21
    Pro-black activism, 1960-64            1.20                 5.57             0.83        4.65
    Anti-black activism, 1960-64           0.24                 1.95             0.18        1.51
    Cotton suitability                     0.45                 0.40             0.43        0.39
    Black police, 1959                     1.12                4.72              0.79        6.17
    Farms with 700 acres or more          35.06                42.75            32.89       42.74



    Counties                                            590                             1137




                              Table 2: Summary Statistics
                                                All                      Sheriff                 Police

                                        Mean      St. Dev.       Mean        St. Dev.    Mean       St. Dev.

County characteristics

Percent black, 1960                     21.50      17.73         20.45          19.04    21.59        16.14
Unemployment rate, 1960                  5.00       1.87          4.96           1.97     5.01         1.68
Families below poverty line, 1960       41.03      14.10         42.42          14.40    38.64        13.15
Percent unskilled, 1960                 69.98       9.10         71.06           8.87    68.25         8.89
County population (1,000), 1960         54.40     100.52         48.13          91.86    69.39       116.08
Percent rural, 1960                     17.09      13.90         19.53          14.59    14.15        12.58
Pro-black activism, 1960-64              1.20       5.57          0.98           5.46     1.62         6.56
Anti-black activism, 1960-64             0.24       1.95          0.23           1.62     0.31         2.31
Cotton suitability                       0.45       0.40          0.46           0.42     0.44         0.39
Black police, 1959                       1.12       4.72          0.89           3.85     1.46         5.33
Farms with 700 acres or more            35.06      42.75         39.91          48.45    33.42        39.69

Arrest rates

Arrest rate pre-VRA, black              6.29          12.92       2.62          4.94     7.02           14.47
Arrest rate post-VRA, black             6.59          10.65       3.13          6.78     5.93           11.20
Difference in ln Arrests rates, black   0.30           1.00       0.45          1.34     -0.08           0.70
Arrest rate pre-VRA, white              1.99           1.94       0.90          0.85     2.24            2.07
Arrest rate post-VRA, white             3.07          2.13        1.55          1.10     2.62           2.28
Difference in ln Arrests rates, white   0.62           0.85       0.71          1.11     0.16            0.63



Counties                                        590                       302                     334




                                                  37
     Table 3: OLS models. Dependent Variable: Sheriffs and Police, Long run Difference in ln Arrests rates, by race
     (1960-1981)
                                            (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                           black      white       black      white       black      white       black      white

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage      ­0.016**    ­0.006     ­0.017**    ­0.003     ­0.017**    ­0.006     ­0.023**    ­0.004
                                          (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.008)    (0.006)     (0.007)    (0.006)     (0.009)    (0.007)
     Percent black, 1960                 0.020***     0.004     0.020***     0.004     0.024***     0.007     0.027***     0.007
                                          (0.006)    (0.004)     (0.006)    (0.004)     (0.006)    (0.005)     (0.007)    (0.005)
     Coverage                            0.472**      0.023      ­0.172      0.168     0.588**      0.068       0.165      1.091
                                          (0.240)    (0.196)     (0.579)    (0.542)     (0.260)    (0.208)     (0.752)    (0.747)

     Economic Controls                      Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
     Other Controls                         No         No          No         No          Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
38




     Coverage X Controls                    No         No          Yes        Yes         No         No          Yes        Yes
     State Trends                           Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes

     Adj. R-Square                         0.18        0.37       0.17        0.37       0.20        0.39       0.17        0.38
     N                                     552         589        552         589        487         524        487         524
     Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels,
     respectively. Economic Controls: population, unemployment rate, percent family below the poverty line, percent unskilled,
     percent rural. Other controls: cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black
     police.
Table 4: OLS models. Dependent Variable: Sheriff vs. Police Long
run Difference in ln Arrests rates, by race (1960-1981)
                                      Sheriff sample        Police sample

                                      (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)
                                     black       white     black     white

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage     ­0.031**     ­0.011    ­0.004      0.009
                                    (0.014)     (0.011)   (0.008)    (0.006)

Controls                              Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
Coverage X Controls                   Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
State Trends                          Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes

Adj. R-Square                         0.14       0.31       0.14      0.22
N                                     247        280        347       361
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Controls: percent
black, coverage, population, unemployment rate, percent family below the
poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability, farms with
700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.




                                     39
Table 5: OLS models. Dependent Variable: Sheriffs and Police, Long run Difference in ln
Arrest rates, by race and offense (1960-1981)
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
                                   felony black   non felony black    felony white    non felony white

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage       ­0.014             ­0.022**         ­0.008             0.002
                                     (0.010)             (0.010)         (0.008)           (0.007)

Controls                               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
Coverage X Controls                    Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes
State Trends                           Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes

Adj. R-Square                          0.56               0.15            0.69              0.29
N                                      458                485             512               523
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and
10% levels, respectively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment rate, percent
family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres
or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.




                                                   40
Table 6: OLS models. Dependent Variable: Long run Difference in ln Arrest rates, by race and
offense (1960-1981)
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)
                                   felony black   non felony black    felony white    non felony white

Sheriff sample

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage       ­0.024             ­0.038**         ­0.014            ­0.005
                                     (0.016)             (0.015)         (0.011)           (0.012)

Controls                               Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes
Coverage X Controls                    Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes
State Trends                           Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes
Adj. R-Square                          0.28               0.09            0.53              0.24
N                                      232                245             278               279

Police sample

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage        0.005             ­0.006            0.004             0.008
                                     (0.011)            (0.007)          (0.010)           (0.007)

Controls                               Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes
Coverage X Controls                    Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes
State Trends                           Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes
Adj. R-Square                          0.56               0.30            0.65              0.19
N                                      323                346             349               361
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and
10% levels, respectively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment rate, percent
family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres
or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.




                                                   41
Table 7: OLS models. Elected vs Appointed Police Chief. Dependent Variable: Long run Differ-
ence in ln Arrests rates, by race (1960-1981)
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)
                                      black      white      black      white      black      white      black     white

Elected Police Chief

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage      ­0.021**    ­0.001     ­0.016     ­0.006    ­0.018*     ­0.004     ­0.005    ­0.001
                                     (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.010)    (0.011)   (0.011)     (0.010)    (0.010)   (0.010)

Economic Controls                     Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Other Controls                         No          No         No        No        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Coverage X Controls                    No          No        Yes       Yes         No          No       Yes        Yes
State Trends                          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Adj. R-Square                         0.10        0.31       0.10      0.36       0.05        0.30      0.03       0.39
N                                     178         190        178       190        161         173       161        173

Appointed Police Chief

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage       ­0.006      0.001     ­0.005      0.014     ­0.003      0.004     ­0.001     0.018
                                     (0.007)    (0.008)    (0.009)    (0.011)    (0.010)    (0.009)    (0.011)   (0.013)

Economic Controls                     Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Other Controls                         No          No         No        No        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Coverage X Controls                    No          No        Yes       Yes         No          No       Yes        Yes
State Trends                          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Adj. R-Square                         0.15        0.08       0.14      0.10       0.17        0.09      0.16       0.09
N                                     221         222        221       222        186         188       186        188
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels,
respectively. Economic Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment rate, percent family below the
poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural. Other Controls: cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black
protests, anti-black protests, black police.




                                                           42
Table 8: OLS models. Dependent Variable: Change in black office holding (1960-
1981)
                                         Sheriff sample                  Police sample

                                       (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)
                                   Commissioners      Judicial   Municipal council     Judicial

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage         0.142**         ­0.003          ­0.007           0.007
                                       (0.070)         (0.005)         (0.079)         (0.012)

State Trends                              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Coverage X Controls                       Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Controls                                  Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes

Adj. R-Square                            0.48           0.32            0.54             0.08
N                                        247            247             347              347
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the
1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unem-
ployment rate, percent family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton
suitability, farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.




                                                43
     Table 9: OLS models. Dependent Variable: Long run Difference in black office holding
     and black arrests by election rule, sheriff sample (1960-1981)
                                            (1)                (2)             (3)                 (4)
                                        Commissioners     Black Arrests    Commissioners      Black Arrests

     Single Member District

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage        0.167***           ­0.012           0.170**           ­0.019
                                            (0.061)           (0.014)          (0.072)           (0.018)

     Controls                                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
     Coverage X Controls                      No                No               Yes               Yes
     State Trends                            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
     Adj. R-Square                           0.54              0.14              0.55              0.10
     N                                       165               165               165               165
44




     Non Single Member district

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage         ­0.008           ­0.037**            0.080          ­0.084***
                                            (0.123)           (0.016)           (0.180)          (0.026)

     Controls                                Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
     Coverage X Controls                      No                No               Yes               Yes
     State Trends                            Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
     Adj. R-Square                           0.35              0.24              0.31              0.29
     N                                        82                82                82                82
     Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and
     10% levels, respectively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment rate, percent
     family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres
     or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.
                                        Table 10: OLS models. Characteristics of the police force
                                                         number of black police p.c.                          collective bargaining

                                                  1959­1969                         1959­1987                        1959­1987

                                            (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
                                      Sheriff sample    Police sample   Sheriff sample   Police sample   Sheriff sample   Police sample

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage        0.001           ­0.000            0.003          ­0.003           ­0.004           ­0.001
                                          (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.003)         (0.002)          (0.005)          (0.005)

     Controls                               Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes
     Coverage X Controls                    Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes
     State Trends                           Yes               Yes            Yes                Yes            Yes               Yes

     Adj. R-Square                         0.25               0.05           0.75               0.75          0.34               0.27
45




     N                                     280                361             95                172            95                172
     Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
     Controls: population, unemployment rate, percent family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability,
     farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests.
                                Table 11: OLS models. Post-VRA trends, by race (1960-1981)
                                                                  All counties                         Counties with # Blacks  1,000

                                          (1)            (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)      (6)        (7)          (8)
                                       Population    Black share       Unemp     Unskilled    Poor     Black      Black        Black
                                                                                                       Unemp     Unskilled     Poor

     Sheriff Sample

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage      0.005**       0.105**         ­0.002      0.022     ­0.013    ­0.023      0.030       0.128
                                         (0.002)       (0.048)         (0.019)    (0.045)    (0.042)   (0.061)    (0.153)     (0.154)

     Controls                              Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
     Controls x Coverage                   Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
     State Trends                          Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
     Adj. R-Square                         0.57          0.59           0.50       0.95       0.94      0.55       0.98        0.95
     N                                     280           280            280        280        280       172        169         165
46




     Police Sample

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage       0.003          0.032          0.002      0.068      0.013    ­0.030      0.033       0.137
                                         (0.002)        (0.036)        (0.018)    (0.045)    (0.036)   (0.046)    (0.094)     (0.105)

     Controls                              Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
     Controls x Coverage                   Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
     State Trends                          Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
     Adj. R-Square                         0.66          0.64           0.61       0.96       0.94      0.56       0.99        0.96
     N                                     361           361            361        360        361       299        301         294
     Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
     Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.
     Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment rate, percent family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent
     rural, cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.
Appendix

Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1 Taking p2 as given, the first-order condition for candidate 1 is given by:




             Q1            Q1
                = (1 -  )     [0.5( p1 - pW )2 - 0.5( p2 - pW )2 ] + (1 -  )Q1 ( p1 - pW )
             p1            p1


Changes in announced platforms by candidate 1 leads to changes in the probability of winning,

which has direct effects on candidate payoffs from winning (the left hand size) but also effects on

the policies that are implemented and candidate preferences over those policies, as represented by

the right-hand side.

   Moreover, the effect of making policies harsher on the probability of winning is given by:


               Q1
                  = f [ B +  (1 -  )W ][- ( p1 - pB ) -  (1 -  )( p1 - pW )]
               p1


   When candidate 1's platform is more harsh than preferred by blacks but less harsh than pre-

ferred by whites ( pB < p1 < pW ), making policies more harsh leads to more support from white

voters but less support from black voters. Putting this back into the candidate equilibrium condition

above, using symmetry, and re-arranging, equilibrium polices can be characterized by a weighted

average of black and white bliss points:


                                      p =  pB + (1 -  ) pW




                                                 47
where the weight on policy preferences of black voters equals:


                                           f (0)
                           =
                                  f (0) +  f (0) (1 -  ) + (1 -  )


Finally, the weight on the policy preferences of black voters is increasing in the black share of the

population ( ).



Proof of Proposition 2 With an appointed CLEO, the pre-VRA equilibrium is unchanged ( p =

pW ) but the post-VRA equilibrium in police treatment of blacks is given by:


                                      p = ~ pB + (1 - ~ ) pW



where the weight on black preferences now equals:


                                            f (0)   ~
                           ~ =
                           
                                  f (0)~ +  f (0)~ (1 -  ) + (1 -  )


A marginal increase in the share of black voters shifts equilibrium policy towards those preferred by

blacks in proportion to the weight placed on black voters by policy makers. That is,   /  =  /

and  ~ /  = ~ / . Moreover, one can show that  > ~ due to the fact that  > ~ and so long as

candidates place some weight on both policy and winning (0 <  < 1). Thus, a marginal increase

in the share of black voters leads to a bigger shift in police treatment of blacks under elected

officials than under appointed CLEOs.




                                                 48
     Table A1: OLS models. Pre-VRA trends in civil right activism, political participation and
     racial attitudes sample
                                          Police and Sheriff sample          US South entire sample

                                        NACCP      Turnout      KKK       NACCP      Turnout     KKK
                                          (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage     0.0115     ­0.0002    ­0.0472     0.0016     0.0001     ­0.0594
                                        (0.012)    (0.001)    (0.044)     (0.004)    (0.001)    (0.051)

     Controls                             Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     Controls x Coverage                  Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     State Trends                         Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

     Adj. R-Square                       ­0.02       0.93       0.02       ­0.01       0.92       0.02
49




     N                                    508        515        508         978        997        978
     Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%
     and 10% levels, respectively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment rate,
     percent family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability, farms
     with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.
     Table A2: OLS models. Pre-VRA trends in civil right activism, political participation and
     racial attitudes sample
                                                  Sheriff sample                    Police sample

                                        NACCP        Turnout       KKK    NACCP       Turnout       KKK
                                          (1)          (2)          (3)     (4)         (5)          (6)

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage      0.0068      0.0030    ­0.1818    0.0015      ­0.0002   ­0.0057*
                                         (0.013)     (0.002)   (0.152)    (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.003)

     Controls                              Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
     Controls x Coverage                   Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes
     State Trends                          Yes         Yes         Yes      Yes         Yes         Yes

     Adj. R-Square                        ­0.07       0.93         0.12     0.15       0.94         0.10
50




     N                                     267        277          267      353        355          353
     Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%
     and 10% levels, respectively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment rate,
     percent family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability, farms with
     700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.
     Table A3: OLS models. Pre-VRA trends in economic and demographic variables (1960-1950 difference),
     Sheriff Sample sample
                                        Black Share    Population    Unemp       Rural    Unskilled      Poor     Cotton Yield
                                            (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)           (6)          (7)

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage       0.0158        0.0020**     ­0.0089    0.1047     ­0.0195     ­0.0350      ­0.0030
                                          (0.019)        (0.001)     (0.014)    (0.070)    (0.023)     (0.051)      (0.003)

     Controls                               Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
     Controls x Coverage                    Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes
     State Trends                           Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes           Yes

     Adj. R-Square                          0.34          0.60         0.69      0.88        0.87        0.81         0.33
     N                                      280           280          280       280         280         280          280
51




     Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels,
     respectively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment rate, percent family below the poverty line,
     percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests,
     black police.
     Table A4: OLS models. Pre-VRA trends in economic and demographic variables (1960-1950 difference), Police
     Sample sample
                                         Black Share     Population     Unemp        Rural      Unskilled     Poor      Cotton Yield
                                             (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)           (7)

     Percent black, 1960 x Coverage         0.0348         0.0013       ­0.0163    0.1697**      0.0338      0.0468       ­0.0030
                                            (0.037)        (0.001)      (0.017)     (0.067)      (0.028)     (0.056)      (0.003)

     Controls                                 Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Controls x Coverage                      Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
     State Trends                             Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes

     Adj. R-Square                           0.37            0.70         0.61        0.89         0.90       0.83          0.39
     N                                       361             361          361         361          361        361           361
52




     Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respec-
     tively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment rate, percent family below the poverty line, percent
     unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability, farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.
Table A5: OLS models. Dependent Variable: Sheriffs and Police, Long run
Difference in ln Arrests rates, by race (1960-1981)
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)
                                       black        white        black       white

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage      ­0.016**        ­0.006     ­0.017**       ­0.006
                                     (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.006)
Percent black, 1960                 0.020***        0.004      0.024***       0.007
                                     (0.006)       (0.004)      (0.006)      (0.005)
Coverage                             0.472**         0.023      0.588**        0.068
                                     (0.240)       (0.196)      (0.260)      (0.208)
Unemployment rate, 1960               ­0.020        ­0.015       ­0.036       ­0.018
                                     (0.034)       (0.024)      (0.036)      (0.025)
Percent family bottom 20, 1960         0.003         0.005        0.001       ­0.000
                                     (0.008)       (0.005)      (0.008)      (0.006)
Percent unskilled, 1960               ­0.002       0.008**       ­0.001      0.010**
                                     (0.005)       (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.004)
County population (1,000), 1960     ­0.001***     ­0.001***      ­0.001     ­0.001**
                                     (0.000)       (0.000)      (0.000)      (0.000)
Percent rural, 1960                    0.007       ­0.001         0.003       ­0.001
                                     (0.006)       (0.004)      (0.006)      (0.005)
Pro-black activism, 1960-64                                    ­0.009**     ­0.009**
                                                                (0.004)      (0.004)
Anti-black activism, 1960-64                                      0.013        0.017
                                                                (0.013)      (0.015)
Cotton suitability                                              ­0.343*       ­0.222
                                                                (0.176)      (0.165)
Farms with 700 acres or more                                      0.001       ­0.000
                                                                (0.002)      (0.001)
Black police, 1959                                             ­0.012**       ­0.005
                                                                (0.005)      (0.010)

State Trends                           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
Coverage X Controls                    No            No           No          No

Adj. R-Square                          0.18          0.37         0.20        0.39
N                                      552           589          487         524
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels, respectively.



                                          53
Table A6: OLS models. Dependent Variable: Sheriffs Long run Difference in ln Arrest
rates, by race and age (1960-1981)
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
                                   adult black    juvenile black   adult white   juvenile white

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage      ­0.030**          ­0.012         ­0.011           0.016
                                     (0.014)          (0.062)        (0.011)         (0.020)

Controls                               Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Coverage X Controls                    Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
State Trends                           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

Adj. R-Square                          0.12            0.43           0.27            0.41
N                                      247              74            280             119
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5% and 10% levels, respectively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment
rate, percent family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability,
farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.




Table A7: OLS models. Dependent Variable: Police Long run Difference in ln Arrest
rates, by race and age (1960-1981)
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
                                   adult black    juvenile black   adult white   juvenile white

Percent black, 1960 x Coverage       ­0.004           ­0.011          0.009           0.002
                                     (0.007)          (0.018)        (0.006)         (0.016)

Controls                               Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Coverage X Controls                    Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
State Trends                           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

Adj. R-Square                          0.20            0.70           0.17            0.74
N                                      347             214            361             242
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%,
5% and 10% levels, respectively. Controls: percent black, coverage, population, unemployment
rate, percent family below the poverty line, percent unskilled, percent rural, cotton suitability,
farms with 700 acres or more, pro-black protests, anti-black protests, black police.




                                                 54
Variable definitions and sources

Arrests data.

   Arrests executed by local police offices between 1960-1981 have been obtained from the Uni-

form Crime Reports (UCR) reporting information on arrests by race and local enforcement agency

provided by voluntary filing. Since the number of reporting agencies varies over time, we have

retained only agencies for which we have information before and after the VRA passage to build

a panel of municipal police and sheriff offices that we have subsequently mapped to counties, ob-

taining a balanced panel of 484 counties (out of a universe of 1137) for the pre­VRA (1960-1965)

and post­VRA (1975-1980) periods. These data have been combined with Census data on popula-

tion by county to construct the average county arrest rates pre­VRA (1960-1965) and post­VRA

(1975-1980) described below.

   Arrest rate pre­VRA, black: Black arrests per thousands (1960-1965).

   Arrest rate pre­VRA, white: White arrests per thousands (1960-1965).

   Arrest rate post­VRA, black: Black arrests per thousands (1975-1980).

   Arrest rate post­VRA, white: White arrests per thousands (1975-1980).

   Difference in Ln Arrest rate, black: Difference between the natural log of black arrest rates

post­VRA and pre­VRA.

   Difference in Ln Arrest rate, white: Difference between the natural log of white arrest rates

post­VRA and pre­VRA.

Coverage.

   Dummy variable equal to one for the counties that were covered under Section 5 of the VRA

in 1965 and zero otherwise. All counties of six states (Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi,

South Carolina, and Virginia) were covered, whereas, of the 100 North Carolina counties, 39 were



                                               55
covered, i.e. Anson, Beaufort, Bertie, Bladen, Camden, Caswell, Chowan, Cleveland, Craven,

Cumberland, Edgecombe, Franklin, Gaston, Gates, Granville, Greene, Guilford, Halifax, Harnett,

Hertford, Hoke, Jackson, Lee, Martin, Nash, Northampton, Onslow, Pasquotank, Perquimans,

Person, Pitt, Robeson, Rockingham, Scotland, Union, Vance, Washington, Wayne, Wilson (source:

https://www.justice.gov/crt). All counties of Arkansas, Florida, Tennessee, and Texas were instead

not covered.

County characteristics.

   Percent black, 1960: percent black in the 1960 county population is from the County and City

Data Book Consolidated File, County Data 1947-1977 (U.S. Department of Commerce 1978).

   Population, 1960: the county population is from the County and City Data Book Consolidated

File, County Data 1947-1977 (U.S. Department of Commerce 1978).

   Unemployment rate, 1960: county unemployment rate is from the County and City Data Book

Consolidated File, County Data 1947-1977 (U.S. Department of Commerce 1978).

   Percent poor, 1960: percentage of families with income less than 3,000 USD in 1960 is from

the County and City Data Book Consolidated File, County Data 1947-1977 (U.S. Department of

Commerce 1978).

   Percent unskilled, 1960: county percentage of 25 years old or more without a high school

diploma in 1960 is from the County and City Data Book Consolidated File, County Data 1947-

1977 (U.S. Department of Commerce 1978).

   Percent rural, 1960: county percentage of population living in rural farms in 1960 is from

the County and City Data Book Consolidated File, County Data 1947-1977 (U.S. Department of

Commerce 1978).

   Pro-black activism, 1960-64: counts of pro-black events occurred between 1960 and 1964 as

reported by the Dynamics of Collective Action Dataset by states and cities, matched to counties by



                                               56
the authors. Source: web.stanford.edu/group/collectiveaction/cgi-bin/drupal.

   Anti-black activism, 1960-64: counts of anti-black events occurred between 1960 and 1964 as

reported by the Dynamics of Collective Action Dataset by states and cities, matched to counties by

the authors. Source: web.stanford.edu/group/collectiveaction/cgi-bin/drupal.

   NAACP: change in the standardized (by black population) count of local branches of the Na-

tional Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), by county, between 1940

and 1964. The information on the location of local branches of the NAACP has been obtained

from the University of Washington's project `Mapping American Social Movements Through the

20th Century', which reports the municipality of each branch. These locations have been mapped

to the corresponding counties by the authors.

   KKK: change in the standardized (by black population) counts of Ku Klux Klan organiza-

tions (known as Klaverns) by county. Information on the location of Klan organizations has been

obtained from two sources. For the year 1940, information on the location of each Klavern has

been obtained from the Virginia Commonwealth University's project `Mapping the Second Ku

Klux Klan', which lists the exact location of each headquarter (in a latitude and longitude for-

mat), mapped to the counties by the authors. For the later period, the location by county has

been obtained from `The Present-Day Ku Klux Klan Movement: Report by the Committee on

Un-American Activities. House of Representatives. Ninetieth Congress, First Session. 1967' (pp.

145-163), which reports information on active Klaverns between 1964-1966.

   Presidential turnout: difference in the natural log of presidential turnout in 1964 and 1944,

where presidential turnout is given by the votes cast in the 1964 and 1944 presidential elections

divided by population of voting age. The data on votes cast in the presidential election are from

Electoral Data for Counties in the United States: Presidential and Congressional Races, 1840-

1972, ICPSR 8611. The data on population of voting age are from the Minnesota Population

Center, National Historical Geographic Information System and from the U.S. Census.


                                                57
   Cotton suitability: maximum potential cotton yield by county (e.g. cotton suitability index).

Source:(Hornbeck and Naidu 2014)

   Farm size: number of farms with 700 acres or more from United States Agriculture Data,

1840-2012, ICPSR 35206.

   Number of blacks in the police force: the 1959 data have been digitized from Rudwick (1962)

and the 1969 have been digitized from Southern Regional Council (1983).

   Cotton yield: change in cotton yield computed as the difference in the natural log of cotton

yields in 1964 and 1945, where the cotton yield is the number of cotton bales per acre of land

devoted to the cultivation of cotton by county. Cotton bales and acres of land devoted to cultivation

of cotton are from the United States Agriculture Data, 1840-2012, ICPSR 35206.

Black elected officials.

   The share of black elected officials by type of office is the number of black elected officials in

County Commissions, municipal council and judges as reported by the National Roster of Black

Elected Officials, divided by the total number of elected officials for the corresponding offices at

county level, as reported by the Census of Governments. Judges belong to courts whose jurisdiction

does not exceed the boundaries of a county and include the following courts: city and municipal

courts, traffic courts, family courts, juvenile courts, pro- bate courts, general sessions courts, and

county courts. When the numerator is zero and the denominator is missing, the share is zero.

The total number of black elected officials in each local office in the US South has been obtained

by counting the black elected officials by office reported in the National Roster of Black Elected

Officials in 1969, 1971, and for the period 1973-1980. These officials have been matched to

the counties using the address provided by the Roster. The information on the total number of

elected officials by type of office that is used to construct the share of black elected officials is only

available from the Census of Governments in 1967 and 1977. Thus, for the period 1964-1972,



                                                   58
the total number of elected officials by type of office are taken from the Census of Governments,

Volume 1, Governmental Organization, Number 2, Popularly Elected Officials, 1967. For the

period 1973-1982, elected officials by type of office are taken from the Census of Governments

Volume 1, Governmental Organization, Number 2, Popularly Elected Officials, 1977.

Election rule of county governing bodies and police chiefs.

   The information on the system of elections of members of county governing bodies and police

chiefs comes from the Census of Governments, Elective Offices of State and Local Governments

(1957) and from the National Roster of Black Elected Officials (NRBEO, 1980). We have used

the summary information reported by the Census of Government (1957) and the NRBEO (1980) at

state level to construct indicators for the system of elections of county governing bodies and police

chiefs as detailed below.

   Elected Police chiefs: indicator equal to one for counties in states where statutes and local

charters allow for the election of police chiefs as reported by the Census of Government. The

municipal police chief may also be called marshal in Arkansas, Florida, Mississippi, Texas. In

Virginia, town police chiefs are called Sargeants. Based on this information, the indicator is equal

to one for Arkansas, Florida, Louisiana, Texas and Virginia with the exception of independent

cities where Sargeants do not act as police chiefs.

   Single member districts (SMD): indicator equal to one for covered states where members of

county governing bodies are elected by single member districts (Louisiana, Mississippi, and Vir-

ginia) and zero otherwise.




                                                 59
