                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       FIXING MISALLOCATION WITH GUIDELINES:
                             AWARENESS VS. ADHERENCE

                                           Jason Abaluck
                                             Leila Agha
                                          David C. Chan Jr
                                           Daniel Singer
                                             Diana Zhu

                                        Working Paper 27467
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27467


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                             July 2020, Revised October 2020




For helpful comments and suggestions we thank Fiona Scott Morton, Jonathan Gruber, Erzo
Luttmer, Jonathan Skinner, Frank Sloan, Doug Staiger, and Mintu Turakhia. We are grateful to
Mohit Agrawal, Sophie Andrews, Samuel Arenberg, Liberty Greene, Johnny Huynh, Chris Lim,
Uyseok Lee, and Natalie Nguyen for invaluable research assistance. We thank Carl van Walraven
and the Atrial Fibrillation Investigators for generously sharing the AFI database for reanalysis..
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27467.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jason Abaluck, Leila Agha, David C. Chan Jr, Daniel Singer, and Diana Zhu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fixing Misallocation with Guidelines: Awareness vs. Adherence
Jason Abaluck, Leila Agha, David C. Chan Jr, Daniel Singer, and Diana Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 27467
July 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. I11,I18,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

Expert decision-makers often deviate from evidence-based guidelines. If experts lack awareness
of guidelines, dissemination may improve outcomes. If experts who are aware of guidelines
continue to deviate, promoting stricter adherence has ambiguous effects on outcomes, depending
on whether experts use information not encoded in guidelines. We study the role of guidelines in
physician decisions to prescribe anticoagulants for atrial fibrillation patients. Anticoagulation
reduces stroke risk but increases hemorrhage risk. By text-mining physician notes for guideline
mentions, we identify when each physician becomes aware of a new guideline. Once aware of the
guideline, physicians pivot their practice patterns to align more closely with the
recommendations, but guideline adherence remains far from perfect. To evaluate whether
continued non-adherence reflects physicians' superior information, we combine observational
data on treatment choices with new machine learning estimates of heterogeneous treatment
effects from eight randomized controlled trials. When physicians depart from guidelines, they are
not responding to measurable treatment effect heterogeneity. Improving adherence to the current
guideline produces much larger gains than making all physicians aware of the guideline. Our
estimates imply that adherence to an optimal rule would prevent 47% more strokes without
increasing hemorrhages.
Jason Abaluck                                    Daniel Singer
Yale School of Management                        55 Fruit St # 148
Box 208200                                       Boston, MA 02114
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                         USA
and NBER                                         DESINGER@mgh.harvard.edu
jason.abaluck@yale.edu
                                                 Diana Zhu
Leila Agha                                       Yale University
Department of Economics                          dianayilunzhu@gmail.com
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
leila.agha@dartmouth.edu

David C. Chan Jr
Center for Health Policy and
Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
david.c.chan@stanford.edu
1     Introduction

In medicine, law, science, and many other settings, expert decision-makers frequently deviate from
guideline recommendations (Arrowsmith et al., 2015; Grimshaw and Russell, 1993; Prior et al., 2008;
Stevenson and Doleac, 2019). Experts may deviate because they lack awareness of guidelines; in this
case, guideline dissemination may reduce deviations and improve outcomes as long as guidelines are
well-crafted. If experts are aware of guidelines but continue to deviate, promoting stricter adher-
ence may worsen or improve outcomes, depending on whether they have information not encoded in
guidelines.
    Understanding deviations from guidelines is especially urgent in healthcare, where research doc-
uments large inefficiencies in care allocation.1 Clinical guidelines have been the principal strategy
used to encourage evidence-based care, with approximately 250,000 peer-reviewed papers about clin-
ical scoring systems published over the past 50 years (Challener et al., 2019). Efforts to encourage
greater guideline adherence have been criticized because they discount the role of physician expertise
in tailoring individualized treatments (Basu et al., 2014; Costantini et al., 1999; Woolf et al., 1999).
A crucial question in health economics is whether greater guideline awareness or adherence would
correct or exacerbate care misallocation.
    In this paper, we study how physicians employ an existing clinical guideline and then evaluate
their treatment choices using novel machine learning (ML) estimates of treatment effects that in-
corporate many patient characteristics absent from current guidelines. This approach allows us to
test whether physician treatment choices depend on information about treatment effects not encoded
in guidelines and to investigate how guideline awareness affects this dependence. We measure the
impact on patient outcomes of both guideline "awareness," the change in behavior when physicians
begin to use a guideline, and stricter "adherence," the degree to which a physician follows guideline
recommendations.
    We focus on the clinical setting of atrial fibrillation, a common condition afflicting more than 5
million people in the US (Colilla et al., 2013). The principal risk in atrial fibrillation is debilitating or
deadly ischemic stroke (hereafter, stroke); untreated patients have a 5% risk of stroke per year (Atrial
Fibrillation Investigators, 1995). Anticoagulation (blood thinning) has been shown in clinical trials
   1 Abaluck et al. (2016) and Ribers and Ullrich (2019) show that physicians allocate testing inefficiently across patients.
Mullainathan and Obermeyer (2019) and Chandra and Staiger (2020) show evidence of misallocation in heart attack testing
and treatments. Similar misallocations have been shown in the setting of C-sections (Currie and MacLeod, 2017), depres-
sion (Currie and MacLeod, 2020), pneumonia (Chan et al., 2019), and emergency department care (Gowrisankaran et al.,
2017).



                                                             1
to reduce stroke risk; however, anticoagulation also increases the risk of life-threatening hemorrhage
(hereafter, bleed), including intracranial bleeding (Atrial Fibrillation Investigators, 1995). Therefore,
the consequences of misallocating anticoagulation can be serious. In response to these stakes, re-
searchers have developed the CHADS2 score: a simple predictive score of stroke risk for patients
with atrial fibrillation (Gage et al., 2001). Clinical guidelines recommend tailoring treatment deci-
sions on the basis of patients' CHADS2 scores (Fuster et al., 2006; Hirsh et al., 2008). The CHADS2
score is among the most well known and widely used risk scores used for any clinical condition.2
    We study guideline awareness and treatment decisions of nearly 5,800 physicians treating 113,000
newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation patients in the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) from 2002-
2013. For each physician, we measure the date that the physician first incorporates the CHADS2
guideline into their decision-making, by identifying the earliest mention of the CHADS2 score in the
physician's clinical notes. Following the publication of CHADS2 -based treatment guidelines in 2006,
we see steady growth in physicians becoming aware of the guideline. Prior to awareness, physicians
treat roughly 50% of patients with atrial fibrillation, and treatment probability is largely invariant
to the CHADS2 score. After the first CHADS2 mention, practice patterns pivot towards CHADS2 -
based recommendations: prescriptions to patients with low risk scores fall by 4.9 percentage points,
while prescriptions to patients with high risk scores increase by 1.6 percentage points. Despite these
changes, physicians who are aware of the CHADS2 score still fail to adhere to guidelines in more
than 40% of cases. Most non-adherence is not explained by a lack of guideline awareness.
    To assess the benefits of guideline awareness as well as the possible benefits stricter adherence,
we need to understand how treatment effects vary across patients. To this end, we generate novel ML
estimates of heterogeneous treatment effects from randomized control trial (RCT) microdata. To esti-
mate heterogeneous treatment effects, we use detailed patient characteristics, clinical outcomes, and
randomized treatment status of each patient from eight RCTs in the Atrial Fibrillation Investigators
database (hereafter, AFI database) (van Walraven et al., 2009). Using a causal forest model (Wa-
ger and Athey, 2017), we obtain treatment effects on strokes and bleeds that vary both with patient
characteristics included in the CHADS2 score and with other detailed characteristics. We find that
the CHADS2 score explains 25% of the variation in causal forest stroke treatment effects, indicating
substantial residual variation.
   2 Researchers  affiliated with the Mayo Clinic report that the CHADS2 and its successor the CHA2 DS2 -VASc were the
most common search queries in their internal clinical decision support tool (Challener et al., 2019). MDCalc.com, the
popular website for calculating risk scores, currently lists CHA2 DS2 -VASc as second-highest in popularity and CHADS2
as sixth-highest in popularity.




                                                          2
    Exporting the ML-estimated treatment effects to the VHA, we estimate a model of clinician treat-
ment decisions. Our goal is to understand the extent to which treatment deviations from CHADS2
recommendations may be motivated by residual variation in stroke and bleed treatment effects that
are not codified in the guideline. Our first finding is that residual variation in stroke treatment effects
(i.e., orthogonal to the CHADS2 score) explains almost none of the variation in treatment decisions.
New awareness of the CHADS2 score (proxied by first mention of the score in a doctor's clinical
notes) leads doctors to place greater decision weight on CHADS2 -related variation in stroke treat-
ment effects and, in some specifications, less weight on bleed treatment effects.
    These results suggest that departures from guidelines generally worsen patient outcomes, but this
interpretation relies on two key assumptions. First, our estimates of treatment effects in the AFI data
must be externally valid in the VHA data. To assess the external validity of our estimates, we demon-
strate that treatment effects estimated on subsets of our trial database predict treatment effects in
"out-of-bag" trials not used in estimation, and we show that observables in the VHA data are "in the
support" of the variation in the AFI data. This evidence suggests that our estimates likely generalize
to the VHA setting, but does not conclusively establish this point. Second, we require that doctors are
not making treatment decisions based on variation in treatment effects that cannot be predicted by the
covariates in the AFI data. The attributes in the AFI data were included precisely because physicians
plausibly believed they might impact the benefits and costs of anticoagulant treatment. Nonetheless,
other attributes may also be relevant. To investigate this, we add to the model detailed patient charac-
teristics that may relate to the benefits of treatment despite not being available in the RCT data; these
include variables that predict patient medication adherence, bleed risk, and fall risk. These character-
istics explain very little of the variance in treatment choices given estimated treatment effects and do
not impact the other coefficients in the model, suggesting that deviations from guidelines not easily
reconciled by other considerations raised by the clinical literature but not measured in the AFI data.
    Under these assumptions, we use the model to simulate the impact of broader awareness or stricter
adherence to existing and new guidelines. We consider the frontier of stroke and bleed outcomes
which are possible following each decision rule, while varying the fraction of patients treated from
0% to 100%. Our findings suggest that physicians allocate treatments to patients with atrial fibrillation
only slightly better than a random decision rule. Some of this inefficiency is explained by physicians'
aversion to treating older patients, as the rate of strokes prevented per bleed induced remains roughly
constant as patients age, but doctors are much less likely to treat older patients. Extending awareness
of the CHADS2 score (with levels of adherence associated with adherence) would modestly improve


                                                    3
treatment allocation, preventing an additional 8 strokes per 10,000 patients annually, or a 4% increase
in strokes prevented by warfarin.
    The benefits of strict guideline adherence to current guidelines are much larger than the benefits of
universal guideline awareness. Reallocating the same number of treatments in the observed allocation
to patients with the highest CHADS2 scores would prevent 13% more strokes than the status quo for
the same number of bleeds. Strict adherence to a guideline which incorporates all information about
heterogeneity in stroke treatment effects would prevent 38% more strokes. Reallocating treatments to
patients with the greatest ratio of strokes prevented per bleed induced could prevent 47% more strokes
without increasing the number of bleeds. These results suggest that policies that aim to increase
adherence at the intensive margin may produce much larger improvements in patient outcomes than
policies that only broaden adoption at the extensive margin by increasing awareness.
    Incorporating more variables can improve guidelines, but only if that information is properly
weighted. A subsequent refinement to the CHADS2 score called the CHA2 DS2 -VASc was introduced
in 2010, changing the weighting on age and adding vascular disease as a component. While vascular
disease does predict stroke treatment effects, the CHA2 DS2 -VASc score gave it too much weight
and the new score performs worse than the prior version at minimizing strokes per induced bleed.
Incorporating more variables that predict strokes does not necessarily improve guidelines if those
variables are not weighted in proportion to their impact on treatment effects.
    Our research relates to several strands of literature. First, we contribute to an active literature in
economics studying the potential for machine-based algorithms to improve decision-making. Evi-
dence from judge bail decisions (Kleinberg et al., 2018) and clinical care (Abaluck et al., 2016; Mul-
lainathan and Obermeyer, 2019) suggests that human experts make frequent mistakes that could be
corrected by optimal guidelines, but do not analyze how guidelines impact behavior in practice. Hoff-
man et al. (2018) finds that managers hiring low-skilled workers frequently overrule a technology-
driven hiring recommendation, but that doing so worsens outcomes. We build on this research by
studying highly-skilled experts making an important clinical decision. We analyze how new aware-
ness of a guideline changes behavior and outcomes, in addition to simulating the impacts of stricter
adherence to existing and novel guidelines using estimates of heterogeneous treatment effects.
    Prior papers comparing machine decisions to human discretion have typically relied on observa-
tional data and quasi-experimental assumptions to reach conclusions about misallocation.3 A recent
   3 Many of these papers compare treatments and outcomes across decision-makers, usually assuming a common ranking
of cases across decision-makers (e.g., Abaluck et al., 2016; Kleinberg et al., 2018; Chandra and Staiger, 2020). Newer
approaches in Chan et al. (2019) and Arnold et al. (2020) relax this assumption but restrict the direction of treatment


                                                          4
econometric literature has pointed out that many quasi-experiments that recover treatment effects
averaged across subgroups of data may nevertheless fail to meet the strict assumptions required for
identifying treatment effects within each subgroup of data (e.g., Kolesar et al., 2015; de Chaisemartin,
2017; Frandsen et al., 2019).
    Our findings also relate to recent work highlighting challenges that arise when applying evidence
from clinical trials to inform treatment decisions more generally. Manski (2017) cautions that we
should not privilege the internal validity of trials over external validity in the setting of interest. We
address this concern by "clustering" our treatment effect estimates so that the objective is to fit treat-
ment effects in "out-of-bag" trials not used in estimation. We further validate predicted treatment
effects in out-of-bag trials with a "best linear predictor" regression, following (Chernozhukov et al.,
2018). Einav et al. (2019) and Oster (2020) both report that healthier patients are more likely to
take up recommended health screenings and diets. This selection can bias observational estimates
and may imply that those treated as a result of guidelines have smaller treatment effects than in-
framarginal patients. In contrast to these papers, we study guidelines that are primarily targeted at
physician treatment decisions rather than patient-driven health behaviors, and we find no evidence that
marginal patients treated due to new CHADS2 awareness have smaller (or larger) treatment effects.
These differences suggest that the degree of selection on treatment effects may depend on whether
physicians or patients are adopting the guideline.
    In the medical literature, research has focused on how treatment decisions relate to clinical guide-
lines. The literature has shown widespread lack of adherence, not only in the case of the CHADS2
score, but also across many clinical risk scores and guidelines.4 Our paper builds on this literature
by documenting that even adopting physicians who are aware of the guideline continue to deviate
frequently. The crucial difficulty in interpreting non-adherence is the lack of evidence on whether
counterfactual treatment decisions promoted by guidelines will improve health outcomes. For ex-
ample, Mehta et al. (2015) report that physicians who adhere more closely to guidelines have better
outcomes but do not separate the impact of guidelines from other differences across physicians. We
address this problem by recovering granular heterogeneous treatment effects with ML techniques
and RCT data and applying these treatment effects to assess observed and counterfactual treatment
effects. In another vein, recent papers have applied ML techniques to predict outcomes using observational data, again
with necessary quasi-experimental assumptions because outcomes are selectively observed (e.g., Ribers and Ullrich, 2019;
Mullainathan and Obermeyer, 2019).
    4 An older review article estimated that 40% of patients were not receiving guideline-recommended care for chronic
conditions (Schuster et al., 1998). More recent research suggests non-adherence to guidelines continues to be widespread
across a variety of clinical contexts (Lasser et al., 2016; Valle et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2015; Rosenberg et al., 2015). For
the CHADS2 score specifically, Chapman et al. (2017) find evidence of substantial non-adherence to the guideline.


                                                              5
behavior.
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides clinical background.
Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 provides reduced form evidence of the impact of CHADS2
awareness on treatment. Section 5 presents our estimates of causal forest treatment effects. Section 6
models how guideline awareness impacts the relationship between treatment behavior and treatment
effects. Section 7 considers counterfactual policies. Section 8 concludes with a discussion of policy
implications.



2     Atrial Fibrillation and the CHADS2 Score

Atrial fibrillation is the most common cardiac arrhythmia. It afflicts over 5 million Americans; for
adults older than 40 years, one in four will develop the condition (Hsu et al., 2016). Atrial fibrillation
increases stroke risk by five-fold and is responsible for 40% of strokes among patients older than
80 years (Piccini and Fonarow, 2016). The main treatment to reduce stroke risk among patients with
atrial fibrillation is anticoagulation by warfarin.5 While anticoagulation is effective in reducing stroke
risk, by 68% on average, it has also been shown to increase the risk of major bleeding by more than
twofold (Atrial Fibrillation Investigators, 1995; Kearon et al., 2012). Given the large potential benefits
and risks of anticoagulation, an important task for clinicians evaluating patients with atrial fibrillation
is to decide which patients to treat with anticoagulation.
     Efforts to improve anticoagulation targeting have largely focused on predicting stroke risk, with
the intuition that the benefits of anticoagulation are likely increasing in baseline stroke risk. Earlier
studies re-analyzed data from the control arms of randomized trials of patients with atrial fibrillation
to find hypertension and prior stroke as important risk factors of stroke (Atrial Fibrillation Investiga-
tors, 1995; Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation Investigators, 1995). Building on this work, the
CHADS2 score was first formulated by Gage et al. (2001), using registry data comprising 1733 Medi-
care patients, and later validated for clinical practice by Gage et al. (2004). In 2006, the American
College of Cardiology (ACC) became the first specialty society to issue a guideline recommending
treatment decisions based on the CHADS2 score (Fuster et al., 2006). Other professional societies
followed, with the American College of Chest Physicians (ACCP) recommending CHADS2 -based
    5 In our sample, fewer than 2% of patients are prescribed alternative anticoagulants. Novel oral anticoagulants (NOACs)
were introduced near the end of our sample, with the FDA approval of dabigatran in 2010, rivaroxaban in 2011, and
apixaban in 2012. Based on non-inferiority trials, they are similarly effective in preventing stroke with possibly lower risks
of bleeding (Lane and Lip, 2012). Guideline recommendations for their use (vs. no anticoagulation) rely on the same stroke
risk scores. Warfarin continues to be the mainstay drug for anticoagulation in atrial fibrillation (Hsu et al., 2016).



                                                              6
treatment decisions in 2008 (Hirsh et al., 2008).
     Designed to be easy to use, the CHADS2 score is an index of five patient characteristics: "C" for
congestive heart failure (1 point), "H" for hypertension (1 point), "A" for age  75 years (1 point), "D"
for diabetes (1 point), and "S" for stroke (2 points) (Table 1). Since its introduction, the CHADS2
score has become one of the most widely recognized risk scores in clinical practice.6 However,
despite its widespread recognition, studies in a variety of settings have shown that adherence to the
CHADS2 score has been low, typically with only half of recommended patients being prescribed
anticoagulation (Hsu et al., 2016; Piccini and Fonarow, 2016).
     While poor adherence to CHADS2 -based treatment recommendations has been linked to many
factors, physicians' concerns of increased bleeding risk due to frailty and multi-morbidity are com-
monly cited. Frailty and multi-morbidity often coexist with atrial fibrillation, since both conditions
increase in prevalence with age. Less evidence has existed to guide physicians to assess bleeding
risk. The first formal risk score for bleeding (HAS-BLED) was published toward the end of our study
period (Lane and Lip, 2012). However, it remains unvalidated in the population of atrial fibrillation
patients and is not as widely used in clinical practice. Therefore, while guidelines have discussed the
need to consider bleeding risk, they do not offer rules that formally consider both stroke and bleeding
risk (let alone treatment effects). In recent years, more evidence has emerged to support the use of
anticoagulation in frail and multi-morbid patients; nevertheless, the uptake of anticoagulation among
patients who are frail and have a high-risk of stroke remains low (Fawzy et al., 2019).



3      Data

Our approach combines data from two main sources. We study treatment decisions in the context of
guideline awareness using data from the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). We estimate hetero-
geneous treatment effects using RCT data from the Atrial Fibrillation Investigators (AFI) database.
    6 In2010, a modification of the CHADS2 score, the CHA2 DS2 -VASc score, was introduced (Lip et al., 2010). The
CHA2 DS2 -VASc score changes the weighting of age and introduces vascular disease as an additional risk factor. Due to
the time period covered by our data, from 2003-2013, our analysis focuses principally on the original CHADS2 score.
We observe comparatively little use of the CHA2 DS2 -VASc score: while 23% of patient encounters in our data are by
physicians who have previously mentioned the CHADS2 score, fewer than 2% of patient encounters are by physicians who
have previously mentioned the CHA2 DS2 -VASc in their notes. We do consider vascular disease in our causal forest model
of treatment effects, and in some simulations, we contrast the CHADS2 and CHA2 DS2 -VASc scores.




                                                          7
3.1     Veterans Health Administration Cohort

To study initial treatment decisions, we identify patients with a new diagnosis of atrial fibrillation
using electronic medical records from the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) from October 2002
to December 2013. Following a protocol in previous work, we err on the side of defining a narrower
cohort of patients who are more likely both to have a new, confirmed atrial fibrillation diagnosis and
to receive care at the VHA (Turakhia et al., 2013; Perino et al., 2017).
      We first identify potentially new diagnoses of atrial fibrillation (ICD9 code beginning with 427.3)
among patients with no previous such diagnosis within three years, extending our data back to Oc-
tober 1999 to perform this exclusion. We also require an electrocardiogram (the primary means to
diagnose atrial fibrillation) near the time of initial diagnosis and no anticoagulation prior to the initial
diagnosis. After a diagnosis of atrial fibrillation, the anticoagulation decision is typically made by a
physician who provides longitudinal care and makes prescription decisions for the patient. Therefore,
to attribute patients to physicians who are likely responsible for anticoagulation decisions, we require
each patient to have a visit with a VHA cardiologist or primary care physician (PCP) within 90 days
after the initial diagnosis (to decide on treatment). Further, the patient must have received at least one
drug (other than warfarin) prescribed by the attributed physician within one year before or after the
atrial fibrillation diagnosis. We also require each attributed physician to have at least 30 other patients
with atrial fibrillation and to have prescribed warfarin for another patient. Our sample restrictions
result in an analytic cohort of 113,270 patients (see Table 2 for details).
      For each patient in this cohort, we capture a broad array of characteristics that may influence the
anticoagulation decision following an initial diagnosis. These characteristics include demographic
information, comorbidities, laboratory test results, body measurements, and blood pressure readings.
We use these characteristics to construct the CHADS2 score, match the other clinical characteristics
recorded in the RCT data, and to proxy for other concerns not fully captured in the RCT data (e.g.,
bleed risk, fall risk, frailty, multi-morbidity).7 To capture the anticoagulation decision, we rely on
VHA records of prescriptions for warfarin or a newer oral anticoagulants (e.g., dabigatran, rivaroxa-
ban, apixaban, edoxaban).8
      Finally, we measure awareness of the CHADS2 score at the physician level by searching physician
   7 For further details on the additional patient comorbidities and risk factors we extracted from the VHA sample, see
Appendix Section A.4.
   8 The VHA records include prescriptions that are dispensed by the VHA as well as prescriptions that are paid for by
the VHA. Recall that the vast majority of prescriptions in our sample are for warfarin. Fewer than 2% of patients in our
sample are prescribed a novel oral anticoagulant (NOAC). Among patients prescribed an anticoagulant, 4% are prescribed
a NOAC.


                                                           8
visit notes for mention of the CHADS2 score.9 We consider physicians who have mentioned the
CHADS2 score in a note as becoming aware of the CHADS2 score guideline, in the sense that they
recognize the CHADS2 score and have used it in their decision-making. We proxy a physician's time
of CHADS2 awareness by the physician's first note mentioning the CHADS2 score. We categorize
physicians without any note mentioning the CHADS2 score as never being aware of the guideline.
      Table 3 reports summary statistics for physicians who become aware vs. those who are never
aware of the CHADS2 score. Overall, 50% of patients in our sample receive anticoagulation. Patient
characteristics are similar between the two groups. Physicians who eventually mention the CHADS2
score comprise roughly half of the physicians in our sample, and they tend to have more patients,
partly by construction. Patients seen by the two groups are similar in age and have similar prevalence
rates of CHADS2 risk factors.


3.2     Atrial Fibrillation Investigators Database

To estimate heterogeneous treatment effects--which we use to assess physician decision-making and
to evaluate counterfactual anticoagulation decisions on patient outcomes--we rely on the Atrial Fib-
rillation Investigators database (hereafter, AFI database). The AFI database contains patient-level
observations from eight trials in which patients were randomized to anticoagulants versus a placebo
or control.10 Details of the AFI database have been documented elsewhere (e.g., van Walraven et al.,
2009).
      The AFI database was previously compiled by investigators to explore heterogeneity in risk and
in treatment effects. Previous analyses using the database have selected patient characteristics heuris-
tically (van Walraven et al., 2002, 2009). For each patient in the AFI database, we observe randomiza-
tion status and subsequent stroke and bleeding events. In harmonizing data across the clinical trials,
the investigators consistently recorded several important patient characteristics at the time of random-
   9 Recall  that physicians in our analytic sample are cardiologists and PCPs who have each treated at least 30 atrial
fibrillation patients. We increase our detection of CHADS2 mentions for these physicians by using visit notes within 6
months of initial diagnosis in our broad cohort of 844,312 atrial fibrillation patients, who may be patients with previously
established diagnoses (see Table 2), and search for non-case-sensitive occurrences of the string chads. We settled on this
string after spot-checking several variants for false positives. Consistent with our spot-checking results, we find no positive
mentions of this string in the first two years of our data, prior to diffusion of the CHADS2 score. This suggests that false
positives are very rare.
   10 There are a total of ten trials in the original AFI database. For our analysis, we define patients who were treated with
aspirin alone as being untreated with anticoagulation. We drop observations for patients on low warfarin or low warfarin
plus aspirin therapy. After these modifications, eight trials remain with both treatment and control arms. In two of the eight
trials, patients are divided into eligible versus ineligible groups for anticoagulation and then randomized among eligible
patients. We treat the ineligible patients as separate trials (with only one treatment arm) and use data from all trials in the
causal forest implementation to increase power.



                                                              9
ization, including all variables underlying the CHADS2 score, as well as several additional variables,
including further detail on demographics, height, weight, blood pressure, hemoglobin, smoking sta-
tus, comorbidities, and history of transient ischemic attack (TIA), stroke, anginal symptoms, and
myocardial infarction. In Appendix Table A.1, we list the full set of characteristics that we use from
the AFI database. In Appendix Table A.3, we report the results of balance tests, which suggest suc-
cessful randomization in these clinical trials.



4      CHADS2 Guideline Awareness and Adherence

The 2006 ACC and 2008 ACCP guidelines recommended treating patients with a CHADS2 score
of 0 or 1 potentially with aspirin alone and treating patients with a CHADS2 score of 2 or above
with anticoagulation (Hirsh et al., 2008; Fuster et al., 2006).11 We therefore begin our analysis by
describing trends in prescribing behavior for groups of patients defined by their CHADS2 score.
      Figure 1 displays trends in anticoagulation rates for patients with low risk of stroke (CHADS2
score of 0 or 1), patients with moderate risk of stroke (CHADS2 score of 2 or 3), and patients with
high risk of stroke (CHADS2 score of 4 or greater). Prior to the 2006 guideline, patients with lower
CHADS2 scores were remarkably more likely to be treated with anticoagulation. This relationship
held both between patients with low vs. moderate stroke risk and between patients with moderate
vs. high stroke risk. In the years after 2006, we observe a gradual reduction in anticoagulation rates
for low-risk patients for whom the guideline allowed for management without anticoagulation. There
appears to be a small increase in treatment rates for patients at moderate or high risk. However, even
among groups where anticoagulation is recommended, prescription rates remain below 55% for our
sample period. Patients with high stroke risk (CHADS2 score of 4 or greater) remain slightly less
likely to be treated than patients with moderate stroke risk (CHADS2 of 2 or 3).
      It is evident from Figure 1 that physicians had only weak adherence to recommendations to treat
patients with high CHADS2 risk scores and to leave patients with low CHADS2 risk scores untreated.
We next examine when physicians mention the CHADS2 score in their clinical notes. We interpret
these mentions of the risk score as a measure of awareness on the extensive margin, in the sense that
physicians recognized the score as a tool to assist in the evaluation of stroke risk and the anticoagu-
lation decision. In Figure 2, we show that almost no physician mentioned the CHADS2 score in the
    11 In the 2006 and 2008 guidelines, patients with a CHADS
                                                               2 score of 0 were recommended aspirin, while patients with a
CHADS2 score of 1 could be treated with either aspirin or anticoagulation. Later guidelines suggested anticoagulation for
patients with a CHADS2 score of 1 and some patients with a CHADS2 score of 0 but a CHA2 DS2 -VASc score of 1 (Lip et
al., 2010). This clinical consensus applied mostly to after our study period.


                                                           10
period prior to the ACC guideline in 2006, despite the fact that the CHADS2 score was introduced
in 2001 and validated in 2004. Following 2006, we find a steady rise in the proportion of physicians
who have previously mentioned the CHADS2 score at least once, approaching 70% near the end of
our study period in 2013. We note that this represents a lower bound to awareness of the CHADS2
score, as physicians may be aware of the score yet not mention it in their notes.
    We proceed by estimating the causal impact of guideline awareness on prescription choice and
investigating how guideline adherence changes after a physician incorporates the guideline into her
clinical practice. In the Panel A of Figure 3, we first plot how anticoagulation rates among high- and
low-score patients change following an adopting physician's first note mentioning the CHADS2 score.
Following this event, the anticoagulation rate for low-scoring patients drops by several percentage
points, while the anticoagulation rate for higher-scoring patients increases slightly.
    We further assess the effect of awareness on adherence by an event-study regression separately
for the two guideline-relevant groups of patients:

                                          5
                                      =         1( ( ) = )     +    ( )   +   ( )   + .                            (1)
                                          =-5

     {0, 1} indicates whether patient was anticoagulated, and ( ) is a function that returns the year
of 's visit relative to the prescribing physician's becoming aware of the CHADS2 score. The regres-
sion includes fixed effects for the prescribing physician,                ( ) , and for the year, ( ) . We estimate
Equation (1) separately for patients with CHADS2 scores of 0 and 1 and for those with CHADS2
scores 2 and higher. Panel B of Figure 3 displays estimation results of the                      coefficients and is
broadly consistent with the raw treatment rates shown in Panel A. Treatment rates for low-score pa-
tients decline by 4.7 percentage points on average (standard error of 1.6 percentage points), while
higher-score patients experience a small 1.7-percentage-point increase (standard error of 1.1 percent-
age points).12
    Taken together, these results suggest that although the CHADS2 score was becoming widely
known, adherence to anticoagulation recommendations increased only modestly with physician aware-
ness. Prior to the 2006 guideline, almost no physician appeared to be using the CHADS2 score in
documented clinical decision-making, yet by the end of 2013, the vast majority had explicitly men-
tioned it in their notes. While our event-study results suggest a clear behavioral shift in prescribing at
the time of becoming aware of the CHADS2 score, most of this response is from avoiding treatment
  12 This estimate of changes in treatment rates comes from aggregating the results shown in Figure 3. Specifically, we
calculate the difference between the average level in years 0 through 4 minus the average level in years -5 through -1.


                                                          11
for low-risk patients, not increasing treatment for high-risk patients. In Figure A.1, we further show
that, while adherence varied substantively across physicians, few physicians reached an adherence
rate of 80%.
    Awareness is more difficult to measure than adherence. However, two features of our setting lend
greater confidence to our results on the effect of awareness and allow us to understand patterns of
adherence in the context of guideline awareness. First, the lack of pre-trends in our event-study results
in Figure 3 and the timing of the effect suggest that our measure based on clinical documentation
coincides with a discrete awareness event. Second, we witness a dramatic shift in the pace of guideline
awareness--from nearly no mentions of the CHADS2 score prior to the ACCP guideline publication,
growing to 70% of doctors having mentioned the score by the end of our study. Falsely classifying
physicians who have adopted the guideline but have not mentioned the CHADS2 score is thus less of
a concern, and we can reconcile our event-study results with the overall shifts in adherence among all
physicians evident in Figure 1.
    These findings are consistent with a clinical literature that emphasizes the importance of reducing
stroke risk by anticoagulation and that documents widespread awareness of the CHADS2 score among
physicians, more than a decade after the 2006 ACC guideline (Ashburner et al., 2018; Amroze et
al., 2019). Yet in numerous settings, only about half of patients with the highest stroke risks are
treated with anticoagulation (Hsu et al., 2016). Our results further show that there is low adherence
even among physicians who discuss the CHADS2 score in their decision-making. Survey evidence
suggests that physicians remain hesitant to anticoagulate patients who are elderly, frail, and multi-
morbid, out of concern that anticoagulation may result in severe bleeding for these patients (Fawzy
et al., 2019). We find descriptive evidence to support this reason behind nonadherence: Appendix
Figure A.2 shows that treatment rates actually decline with age after 75 years, despite age being a
strong predictor of stroke risk.



5    The Effects of Anticoagulation

The results in the previous section show a gap between extensive-margin CHADS2 guideline aware-
ness and full adherence to the CHADS2 -based recommendations. Our interpretation of this gap, as
well as policy recommendations for incorporating evidence from clinical trials into practice, will
depend on the relative value of physician discretion versus guideline adherence for patient health
outcomes.


                                                   12
      In the case of atrial fibrillation, physicians may depart from CHADS2 -based recommendations for
good reasons. First, the CHADS2 score predicts stroke risk, while treatment decisions should be based
on stroke treatment effects. Second, the decision to anticoagulate must weigh the reduction of stroke
risk against the inducement of bleed risk. The CHADS2 score is silent on the latter; while risk scores
for bleeding have subsequently been developed (Pisters et al., 2010), they are much less known by
clinicians than the CHADS2 score. Third, clinicians have access to more patient information than has
been encoded in simple risk scores. Tailoring their treatment decisions to this additional information
could lead to departures from CHADS2 -based guidelines.


5.1     Setup and Design

To evaluate treatment decisions and departures from guidelines, we need to characterize counterfac-
tual patient stroke and bleeding outcomes. Let        ( )  {0, 1} denote whether patient will have a
stroke within one year, depending on anticoagulation          {0, 1}, and let   ( )  {0, 1} denote a simi-
lar object for bleeding within one year. We then define conditional average treatment effects (CATEs)
that are a function of patient characteristics, both those that are included in the CHADS2 score and
others that are omitted from it. Specifically, for one-year stroke and bleeding, respectively,


                                    ( )             ( 1) -     ( 0)   =    ;                           (2)

                                    ( )             ( 1) -     ( 0)    =   ,                           (3)


where      is a set characteristics belonging to patient .
      We set about estimating these objects by applying "causal forest" ML techniques, as described
in Wager and Athey (2017), to RCT-generated data in the AFI database (van Walraven et al., 2002).
While many applications of machine learning methods use very large data sets, new work on causal
forests apply related methods to estimate CATEs in sample sizes more typical of RCTs in medicine
and social science; similar scale RCT applications of causal forest estimation have been previously
demonstrated in Athey and Wager (2019); Chernozhukov et al. (2018). We adapt the insights from
these analyses to our setting.
      The experimental design of RCTs is well-suited for estimating treatment effect heterogeneity,
in contrast to many quasi-experimental designs commonly used in the economics literature. First,
random assignment of treatment within each cell of patient characteristics , a crucial requirement to
estimate CATEs, is more plausible in RCTs. Second, many quasi-experiments involve monotonicity


                                                    13
and exclusion-restriction violations within cells of the data, even if these violations "average out" in
the entire sample (e.g., Kolesar et al., 2015; Frandsen et al., 2019). Third, RCTs carefully collect
information on infrequent yet important outcomes (e.g., stroke and bleeding) for the disease and
treatment being studied. Capturing these events, particularly their timing relative to initiation of
treatment, may be challenging in observational data.


5.2     Causal Forest Implementation

We use the algorithm developed in Athey and Wager (2019) for estimating causal forests with condi-
tional random assignment, supplemented by a LASSO variable selection step. We find that the latter
improves performance, especially for bleeds (the rarer of the two outcomes in our data).                             13   The
LASSO with a cross-validated penalty parameter selects the variables shown in Appendix Table A.2
(column 2 for stroke and column 4 for bleed) from the full set of variables in Appendix Table A.1 (as
well as the CHADS2 score itself, which is a function of these variables). For bleeds, this procedure
leaves just two variables which strongly predict bleed risk: age and race. For strokes, 10 variables are
selected. For the remainder of the algorithm, we proceed with the LASSO-selected variables.
      We then use regression forests to adjust outcomes and treatment status with expectations based
on patient characteristics and the RCT trial identifier :


                                  ( ; ) =          [   ( 0)|     = , ( ) = ],         { , };                               (4)

                                  ( ; ) =          [   |      = , ()= ]                                                    (5)


where ( ) indicates the RCT trial for individual , and where                      ( ; ) is formed using observations
in the control arm of each trial. We compute "out-of-bag" estimates ^- ( ; ) and ^ - ( ; ) from
data excluding . In our causal forest estimation, we use re-centered outcome and treatment variables:
~ =      - ^- (     ; ( )) and ~ =          - ^- (         ; ( )) . The causal forest generates predictions of stroke
and bleeding CATEs,           ( ) and       ( ) respectively, capturing heterogeneity in treatment effects along
patient characteristics observable in the AFI database.14 In addition to the variables selected by the
LASSO, we include the associated risk score for each outcome, ^- (                       ; ( )) , in the causal forest.
      To improve the prediction of treatment effects out of sample (i.e., in the VHA data), we use
   13 A preliminary variable selection step can improve the performance of causal forest estimators (Basu et al., 2018; Athey
and Wager, 2019).
   14 We estimate treatment effects as a function of , exclusive of trial indicators, since we will be applying our predictions
to an external sample (i.e., the VHA data). The `centering' procedure described in the text is formally justified in Section
6.1.1 of Athey et al. (2019).


                                                               14
trial identifiers in the AFI database to implement a "cluster-robust" causal forest with clusters at the
trial level (Athey and Wager, 2019). This means that predictions are trained in other trials and then
assessed "out-of-bag" on observations in a leave-out trial. This procedure constructs estimates which
are externally valid across trials within the AFI database.15
      To provide insight into sources of treatment effect heterogeneity, we summarize the "variable im-
portance" of patient characteristics in predicting treatment effect heterogeneity.16 Appendix Table A.2
lists variables ranked by importance in the stroke and bleed causal forests, as well as regression forests
estimated to predict risk in the control groups. We also report the sign of each variable in a linear
regression of treatment effects on all included variables. The single most important predictor of treat-
ment effects in both the stroke and bleed models is the corresponding regression-forest model of risk.
The variables in the CHADS2 score generally rank highly in both the causal forest and regression
forest models, but several variables not in the CHADS2 score also matter: e.g. lower hemoglobin and
history of angina or myocardial infarction predict larger stroke treatment effects.


5.3     Validation and Best Linear Predictors

In this section, we validate the estimated heterogeneity to assess concerns about potential over-fitting
both within and across trials. Following Athey and Wager (2019), we project outcomes onto leave-
out-trial CATE predictions of treatment effects. This exercise also allows us to construct a "best
linear predictor" (BLP) of treatment effects given the causal forest estimates (Chernozhukov et al.,
2018).17 Specifically, for observations in each trial in the AFI database, we make out-of-bag CATE
predictions from causal forests grown exclusively from data in the other trials. Denote these leave-
out-trial CATE predictions for stroke and bleeding as ^-                   ( )
                                                                                 ( ),    { , }, for individual in trial
 ( ) with characteristics          =    (we hereafter suppress the                in ( ) to simplify notation). Using
regression forests, we also construct and potentially control for predictions of                    ( ) , based on other
trials: ^-   ,1 (   ) , using only control group data, and ^-       ,2 (    ) , using all data but not conditioning on
  15 We   cross-validate all parameters in the causal forest except for sample fraction and minimum node size. The sample
fraction can get too low for estimation to proceed properly when being tuned. Therefore we set the sample fraction to
its default value 0.5. We set the minimum node size to 100 to avoid overfitting that occurs at node sizes that are too
small. When selected via cross-validation, the causal forest prefers full-grown trees with arbitrarily small node sizes but
this specification leads treatment effects to vary implausibly with small changes in continuous variables such as age. These
irregularities disappear at a minimum node size of 100.
   16 There are several methods to compute variable importance, and there is no clear consensus yet on the best method (Wei
et al., 2015). We use a measure from Athey et al. (2019) which ranks variables more highly in importance if the algorithm
chooses to split trees in the forest earlier on those variables.
   17 The regression is an OLS version of the BLP procedure. Chernozhukov et al. (2018) suggest a GLS version that has
more power in the general case when treatment probabilities vary across trials.



                                                            15
treatment status.
    We assess external validity across trials by a regression of realized outcomes                                                on out-of-bag
predictions and trial fixed effects                :18


                                                   (       )                ^                          ^
                          =    0   +       1 ^-                       +    1 - ,1 (       )+        2 - ,2 (         )+     + .             (6)


The coefficient     1   quantifies the predictive power of heterogeneous CATEs that are estimated in other
trials; a coefficient value of         1   = 1 would suggest that the causal forest estimates are well calibrated
and outcomes for a patient with characteristics                              would increase one-for-one with treatment and the
relevant ^- ( ) . Using Equation (6), we can further construct, for later use, BLP-based adjustments
to the CATEs estimated in Section 5.2:


                                                       ^             ( ) = ^0 + ^1 ^ ( ) .                                                  (7)


We will use this adjustment directly for CATEs on bleeding.
    For strokes, we consider the exact analog of this regression as well as a modified procedure
where we decompose treatment effects into two dimensions: stroke treatment effects that vary with
the CHADS2 score, and stroke treatment effects that are orthogonal to the CHADS2 score. Specif-
ically, we first use a regression to project leave-out-trial stroke CATEs, ^- ( ) , onto indicators of
the CHADS2 score. We call the CHADS2 -projected component ^- ( ) ( ) and the residual component
^- ( ) ( ) , noting that ^- ( ) = ^- ( ) ( ) + ^- ( ) ( ) . We next perform the following BLP projection:

                                                               ( )
                                       =           0+ 1              ^- ( ) (       )+   1
                                                                                             ( )
                                                                                                   ^- ( ) (      )      +
                                                   ^                            ^
                                                  1 - ,1 (            )+    2 - ,2 (          )+           + .                              (8)


Using equation (8), we construct BLP-based adjustments to the stroke CATEs as follows:


                                   ^          ( ) = ^0 + ^1 ( ) ^               ( )
                                                                                      ( ) + ^1 ( ) ^       ( )
                                                                                                                 ( ).                       (9)


    The BLP estimation validates the performance of our causal forest procedure on held-out trials.
   18 We include trial fixed effects to address a mechanical negative relationship between CATEs across trials when trials
are few. To see this, consider the following decomposition:        ( | )=     + +  , , where  , is by construction
uncorrelated with      and . The heterogeneity of interest in the out-of-bag CATEs, ^- ( ) ( ) , is driven by variation in .
If there are relatively few trials, then variation in  will bias downward the relationship between outcomes and CATEs,
due to the small-sample negative correlation between ^- ( ) ( ) and ^ ( | ) .



                                                                            16
Results of the BLP procedure are reported in Appendix Table A.4. All of our BLP coefficients on
the recovered causal forest treatment effects are significantly different from 0, and we cannot reject
the null that each coefficient equals 1. For stroke CATEs, we estimate ^1 = 1.027 (standard error
of 0.242). For bleed CATEs, we estimate ^1 = 1.149 (standard error of 0.324). For the CHADS2
component, we estimate ^1 (        )
                                       = 0.763 (standard error of 0.340); for the residual component, we
              ( )
estimate ^1         = 1.302 (standard error of 0.348). In other words, both components predict treatment
effect variation in held-out trials, although the evidence is even stronger for the residual component.
      In our subsequent analyses, we will adjust CATEs predicted in Section 5.2 for stroke and bleeding
by using Equation (9) for ^            and Equation (7) for ^   . In Appendix Table A.9, we replicate our
main results using unadjusted ^ and ^ as robustness checks and nothing changes qualitatively.


5.4     External Validity in the VHA Data

While clustering at the trial level should yield predictions that are externally valid across trials within
the AFI database, we ultimately seek to use treatment effects estimated in the AFI database to evaluate
counterfactuals in the VHA data. In order to assess the external validity of CATEs in the VHA data,
we compare observable attributes of patients in the AFI database to those in the VHA data to assess
whether, at least with respect to observable characteristics, the VHA data lies roughly within the
support of the AFI trials.
      Table 3 compares the VHA data with the AFI database on some key patient characteristics. The
clearest difference in average patient characteristics is in the share of male patients. We estimate
CATEs for both male and female patients from the AFI database, allowing the causal forest to use
gender to predict treatment effect heterogeneity. Our analysis of variable importance, shown in Ap-
pendix Table A.2, finds that patient gender is unimportant in predicting CATEs. Among other patient
characteristics, the AFI database has a larger share of the population over 65, a lower incidence of
hypertension and diabetes, and a higher rate of congestive heart failure than the VHA data on average.
However, in Appendix Table A.5, we can see that for all patient characteristics (including gender), the
VHA data mean is within the range of trial means. This mitigates concerns that the types of patients
seen in the VHA are not represented in the AFI database.


5.5     Treatment Effect Predictions for VHA Patients

We take causal forest prediction rules trained and validated in the AFI database, in the form of causal
forest splits and leaf values, and apply these rules to patients in the VHA data. For the remainder of

                                                       17
the paper, we use BLP-adjusted CATEs, with weights defined by our validation exercise in Section
5.3, Equations (7) and (9). Figure 4 shows variability in the distribution of estimated stroke and bleed
(BLP-adjusted) CATEs. The 10th percentile stroke treatment effect (corresponding to the largest
reductions in stroke risk) is -0.083, while the 90th percentile is -0.017. The impact of warfarin on
bleeds is smaller but still variable, ranging from 0.010 at the 10th percentile (smallest increases in
blled risk) to 0.038 at the 90th percentile.
      We next assess the importance of characteristics omitted from the CHADS2 score in predicting
treatment effects in the VHA population. While stroke treatment effects and the CHADS2 score are
highly correlated, we find substantial residual variation in stroke treatment effects after condition-
ing on the CHADS2 score. The        2   from regressing BLP-adjusted stroke treatment effects, ^     on
CHADS2 score indicators is 0.25. Figure 5 shows that stroke treatment effects increase monotoni-
cally with the CHADS2 score, but that wide variation also exists in the residual component of stroke
treatment effects. While patients with higher CHADS2 scores also have larger anticoagulation in-
ducements in bleeds, there also is variation in bleed treatment effects within each CHADS2 score.
This suggests scope for using more detailed stroke and bleed CATEs in treatment decisions, which
we will evaluate in the next section.



6     Assessing Physician Decisions in the VHA

With ML predictions of treatment effects in hand, we turn to assess how physician treatment decisions
in the VHA relate to treatment effects. We introduce a model to characterize how treatment decisions
respond to treatment effect variation, separately considering variation that is and is not captured by
guidelines. This model allows us consider the relative impact of awareness and adherence on patient
outcomes. In particular, we will evaluate whether guidelines may lead physicians to neglect infor-
mation relevant for health outcomes but not incorporated into a guideline. Finally, we use the model
to simulate the counterfactual impact of adopting guidelines that incorporate more information about
how treatment effects vary across patients.


6.1     Stylized Model of Treatment Decisions

We model how treatment decisions depend on variation in treatment effects as well as the physi-
cian's guideline awareness status. Guideline awareness status is denoted        {never, pre, post}, cor-
responding to decisions made by physicians who never adopt the CHADS2 score, decisions made by


                                                    18
physicians before adopting the CHADS2 score, and decisions made by physicians after adopting the
CHADS2 score. Anticoagulation decisions                          in state                 are made as follows:


                                           =1         ~, +             ~, + (                      )+   >0 .                                 (10)


This model includes two components. First, physicians consider Bayesian posterior beliefs of patient-
specific stroke and bleeding treatment effects, ~ , and ~ , , with respective preference weights                                              and
      . Guideline awareness may improve physicians' information about treatment effects, giving them
more accurate posterior beliefs. The second component consists of other factors--including both
observable characteristics (to the econometrician)                                  (     ) and otherwise unobservable factors                 --
which impact treatment decisions.
       In Appendix A.1, we specify a Bayesian model in which posterior beliefs about treatment effects
result from a prior and noisy signals. The model implies that posterior beliefs are a linear function of
true treatment effects and prior beliefs:19

                                                      ( )       ( )             ( )           ( )
                                   ~,       =                         +                             +   +   ,   ;                            (11)

                                   ~,       =               +         +         ,   .                                                        (12)


In the equations above,          and         are constants within                                 (which depend on physician's priors), and

  ,    and   ,   are noise terms with variances that depend on the precision of the signals that physicians
                                                                                                                                               ( )
receive. True stroke treatment effects,               , are decomposed into a CHADS2 -related component
                                  ( )                                 ( )               ( )
and a residual component                , such that         =               +                 .      is the true treatment effect for bleeding.
The parameters       ~,   ~  { ( ) , ( ) , }, correspond to the signal-to-noise ratio of posterior beliefs ~ ,
                                 ( )       ( )
and ~ , with respect to                ,         , and          . Physicians may have more precise signals for some
treatment effects types ~ than others, and the precision of their signals may change with guideline
awareness status .
                                                                                                                                       ( )
       In the model, CHADS2 awareness increases the precision of the doctor's signal of                                                      , the
CHADS2 -related variation in stroke treatment effects. The model also allows for the possibility of
"distraction effects," whereby guideline awareness leads physicians to neglect consideration of other
decision-relevant factors (i.e. the "cookbook medicine" critique). In the language of the model,
  19 This linear projection can be exactly microfounded by a standard Bayesian model with normal true treatment effects
and normal noise, which we detail in Appendix A.1. However, absent a joint-normal model of signals and noise, Equations
(11) and (12) are linear approximations of Bayesian updating, common in empirical Bayes applications (e.g., Chetty et al.,
2014).



                                                                       19
                                                                                                                                       ( )
distraction effects correspond to physicians forming less precise beliefs about                                                              and         .


6.2       Estimating Equation

To estimate policy-relevant parameters from the data, we now map our behavioral model in Equa-
tion (10) to a heteroskedastic probit model:

                                 1            ( )    ( )            ( )   ( )
                       =1                                  (   )+               (     )+               (   )+            + (    )+     ,         >0 .               (13)
                                  ,


where                   is a normally distributed error with variance                          2       .
                   ,                                                                               ,

       From Equations (10) to (12), the coefficient                                  ~,   for treatment effect ~  { ( ) , ( ) , } measures
the responsiveness of decisions to a treatment effect and can be interpreted as                                                              ~   =   ~       ~.   Recall
that      ~       is the preference weight that physicians place on preventing outcome ~ (stroke or bleed),
and       ~       is the signal-to-noise ratio describing how well-informed the physician is about variation in
treatment effect ~.                       ,    includes         error term from Equation (10) and the "noise" components of
posterior beliefs,                        and            . In estimation, we normalize                     2           = 1. In our baseline specification,
                                      ,              ,                                                         , pre

we allow (                      ) to depend on age, to account for a bias against treating older patients, and on year
fixed effects, to capture secular shifts in anticoagulation over time.
       Guideline awareness may change the responsiveness to treatment effects in three ways. First,
CHADS2 awareness may give physicians more precise information about CHADS2 -related varia-
tion in stroke treatment effects; this effect increases the responsiveness to treatment effects                                                                   ( )   by
increasing the doctor's signal-to-noise ratio for the CHADS2 -related variation in stroke treatment ef-
fects, i.e. increasing                        ( ).   Second, because noisy assessment of treatment effects are incorporated
into               ,    2        may change with guideline awareness.20 Finally, CHADS2 awareness may distract
              ,             ,

physicians from considering information about other treatment effects, decreasing the signal-to-noise
ratios of doctor's beliefs about bleed treatment effects                                               or residual variation in stroke treatment
effects (              ( ))     and thereby leading to smaller estiamted coefficients                                      or   ( ),   respectively.
       To recover and interpret these objects, we require the following assumptions, which we will as-
sess in our results below. First, to recover unbiased (and correctly signed) estimates of coefficients
  ~,   we require that                         is uncorrelated with             ~(        ) . Second, in order to interpret deviations from
                                          ,

treating according to treatment effects as worsening strokes or bleeds, we assume that                                                                        does not
  20 Ifguideline awareness sufficiently increases the precision of physician signals, then 2 , will decrease. However,
because , includes both noisy assessments and the weight that physicians' place on them, it is possible that , may
increase if better information causes physicians to place more weight on their signals, including the noisy component of
them. This point follows formally from the microfoundation in Appendix A.1.


                                                                                    20
include unmeasured variation in treatment effects. Finally, in order to identify changes in                                    in
our heteroskedastic probit model, we assume that (                      ) is invariant to guideline awareness. In our
baseline specification, we will use age in (             ) for this purpose, which assumes that CHADS2 aware-
ness changes treatment decisions with respect to age only through changes in sensitivity to treatment
effects.
                                                                                                        ( )             ( )
      In estimating Equation (13), we use ML predictions of treatment effects, ^                              ( ), ^          ( ),
and ^      ( ) , in place of true treatment effects,             ( )(   ),   ( )(    ) , and   ( ) . These estimates are
measured with error in the sense that they differ from the treatment effects we could obtain with
infinite data. Our main concern is that differential measurement error of ^                    ( )(   ) and ^    ( )(    ) may
                             ( )            ( )
differentially attenuate           and            . However, our BLP-adjustment in Section 5.3 of CHADS2 -
                                                                                                       ( )              ( )
related and residual stroke treatment effects provides a means to ensure that                                 and             can
be interpreted on the same scale. This approach follows a "regression calibration" literature that
addresses measurement error (George and Foster, 2000) and also resembles the first stage of "split-
sample" instrumental variables approaches in economics (Angrist and Krueger, 1995).


6.3     Results

Table 4 reports estimates of        ~,   for treatment effect type ~  { ( ) , ( ) , } and for each guideline
awareness status  {never, pre, post}, from Equation (13). To facilitate statistical comparisons of the
coefficients   ~   across awareness states, the estimation takes             ~      as the baseline, and uses interaction
                                                                             pre

terms to report differences between          ~      or   ~       and this baseline. Since both stroke and bleeding
                                             post        never

events are undesirable, we expect the sign of coefficients on both stroke and bleeding treatment effects
to be negative. In other words, all else equal, physicians should be more likely to treat patients with
larger reductions in stroke risk and less likely to treat patients with larger increases in bleeding risk.
Our baseline specification controls for year fixed effects and cubic splines in patient age. Column
1 shows these results. Columns 2 and 3 show alternative specifications controlling for differential
time trends in the sensitivity to treatment effects, in order to account for secular trends in overall
anticoagulation and awareness of treatment effects.
      For physicians who have not adopted the CHADS2 score (i.e.,                        {never, pre}), anticoagulation
decisions are already sensitive to the CHADS2 component of stroke treatment effects and to bleed
treatment effects, but they are not sensitive to the residual component of stroke treatment effects.
In Appendix Figure A.3, we show that, conditional on CHADS2 score, treated patients have similar
stroke treatment effects before and after guideline awareness. This again suggests that physicians are


                                                            21
not selecting on factors that predict stroke treatment effects conditional on CHADS2 score.21
      Among decisions without CHADS2 awareness, there are no substantive differences in the respon-
siveness to treatment effects between physicians who never become aware (i.e.,                          = never) and those
who have not yet become aware (i.e., = pre). This finding suggests that in the absence of the guide-
line, those who become aware are neither lower nor higher skilled than those who eventually never
become aware at matching patients to appropriate treatment.
      Following awareness of the guideline, physicians put twice as much weight CHADS2 -related
stroke treatment effects, suggesting guideline awareness improves physicians' information about this
variation in treatment benefits. Further, physicians remain insensitive to residual stroke treatment
effects. We find some evidence that physicians become less sensitive to bleed treatment effects fol-
lowing awareness of the CHADS2 score, although this effect is not statistically significant when
controlling more richly for time trends in Column 3. In addition,                       ,   changes little with awareness,
                              ( )
despite the change in               (see Appendix Table A.6).
      We next consider the average marginal effects implied by our model estimates. As shown in
Appendix Table A.7, a one-percentage-point reduction in CHADS2 -related yearly treatment effects
leads to a 1.9 percentage points increase in treatment probability prior to CHADS2 awareness; this
effect grows to a 4.3 percentage points increase in treatment probability after CHADS2 awareness
(a 2.4 percentage point difference). On average, low CHADS2 patients have stroke treatment effects
that are 2 percentage points larger in magnitude. After CHADS2 awareness, we thus expect relative
treatment probabilities for low CHADS2 patients to decline by 4.8 percentage points relative to high
CHADS2 patients. The magnitude of these marginal effects are consistent with our reduced-form
results in Section 4.


6.4     Interpretation and Robustness

Under the lens of our model, these findings suggest that the CHADS2 score improves physicians' in-
formation on CHADS2 -related stroke treatment effects. Specifically, we find that CHADS2 awareness
doubles the precision of physicians' signal of CHADS2 -related stroke treatment effects, implying a
                                                        ( )          ( )
large increase in the signal-to-noise ratio            pre    to    post .   In contrast, physicians appear to have little
systematic knowledge of residual stroke treatment effects, and adopting the CHADS2 score has no
impact on this. The precision of physicians' information about CHADS2 -related stroke treatment
  21 This result contrasts with Einav et al. (2019) and Oster (2020), who find that healthier patients select into treatment. In
our setting, where physicians are the key decision-maker, patterns of selection might be different.



                                                               22
effects is much greater than the precision of their information about other sources of treatment effect
                   ( )        ( )
variation, i.e.                     , regardless of .
       These estimates imply that doctors do not successfully use variation in stroke treatment effects that
is not captured by the CHADS2 score to improve treatment allocation. In the language of our model,
                                                                   ( )
the estimates imply a very low signal-to-noise ratio                     for residual variation in stroke treatment
effects.
       We cannot directly test whether physicians are responding to other sources of heterogeneity using
characteristics that are unmeasured in the AFI data; however, the insensitivity of physician decisions
to any of the residual variation in stroke treatment effects suggests that there may be little selection
of this sort. By design, the AFI studies record a wide array of clinical characteristics that expert
clinicians predicted might drive variation in risk and treatment effects. We demonstrated that these
factors indeed predict wide variation in stroke treatment effects beyond that captured by the CHADS2
score. Nevertheless, treatment decisions by VHA physicians are unresponsive to all of the measured
variation in stroke treatment effects beyond those factors codified into the CHADS2 .
       This evidence suggests that guideline awareness may provide important informational benefits.
However, three factors highlight the potential limits of only making clinicians aware of guidelines.
First, we find some evidence of distraction effects which may limit the degree to which CHADS2
awareness reduces strokes per induced bleed. Second, although we see a large relative increase in
physicians' responsiveness to CHADS2 -related treatment effects, we see no significant reduction in

   ,    with CHADS2 awareness. This result suggests that uncertainty about CHADS2 -related treatment
effects is responsible for only a small share of variation in treatment decisions. Third, even with
awareness of the CHADS2 score, physicians continue to be less inclined to treat older patients (who
also have higher CHADS2 scores), and this behavior cannot be explained by treatment effects.22
       Before we take our results to counterfactual simulations, we can use the rich set of covariates in
the VHA data to assess some of our key assumptions. Recall that our baseline model already accounts
for the role of many variables that predict treatment effect heterogeneity and may enter physician
decision-making, including salient biomarkers (blood pressure, hemoglobin), patient history (stroke,
heart attack, angina), as well as key comorbidities and demographic variables. In Appendix A.4,
we describe many additional patient characteristics that may influence anticoagulation decisions but
are not available in the VHA data, and which we now add to our analysis. These variables exten-
   22 A similar pattern has been documented in the setting of heart attack care by (Currie et al., 2016): physicians avoid
treating older patients, even when they would benefit from treatment.




                                                           23
sively cover the factors suggested by clinicians and prior researchers to influence treatment decisions.
Importantly, these include many variables related to frailty and fall risk, including past reports of
dizziness, muscle weakness, prior injuries (fractures, head injuries), and risky conditions (Parkinson's
Disease, neuropathy, arthritis, vision problems). We also include variables that were later included
into the HAS-BLED guideline to assess bleeding risk (liver disease, renal failure, alcohol abuse, prior
bleeds). Other variables include a full set of Elixhauser comorbidities, physician specialization, and
variables that predict patients' ability to comply with warfarin monitoring.
    In Panel A of Figure A.4, we investigate the robustness of our findings to these additional con-
trol variables. Enriching the control variables does not substantively change the estimated effect of
CHADS2 awareness on treatment decisions. Specifically, the proportional change in signal-to-noise
ratio of physicians' beliefs about CHADS2 -related variation in stroke treatment effects after guideline
                 ( )   ( )
awareness,      pre / post ,   does not vary much as we progressively add these additional covariates to the
model.
    Next, we explore whether the residual variation in treatment decisions (conditional on estimated
treatment effects) can be explained by the variables described above that might predict treatment
decisions but are available only in the observational VHA data and not in the RCT data from AFI. In
Panel B of Figure A.4, we show that these additional variables do not systematically explain a large
fraction of treatment decisions and therefore cannot explain the high rates guideline non-adherence.23
Even as we control for detailed patient characteristics, we find little increase in the explained share of
variance in treatment decisions.
    This evidence, combined with the important fact that physicians do not even respond to mea-
sured variation in stroke treatment effects (beyond the factors captured in the CHADS2 ), suggests
that departures from treating according to measured treatment effects is unlikely to be explained by
unmeasured variation in treatment effects. Instead, these deviations might represent practice style
variation across physicians or idiosyncratic decision-making within each physician.24
  23 To  the degree that one interprets the results in Panel A as a nonlinear analogue of the test in Altonji et al. (2008),
one might argue that panel B suggests that this test has limited power in the sense of Oster (2019). The test in Panel A
is of direct interest because the covariates we include account for specific normative justifications that physicians give for
non-adherence, but it is not especially informative about other unobservable characteristics in the Oster (2019) sense.
   24 Finally, note that selection on unobservable determinants of treatment effects is immaterial for our counterfactual
analyses comparing strict adherence with random treatment decisions. These analyses consider treatment rules based only
on observable characteristics, for which CATEs are the relevant objects. If doctors did have private information about
treatment effects, our counterfactuals will understate the benefits of the status quo, but still correctly assess the impact of
guideline adherence relative to random treatment.




                                                             24
7       Counterfactual Awareness and Adherence

Based on our ML-predicted treatment effects in Section 5 and our analysis of physician decision-
making in Section 6, we simulate outcomes under counterfactual scenarios of guideline awareness
and adherence. When discussing counterfactual outcomes, it is useful to compare outcomes to a few
benchmarks. Treating all patients with newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation in the VHA would prevent
400 strokes (hereafter, "preventable strokes") and induce 277 bleeding events (hereafter, "inducible
bleeds") per 10,000 patients after one year.
      In Figure 6 and Table 5, we show key results on prevented strokes and induced bleeds under
counterfactual scenarios. We first show that status quo physician decisions are only slightly better than
random anticoagulation of atrial fibrillation patients: physicians prescribe anticoagulation to 49.8%
of patients and prevent 49.8% of preventable strokes but induce 48.4% of inducible bleeds. That is,
                                           49.8%
status quo decisions prevent only          48.4%   - 1  3% more strokes per bleed than random decisions with
the same induced bleeds. While we found in Section 6.3 that physicians are sensitive to treatment
effects, the benefits of this sensitivity are offset by the tendency not to treat older patients who often
have desirable ratios of stroke to bleed treatment effects. We will later revisit this issue with analyses
that reallocate anticoagulation only within age bins.
      Next, we consider counterfactual outcomes under scenarios varying the extensive margin of
guideline awareness. Awareness of the CHADS2 score had relatively muted effects on outcomes.
Under the counterfactual scenario of no CHADS2 awareness, 49.7% of patients would be treated,
preventing 49.2% of preventable strokes and inducing 48% of inducible bleeds (i.e. preventing 2.7%
more strokes per bleed than a random allocation). Universal CHADS2 awareness increases treatment
to 50.2% of patients, preventing 51.3% of preventable strokes and inducing 49.5% of inducible bleeds
(preventing 3.7% more strokes per bleed than random).
      We can also use the model to simulate awareness of a more comprehensive guideline revealing
all information about stroke treatment effects. We assume that physicians who have adopted this
guideline will become as well informed about residual variation in stroke treatment effects                              ( )( )


as they are about CHADS2 -related stroke treatment effects                   ( )( )   after CHADS2 awareness. (More
                                                                                         ( )        ( )
specifically, in our counterfactual, we set the signal-to-noise ratios                         =   post ,   so that the coeffi-
             ( )        ( ) 25
cient              =   post .)   In this scenario, at a treatment rate of 49.8%, physicians prevent 55.5% of
    25 Our
         model also does not identify how much a more comprehensive guideline would reduce noise in treatment choices
and thus reduce , post , but we can bound this effect. Our results are not sensitive to the bounds. We discuss this detail, as
well as assumptions about distraction effects, in Appendix A.2.



                                                             25
preventable strokes and induce 48.4% of inducible bleeds (preventing 14.8% more strokes per bleed
than random). A more comprehensive guideline outperforms the CHADS2 score.
    We then turn to scenarios involving strict adherence to a guideline. Treatment decisions under
these scenarios strictly follow an ordering according to guideline recommendations, and we remove
any tendency not to treat older patients and the substantial idiosyncratic variation in treatment deci-
sions. Each guideline implies a "score" that we use to order patients; patients with the same score
(e.g., patients with the same CHADS2 score for the CHADS2 guideline) are randomly ordered. We
evaluate the performance of adhering to each guideline-implied ordering by a set of counterfactual
outcomes, moving from no patients treated to all patients treated. Under the assumption that the costs
of treatment and monitoring are negligible relative to the clinical benefits,26 two guideline orderings
can be welfare-ranked if one guideline prevents more strokes than the other guideline, for any fixed
number of induced bleeds.
    Compared to expanding awareness of guidelines, policies that achieve strict adherence to guide-
lines produce much better outcomes. Holding bleeds fixed at the status quo level, strict adherence
to the CHADS2 score prevents 56% of preventable strokes. In other words, strict adherence to the
CHADS2 prevents 17% more strokes-per-bleed than was achieved with universal CHADS2 aware-
ness. Adherence to a score based on full stroke treatment effects performs better still, preventing
68.5% of preventable strokes for the same number of bleeds.
    Finally, we consider adherence to an optimal guideline that recommends treatment according
to the ratio of full stroke and bleed treatment effects, or - ^                   ( )/ ^      ( ) . Treatment orderings
based on this ratio should optimize any linear objective function depending on strokes and bleeding
events.27 Ordering based on the complete ratio can prevent 73% of preventable strokes, or 47% more
strokes than under the status quo, while holding induced bleeds fixed at the status quo level.
    In additional counterfactuals, we investigate the role of weighting vs. the number of variables
considered. In Appendix Figure 6, we show that adherence to the CHA2 DS2 -VASc guideline prevents
fewer strokes at any given number of bleeds than strict adherence to the CHADS2 score (i.e. it
performs worse than CHADS2 score). Our model suggests that vascular disease is an important
predictor of stroke treatment effects, but the CHA2 DS2 -VASc guideline gives vascular disease too
much weight relative to other variables.28 Thus, more comprehensive guidelines are not always better.
  26 This   assumption is standard in the existing medical literature on anticoagulation, e.g. Singer et al. (2009).
  27 For   an objective function =           +       , the optimal rule is to treat any patient such that - / > / . Note
the similarity with Equation (10). In that model, an agent will adhere fully to a ratio rule with observed treatment effects if
  ( ) + = 0 for all . We give details in Appendix A.3.
   28 In the interest of simplicity, most of the existing CHADS weights were unchanged in the CHA DS -VASc score (all
                                                                   2                                       2   2



                                                             26
More comprehensive guidelines can improve outcomes, but only if the relevant factors are weighted
appropriately given treatment effects.
    To understand the benefits of more comprehensive guidelines relative to the CHADS2 score, we
also consider an "adjusted CHADS" score that assigns integers to approximate the ratio of stroke
treatment effects to bleed treatment effects, - ^             ( )/ ^    ( ) , with each of the five conditions in
the original CHADS2 score. Holding induced bleeds fixed at the status quo level, adherence to this
"adjusted CHADS" guideline prevents 62% of preventable strokes, about one-third of the difference
between the CHADS2 and the optimal guideline. In this sense, about one-third of the benefits of our
optimal guideline come from better weighting and two-thirds come from including more variables.
    The tendency not to treat old people cannot be rationalized by a lower value of a statistical life,
since that would bear equally on strokes and bleeds, but it could be rationalized if doctors believed that
the relative welfare cost of strokes and bleeds differed for older patients or if the costs of monitoring
were more substantial at older ages. In Appendix Figure A.6 and Appendix Table A.8, we explore
outcomes in counterfactual scenarios that hold fixed the age distribution (in five-year bins) of treated
patients. Observed physician decisions are better than random, but only by a small amount. The
benefits of strict guideline adherence are slightly attenuated when constraining the age distribution
of treated patients but comparable in magnitude to what we find in the unconstrained scenario. For
example, adherence to the optimal ratio guideline can still prevent 44% more strokes than the status
quo holding bleeds fixed and maintaining the age distribution of treated patients.



8    Conclusion

Our findings suggest that evidence-based clinical guidelines have the potential to improve patient
health outcomes. The CHADS2 score shifted physician behavior and likely prevented a small number
of additional strokes while inducing an even smaller number of additional bleeds. Awareness of more
comprehensive guidelines that incorporates all of the variables that predict stroke treatment effects
would have larger benefits. Stricter adherence to existing or novel treatment rules produces much
larger gains than awareness with discretionary adherence. Strict adherence to an optimal treatment
rule that minimizes strokes per bleed can prevent 47% more strokes without increasing the number of
induced bleeds.
    Our results suggest three important lessons for the use of guidelines in clinical care. First, the
variables other than age), but additional variables were added. Vascular disease was given a weight of "1", the lowest
weight available in the score. This weight was still too large and reduced the performance of the score.


                                                         27
extensive margin of guideline awareness, in which physicians are aware of the guideline but exer-
cise discretion in how to use it, achieves only a fraction of the benefits of greater intensive margin
adherence. Second, incorporating more variables into guidelines can improve outcomes, but only if
they are weighted properly. We find that optimally weighting the CHADS2 variables achieves about
one-third of the benefits of an optimal guideline with all available information. The CHA2 DS2 -VASc
score provides a cautionary tale of a more complex score that underperforms relative to the simpler
CHADS2 score due to misweighting. Third, improving the prediction of treatment effects for a sin-
gle outcome may underperform relative to treatment rules that balance a trade-off between different
outcomes. An optimal rule combining information on stroke and bleed treatment effects outperforms
one based on strokes alone. The best algorithms are designed to match a social objective function
(Obermeyer et al., 2019).
    Many policy instruments are available to promote adherence. On the less invasive side, in-person
campaigns to educate and persuade physicians to adhere to guidelines, as well as order sets and elec-
tronic reminders can make more salient the costs of departing from guidelines (Piccini et al., 2019).
Alerting physicians if their adherence rates are low relative to peers could also shift behavior (Sacarny
et al., 2018). More directly, pay for performance incentives could reward physicians whose treatment
behavior accords with guidelines (Werner et al., 2011), and insurers could impose hassle costs on
physicians to justify treatment decisions which do not comply with guidelines (e.g. failing to treat
patients with higher stroke to bleed ratios than other treated patients) (Dillender, 2018). Best prac-
tices for implementing guidelines in clinical decision support (CDS) IT systems call for generating
evidence for their external validity (Bates et al., 2020). An alternative way to increase adherence to
new and existing guidelines may be to generate better evidence for their validity as we seek to do
here, increasing the strength of the signal that guidelines provide.
    Our results incorporate more information to estimate treatment effects than has been previously
considered, but they only scratch the surface of what is possible. Machine-based algorithms could
continue to learn both from additional trials and from observational data, in order to create more
powerful predictors of treatment effects. While there remain logistical challenges to the widespread
integration of machine-based algorithms into health IT systems (Kawamoto and McDonald, 2020),
these are likely to be lessened as data integration and methods of validation in healthcare becomes
more commonplace. As such algorithms are implemented, healthcare markets will be reshaped as
physicians take on fundamentally different roles (Autor et al., 2003).




                                                   28
References

Abaluck, Jason, Leila Agha, Chris Kabrhel, Ali Raja, and Arjun Venkatesh, "The Determinants
  of Productivity in Medical Testing: Intensity and Allocation of Care," American Economic Review,
  December 2016, 106 (12), 3730­64.

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber, "Using Selection on Observed
  Variables to Assess Bias from Unobservables When Evaluating Swan-Ganz Catheterization," The
  American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (2), pp. 345­350.

Amroze, Azraa, Kathleen Mazor, Sybil Crawford, Kevin O'Day, David D. McManus, and Alok
  Kapoor, "Survey of Confidence in Use of Stroke and Bleeding Risk Calculators, Knowledge
  of Anticoagulants, and Comfort With Prescription of Anticoagulation in Challenging Scenarios:
  Support-Af II Study," Journal of Thrombosis and Thrombolysis, November 2019, 48 (4), 629­637.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, "Split-Sample Instrumental Variables Estimates of the
  Return to Schooling," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, April 1995, 13 (2), 225­235.
  Publisher: Taylor & Francis.

Arnold, David, Will Dobbie, and Peter Hull, "Measuring Racial Discrimination in Bail Decisions,"
  Working Paper 2020-33, University of Chicago, Becker-Friedman Institute for Economics April
  2020.

Arrowsmith, Cheryl H, James E Audia, Christopher Austin, Jonathan Baell, Jonathan Bennett,
  Julian Blagg, Chas Bountra, Paul E Brennan, Peter J Brown, Mark E Bunnage et al., "The
  promise and peril of chemical probes," Nature chemical biology, 2015, 11 (8), 536­541.

Ashburner, Jeffrey M., Steven J. Atlas, Shaan Khurshid, Lu-Chen Weng, Olivia L. Hulme,
  Yuchiao Chang, Daniel E. Singer, Patrick T. Ellinor, and Steven A. Lubitz, "Electronic Physi-
  cian Notifications to Improve Guideline-Based Anticoagulation in Atrial Fibrillation: A Random-
  ized Controlled Trial," Journal of General Internal Medicine, December 2018, 33 (12), 2070­2077.

Athey, Susan and Stefan Wager, "Estimating Treatment Effects with Causal Forests: An Applica-
  tion," Observational Studies, 2019, 5, 36­51.

  , Julie Tibshirani, and Stefan Wager, "Generalized Random Forests," Annals of Statistics, 2019,
  47 (2), 1148­1178.


                                                  29
Atrial Fibrillation Investigators, "Risk Factors for Stroke and Efficacy of Antithrombotic Therapy
  in Atrial Fibrillation: Analysis of Pooled Data from Five Randomized Controlled Trials," Archives
  of Internal Medicine, 1995, 154 (3), 1449­1457.

Autor, David H, Frank Levy, and Richard J Murnane, "The Skill Content of Recent Technological
  Change: An Empirical Exploration," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1279­1333.

Basu, Anirban, Anupam B. Jena, Dana P. Goldman, Tomas J. Philipson, and Robert Dubois,
  "Heterogeneity in Action: The Role of Passive Personalization in Comparative Effectiveness Re-
  search," Health Economics, 2014, 23 (3), 359­373.

Basu, Sumanta, Karl Kumbier, James B Brown, and Bin Yu, "Iterative random forests to discover
  predictive and stable high-order interactions," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  2018, 115 (8), 1943­1948.

Bates, David W., Andrew Auerbach, Peter Schulam, Adam Wright, and Suchi Saria, "Reporting
  and Implementing Interventions Involving Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence," Annals
  of Internal Medicine, June 2020, 172 (11_Supplement), S137­S144. Publisher: American College
  of Physicians.

Challener, Douglas W., Larry J. Prokop, and Omar Abu-Saleh, "The Proliferation of Reports
  on Clinical Scoring Systems: Issues about Uptake and Clinical Utility," JAMA, 2019, 321 (24),
  2405­2406.

Chan, David C., Matthew Gentzkow, and Chuan Yu, "Selection with Variation in Diagnostic
  Skill: Evidence from Radiologists," Working Paper 26467, National Bureau of Economic Research
  November 2019.

Chandra, Amitabh and Douglas O. Staiger, "Identifying Sources of Inefficiency in Healthcare,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020, 135 (2), 785­843.

Chapman, Scott A., Catherine A. St Hill, Meg M. Little, Michael T. Swanoski, Shellina R.
  Scheiner, Kenric B. Ware, and May N. Lutfiyya, "Adherence to Treatment Guidelines: The As-
  sociation between Stroke Risk Stratified Comparing CHADS2 and CHA2DS2-VASc Score Levels
  and Warfarin Prescription for Adult Patients with Atrial Fibrillation," BMC Health Services Re-
  search, 2017, 17 (1), 127.



                                                30
Chen, Jonathan H., Daniel Z. Fang, Lawrence Tim Goodnough, Kambria H. Evans, Mar-
  tina Lee Porter, and Lisa Shieh, "Why Providers Transfuse Blood Products Outside Recom-
  mended Guidelines in Spite of Integrated Electronic Best Practice Alerts," Journal of Hospital
  Medicine, 2015, 10 (1), 1­7.

Chernozhukov, Victor, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, and Ivan Fernandez-Val, "Generic Machine
  Learning Inference on Heterogenous Treatment Effects in Randomized Experiments," Working
  Paper 24678, National Bureau of Economic Research June 2018.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff, "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I:
  Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates," American Economic Review, September 2014,
  104 (9), 2593­2632.

Colilla, Susan, Ann Crow, William Petkun, Daniel E. Singer, Teresa Simon, and Xianchen Liu,
  "Estimates of Current and Future Incidence and Prevalence of Atrial Fibrillation in the US Adult
  Population," American Journal of Cardiology, 2013, 112 (8), 1142­1147.

Costantini, Otto, Klara K. Papp, Julie Como, John Aucott, Mark D. Carlson, and David C.
  Aron, "Attitudes of Faculty, Housestaff, and Medical Students Toward Clinical Practice Guide-
  lines," Academic Medicine: Journal of the Association of American Medical Colleges, 1999, 74
  (10), 1138­1143.

Currie, Janet M. and W. Bentley MacLeod, "Diagnosing Expertise: Human Capital, Decision
  Making, and Performance among Physicians," Journal of Labor Economics, 2017, 35 (1), 1­43.

   and    , "Understanding Doctor Decision Making: The Case of Depression Treatment," Econo-
  metrica, 2020, 88 (3), 847­878.

Currie, Janet, W Bentley MacLeod, and Jessica Van Parys, "Provider practice style and patient
  health outcomes: the case of heart attacks," Journal of health economics, 2016, 47, 64­80.

de Chaisemartin, Clement, "Tolerating Defiance? Local Average Treatment Effects Without Mono-
  tonicity," Quantitative Economics, 2017, 8 (2), 367­396.

Dillender, Marcus, "What Happens When the Insurer Can Say No? Assessing Prior Authorization
  as a Tool to Prevent High-Risk Prescriptions and to Lower Costs," Journal of Public Economics,
  2018, 165, 170­200.


                                                31
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Tamar Oostrom, Abigail J. Ostriker, and Heidi L. Williams,
  "Screening and Selection: The Case of Mammograms," Working Paper 26162, National Bureau of
  Economic Research August 2019.

Fawzy, Ameenathul M., Brian Olshansky, and Gregory Y. H. Lip, "Frailty and Multi-Morbidities
  Should Not Govern Oral Anticoagulation Therapy Prescribing for Patients With Atrial Fibrillation,"
  American Heart Journal, 2019, 208, 120­122.

Frandsen, Brigham R., Lars J. Lefgren, and Emily C. Leslie, "Judging Judge Fixed Effects,"
  Working Paper 25528, National Bureau of Economic Research February 2019.

Fuster, Valentin, Lars E Rydén, David S Cannom, Harry J Crijns, Anne B Curtis, Kenneth A
  Ellenbogen, Jonathan L Halperin, Jean-Yves Le Heuzey, G Neal Kay, and Task Force on
  Practice Guidelines, American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association, Com-
  mittee for Practice Guidelines, European Society of Cardiology, European Heart Rhythm
  Association, Heart Rhythm Society, "ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for the management of
  patients with atrial fibrillation­executive summary: A report of the American College of Cardiol-
  ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines and the European Society of
  Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 2001 Guidelines
  for the Management of Patients with Atrial Fibrillation) Developed in collaboration with the Eu-
  ropean Heart Rhythm Association and the Heart Rhythm Society," European Heart Journal, 2006,
  27 (16), 1979­2030.

Gage, Brian F., Amy D. Waterman, William Shannon, Michael Boechler, Michael W. Rich, and
  Martha J. Radford, "Validation of Clinical Classification Schemes for Predicting Stroke: Results
  from the National Registry of Atrial Fibrillation," JAMA, 2001, 285 (22), 2864­2870.

  , Carl van Walraven, Lesly Pearce, Robert G. Hart, Peter J. Koudstaal, B.S.P. Boode, and
  Palle Petersen, "Selecting Patients with Atrial Fibrillation for Anticoagulation: Stroke Risk Strat-
  ification in Patients Taking Aspirin," Circulation, 2004, 110 (16), 2287­2292.

George, Edward I. and Dean P. Foster, "Calibration and Empirical Bayes Variable Selection,"
  Biometrika, December 2000, 87 (4), 731­747.




                                                 32
Gowrisankaran, Gautam, Keith A. Joiner, and Pierre-Thomas Léger, "Physician Practice Style
  and Healthcare Costs: Evidence from Emergency Departments," Working Paper 24155, National
  Bureau of Economic Research December 2017.

Grimshaw, Jeremy M. and Ian T. Russell, "Effect of Clinical Guidelines on Medical Practice: A
  Systematic Review of Rigorous Evaluations," Lancet, 1993, 342 (8883), 1317­1322.

Hirsh, Jack, Gordon Guyatt, Gregory W. Albers, Robert Harrington, and Holger J. Schüne-
  mann, "Executive Summary: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical
  Practice Guidelines (8th Edition)," Chest, June 2008, 133 (6), 71S­109S.

Hoffman, Mitchell, Lisa B. Kahn, and Danielle Li, "Discretion in Hiring," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2018, 133 (2), 765­800.

Hsu, Jonathan C., Thomas M. Maddox, Kevin F. Kennedy, David F. Katz, Lucas N. Marzec,
  Steven A. Lubitz, Anil K. Gehi, Mintu P. Turakhia, and Gregory M. Marcus, "Oral Anticoag-
  ulant Therapy Prescription in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation Across the Spectrum of Stroke Risk:
  Insights From the NCDR PINNACLE Registry," JAMA Cardiology, 2016, 1 (1), 55­62.

Kawamoto, Kensaku and Clement J. McDonald, "Designing, Conducting, and Reporting Clinical
  Decision Support Studies: Recommendations and Call to Action," Annals of Internal Medicine,
  June 2020, 172 (11_Supplement), S101­S109. Publisher: American College of Physicians.

Kearon, Clive, Elie A. Akl, Anthony J. Comerota, Paolo Prandoni, Henri Bounameaux,
  Samuel Z. Goldhaber, Michael E. Nelson, Philip S. Wells, Michael K. Gould, Francesco
  Dentali, Mark Crowther, and Susan R. Kahn, "Antithrombotic Therapy for VTE Disease: An-
  tithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physi-
  cians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines," Chest, February 2012, 141 (2, Supplement),
  e419S­e496S.

Kleinberg, Jon, Himabindu Lakkaraju, Jure Leskovec, Jens Ludwig, and Sendhil Mul-
  lainathan, "Human Decisions and Machine Predictions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018,
  133 (1), 237­293.

Kolesar, Michal, Raj Chetty, John Friedman, Edward Glaeser, and Guido W. Imbens, "Identifi-
  cation and Inference With Many Invalid Instruments," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
  October 2015, 33 (4), 474­484.

                                                33
Lane, Deirdre A. and Gregory Y.H. Lip, "Use of the CHA2DS2-VASC and HAS-BLED Scores
  to Aid Decision Making for Thromboprophylaxis in Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation," Circulation,
  2012, 126 (7), 860­865.

Lasser, Elyse C., Elizabeth R. Pfoh, Hsien-Yen Chang, Kitty S. Chan, Justin Bailey, Hadi Khar-
  razi, Jonathan P. Weiner, and Sydney Morss Dy, "Has Choosing Wisely Affected Rates of Dual-
  Energy X-ray Absorptiometry Use?," Osteoporosis International, 2016, 27 (7), 2311­2316.

Lip, Gregory Y.H., Robby Nieuwlaat, Ron Pisters, Deirdre A. Lane, and Harry J.G.M. Crijns,
  "Refining Clinical Risk Stratification for Predicting Stroke and Thromboembolism in Atrial Fibril-
  lation Using A Novel Risk Factor-Based Approach: The Euro Heart Survey on Atrial Fibrillation,"
  Chest, 2010, 137 (2), 263­272.

Manski, Charles F., "Improving Clinical Guidelines and Decisions under Uncertainty," Working
  Paper 23915, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2017.

Mehta, Rajendra H., Anita Y. Chen, Karen P. Alexander, E. Magnus Ohman, Matthew T. Roe,
  and Eric D. Peterson, "Doing the Right Things and Doing Them the Right Way: Association
  between Hospital Guideline Adherence, Dosing Safety, and Outcomes among Patients with Acute
  Coronary Syndrome," Circulation, 2015, 131 (11), 980­987.

Mullainathan, Sendhil and Ziad Obermeyer, "A Machine Learning Approach to Low-Value Health
  Care: Wasted Tests, Missed Heart Attacks and Mis-Predictions," Working Paper 26168, National
  Bureau of Economic Research August 2019.

Obermeyer, Ziad, Brian Powers, Christine Vogeli, and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Dissecting Racial
  Bias in an Algorithm Used to Manage the Health of Populations," Science, 2019, 366 (6464), 447­
  453.

Oster, Emily, "Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and evidence," Journal of
  Business & Economic Statistics, 2019, 37 (2), 187­204.

  , "Health Recommendations and Selection in Health Behaviors," American Economic Review: In-
  sights, June 2020, 2 (2), 143­60.

Perino, Alexander C., Jun Fan, Susan K. Schmitt, Mariam Askari, Daniel W. Kaiser, Abhishek
  Deshmukh, Paul A. Heidenreich, Christopher Swan, Sanjiv M. Narayan, and Paul J. Wang,


                                                34
  "Treating Specialty and Outcomes in Newly Diagnosed Atrial Fibrillation: From the TREAT-AF
  Study," Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 2017, 70 (1), 78­86.

Piccini, Jonathan P. and Gregg C. Fonarow, "Preventing Stroke in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation-
  A Steep Climb Away From Achieving Peak Performance," JAMA Cardiology, 2016, 1 (1), 63­64.

  , Haolin Xu, Margueritte Cox, Roland A. Matsouaka, Gregg C. Fonarow, Butler Javed, Cur-
  tis Anne B., Desai Nihar, Fang Margaret, McCabe Pamela J., Page II Robert L., Turakhia
  Mintu, Russo Andrea M., Knight Bradley P., Sidhu Mandeep, Hurwitz Jodie L., Ellenbogen
  Kenneth A., Lewis William R., and null null, "Adherence to Guideline-Directed Stroke Preven-
  tion Therapy for Atrial Fibrillation Is Achievable," Circulation, March 2019, 139 (12), 1497­1506.
  Publisher: American Heart Association.

Pisters, Ron, Deirdre A. Lane, Robby Nieuwlaat, Cees B. De Vos, Harry J.G.M. Crijns, and
  Gregory Y.H. Lip, "A Novel User-Friendly Score (HAS-BLED) to Assess 1-year Risk of Major
  Bleeding in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation: The Euro Heart Survey," Chest, 2010, 138 (5), 1093­
  1100.

Prior, Mathew, Michelle Guerin, and Karen Grimmer-Somers, "The Effectiveness of Clinical
  Guideline Implementation Strategies­A Synthesis of Systematic Review Findings," Journal of
  Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 2008, 14 (5), 888­897.

Ribers, Michael A. and Hannes Ullrich, "Battling Antibiotic Resistance: Can Machine Learning
  Improve Prescribing?," Discussion Paper 1803, DIW Berlin May 2019.

Rosenberg, Alan, Abiy Agiro, Marc Gottlieb, John Barron, Peter Brady, Ying Liu, Cindy Li,
  and Andrea DeVries, "Early Trends among Seven Recommendations from the Choosing Wisely
  Campaign," JAMA Internal Medicine, 2015, 175 (12), 1913­1920.

Sacarny, Adam, Michael L Barnett, Jackson Le, Frank Tetkoski, David Yokum, and Shantanu
  Agrawal, "Effect of peer comparison letters for high-volume primary care prescribers of quetiapine
  in older and disabled adults: a randomized clinical trial," JAMA psychiatry, 2018, 75 (10), 1003­
  1011.

Schuster, Mark A., Elizabeth A. McGlynn, and Robert H. Brook, "How Good Is the Quality of
  Health Care in the United States?," Milbank Quarterly, 1998, 76 (4), 517­563.



                                                35
Singer, Daniel E, Yuchiao Chang, Margaret C Fang, Leila H Borowsky, Niela K Pomernacki,
  Natalia Udaltsova, and Alan S Go, "The net clinical benefit of warfarin anticoagulation in atrial
  fibrillation," Annals of internal medicine, 2009, 151 (5), 297­305.

Stevenson, Megan T and Jennifer L Doleac, "Algorithmic Risk Assessment in the Hands of Hu-
  mans," Available at SSRN, 2019.

Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation Investigators, "Risk Factors for Thromboembolism During
  Aspirin Therapy in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation: The Stroke Prevention in Atrial Fibrillation
  Study," Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular Diseases, 1995, 5 (3), 147­157.

Turakhia, Mintu P., Donald D. Hoang, Xiangyan Xu, Susan Frayne, Susan Schmitt, Felix Yang,
  Ciaran S. Phibbs, Claire T. Than, Paul J. Wang, and Paul A. Heidenreich, "Differences and
  Trends in Stroke Prevention Anticoagulation in Primary Care vs Cardiology Specialty Manage-
  ment of New Atrial Fibrillation: The Retrospective Evaluation and Assessment of Therapies in AF
  (TREAT-AF) Study," American Heart Journal, 2013, 165 (1), 93­101.

Valle, Christopher W., Helen J. Binns, Maheen Quadri-Sheriff, Irwin Benuck, and Angira Pa-
  tel, "Physicians' Lack of Adherence to National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Guidelines for
  Pediatric Lipid Screening," Clinical Pediatrics, 2015, 54 (12), 1200­1205.

van Walraven, Carl, Robert G Hart, Daniel E Singer, Andreas Laupacis, Stuart Connolly, Palle
  Petersen, Peter J Koudstaal, Yuchiao Chang, and Beppie Hellemons, "Oral Anticoagulants vs
  Aspirin in Nonvalvular Atrial Fibrillation: An Individual Patient Meta-Analysis," JAMA, 2002, 288
  (19), 2441­2448.

  , Robert G. Hart, Stuart Connolly, Peter C. Austin, Jonathan Mant, F.D. Richard Hobbs,
  Peter J. Koudstaal, Palle Petersen, Francisco Perez-Gomez, J. Andre Knottnerus, Beppie
  Boode, Michael D. Ezekowitz, and Daniel E. Singer, "Effect of Age on Stroke Prevention Ther-
  apy in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation: The Atrial Fibrillation Investigators," Stroke, 2009, 40 (4),
  1410­1416.

Vytlacil, Edward, "Independence, Monotonicity, and Latent Index Models: An Equivalence Result,"
  Econometrica, 2002, 70 (1), 331­341.

Wager, Stefan and Susan Athey, "Estimation and Inference of Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
  Using Random Forests," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 2017, 0 (ja), 0­0.

                                                  36
Wei, Pengfei, Zhenzhou Lu, and Jingwen Song, "Variable Importance Analysis: A Comprehensive
  Review," Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 2015, 142, 399­432.

Werner, Rachel M, Jonathan T Kolstad, Elizabeth A Stuart, and Daniel Polsky, "The effect of
  pay-for-performance in hospitals: Lessons for quality improvement," Health Affairs, 2011, 30 (4),
  690­698.

Woolf, Steven H., Richard Grol, Allen Hutchinson, Martin Eccles, and Jeremy Grimshaw, "Po-
  tential Benefits, Limitations, and Harms of Clinical Guidelines," BMJ, 1999, 318 (7182), 527­530.




                                                37
                                                  Figure 1: Anticoagulation Trends by CHADS2 Score
                       .7
       Anticoagulation prescription rate
            .4        .5
                       .3        .6




                                           2002      2004      2006       2008      2010       2012   2014
                                                                          Year

                                                             CHADS2  {0,1}            CHADS2  {2,3}
                                                             CHADS2  4

Notes: This figure shows the fraction of atrial fibrillation patients treated with anticoagulation over time, for
three groups of patients by CHADS2 score. The sample reflect patients with newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation
in the VHA, and anticoagulation treatments are defined as prescriptions within 90 days of initial diagnosis.
Table 2 provides further details about the sample selection.




                                                                        38
                              Figure 2: Diffusion of the CHADS2 Score
        .8
        .6
        .4
        .2
        0




             2002         2004           2006           2008           2010          2012           2014
                                                        Year

                                 CHADS2 awareness
                                                                       CHADS2 mention rate
                                   (cumulative)

Notes: This figure shows the fraction of patients a given year with physicians who either mention the CHADS2
score in the note for the index patient or have mentioned the CHADS2 score in either the note for the index
patient or in a previous note. We identify mentions by searching the note text for the phrase chads (not case-
sensitive). We consider any physician who has mentioned the the CHADS2 score in the current note or in a
previous note as having adopted the CHADS2 guideline, shown in the solid line. The dashed line reflects the
rate of mentions in the index patient's note. The sample reflect patients with newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation
in the VHA. Table 2 provides further details about the sample selection.




                                                       39
                         Figure 3: Treatment Decisions and CHADS2 Awareness
                                 A. Trends Relative to CHADS2 Awareness


             .7
             .6
             .5
             .4
             .3




                    -5     -4     -3      -2      -1       0     1     2            3       4       5
                                         Year relative to CHADS2 awareness

                                               CHADS2  {0,1}          CHADS2  2


                                           B. Event Study Estimates
             .05
             0
             -.05
             -.1
             -.15




                    -5     -4     -3      -2      -1       0     1     2            3       4       5
                                         Year relative to CHADS2 awareness

                                          CHADS2  {0,1}                   CHADS2  2

Notes: Panel A displays the fraction of atrial fibrillation patients treated with anticoagulation in each year rela-
tive to CHADS2 awareness for physicians who eventually adopt the CHADS2 score. Panel B shows regression
coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from Equation (1), run separately for patients with CHADS2  {0, 1}
and for patients with CHADS2  2. The 12-month period prior to the physician's first CHADS2 mention is
normalized to 0. The regression sample includes 104,585 VHA patients who either are treated within 5 years
of their physician's observed CHADS2 awareness or are treated by a non-adopting physician.

                                                        40
                    Figure 4: Distribution of Treatment Effects Across VHA Patients




             10
          Percent
          5  0




                    -.15            -.1             -.05                0                  .05
                                             Treatment effect on stroke
             20
             15
          Percent
           105
             0




                     0           .01            .02            .03               .04             .05
                                           Treatment effect on bleeding

Notes: This figure displays histograms of stroke and bleed treatment effects in the VHA sample. Conditional
average treatment effect (CATE) predictions are trained and validated by using causal forest methods, described
in Section 5, applied to RCT data in the AFI database. We use the causal forest rules to calculate CATEs as a
function of patient characteristics for each patient in the VHA data.




                                                      41
                                              Figure 5: Treatment Effects by CHADS2 Score
                                                       A. Stroke Treatment Effects


                        0          -.02
          Stroke treatment effects
               -.06     -.04
                        -.08
                        -.1




                                          0       1         2        3               4   5    6
                                                                 CHADS2 score

                                                        B. Bleed Treatment Effects
                        .04   .03
          Bleed treatment effects
                   .02  .01
                        0




                                          0       1         2        3               4   5    6
                                                                 CHADS2 score

Notes: This figure shows box plots for the distribution of treatment effects by CHADS2 score in the VHA data.
Stroke treatment effects are shown in Panel A; bleed treatment effects are shown in Panel B. Bounds on the
box plot are at the 25th and 75th percentile, with the median marked with a horizontal line. Whiskers extend
to the 5th and 95th percentiles.

                                                                   42
                                                                     Figure 6: Counterfactual Outcomes
                                                                        A. Strict Guideline Adherence

                                                        0% treated




                                 0
                                                                                                              Sort randomly
                                                                                                              Sort by CHADS2
                                                                                                              Sort by adjusted CHADS score
                                                                                                              Sort by stroke TE
                                             -100
                    Total stroke effect per 10k
                                                                                                              Sort by TE ratio
                  -300         -200
                                 -400




                                                                                                                           100% treated

                                                    0                          100                      200                               300
                                                                                Total bleed effect per 10k

                                                                        B. Guideline Awareness (Inset)
                                 -180




                                                                                                           Sort randomly
                                                                                                           Sort by CHADS2
                                                                                                           Sort by adjusted CHADS score
                                                                                                           Sort by stroke TE
                     Total stroke effect per 10k




                                                              No CHADS2 awareness
                                           -200




                                                              Universal CHADS2 awareness
                               -220




                                                                                     Full stroke TE guideline awareness
                  -240           -260




                                                    120                  130                140                      150                  160
                                                                                 Total bleed effect per 10k

Notes: This figure shows strokes prevented and bleeds induced by anticoagulation in counterfactual scenarios.
Strokes prevented per 10,000 patients are shown on the y-axis, and bleeds induced per 10,000 patients are
shown on the x-axis. Both panels display outcomes under a random treatment allocation, ranging from 0% of
patients treated (top-left corner of Panel A) to 100% of patients treated (bottom-right corner of Panel A). Panel
A shows outcomes under counterfactual strict adherence to various guideline rules. Each rule implies a patient
sorting, and the curves indicate counterfactual outcomes ranging from treating 0% to 100% of patients. "Sort
by adjusted CHADS score" involves sorting by an integer score based on the CHADS2 component conditions
(see Table 1) but predicting the ratio of stroke treatment effect to bleed treatment effect. "Sort by TE ratio"
sorts by the ratio of stroke treatment effect to bleed treatment effect. Crosses indicate the points where 50%
of patients are treated. Panel B shows an inset area and plots outcomes for counterfactual awareness (i.e.,
imperfect adherence) scenarios.


                                                                                           43
                    Table 1: CHADS2 Score and Treatment Recommendations


                          CHADS2 Components                                  Points
                          History of congestive heart failure                   1
                          History of hypertension                               1
                          History of diabetes mellitus                          1
                          Aged 75 or older                                      1
                          Previous stroke or transient ischemic attack          2


                          Treatment Recommendation
                          Score of 2 or greater: high risk of stroke;
                          oral anticoagulant recommended
                          Score of 1: moderate risk of stroke;
                          oral anticoagulant considered
                          Score of 0: low risk of stroke;
                          oral anticoagulant not recommended
Notes: This table describes the CHADS2 score used to assess stroke risk among patients with atrial fibrillation.
The score is based on evidence developed by Gage et al. (2001, 2004). In the bottom panel, the table also
summarizes the 2006 ACC and 2008 ACCP guideline treatment recommendations based on the CHADS2
score, published in Fuster et al. (2006); Hirsh et al. (2008).




                                                      44
                                                                  Table 2: VHA Sample Selection

                                                                                                                             Observations
               Sample step                                  Description                                                Dropped         Remaining
               1. Identify potentially new atrial           Identify candidate patients with a diagnosis of                             844,312
               fibrillation patients                        atrial fibrillation not previously diagnosed in the
                                                            last three years.
               2. Prescription restriction                  Keep patients who had a prescription filled atthe           290,214             554,098
                                                            VA within the last year. Drop patients who had a
                                                            prior anticoagulation prescription.
               3. Confirmed atrial fibrillation             Keep patients who had an EKG within 30 days                 254,164             299,934
               diagnosis                                    before or after initial diagnosis and a second
                                                            atrial fibrilliation diagnosis recorded 30-365
                                                            days after index visit.




45
               4. PCP or cardiologist visit                 Keep patients who had a PCP or cardiologist                 135,395             164,539
                                                            visit up to 90 days after the index visit. The
                                                            earliest such visit identifies the attributed
                                                            physician. Require that the attributed physician
                                                            wrote at least one non-warfarin prescription for
                                                            the patient within one year (before or after).
               5. Physicians with sufficient sample         Keep patients attributed to a physician with at             32,868              131,671
                                                            least 30 atrial fibrillation patients and has
                                                            written at least one warfarin prescription in the
                                                            unrestricted sample defined in step #1.
               6. Drop observations with missing            Keep patients with non-missing demographics,                18,401              113,270
               variables                                    comorbidities, and clinical information.

     Note: This table describes key VHA sample selection steps, the observations dropped, and the observations remaining after each step.
                                      Table 3: Summary Statistics

                                                         VHA Data                     AFI Database
                                                  Becomes     Never Aware
                                                   Aware
        Characteristic                              (1)           (2)                       (3)
        Treated with anticoagulation                 0.50              0.50                0.39
        Male                                         0.99              0.99                0.65
        Age                                          74.0              74.2                70.8
                                                    (10.0)             (9.7)              (9.5)
        Stroke treatment effect                    -0.041             -0.040             -0.043
                                                   (0.025)            (0.024)            (0.026)
        Bleed treatment effect                      0.028              0.028              0.024
                                                   (0.010)            (0.024)            (0.012)
        CHADS2 components:
         Congestive heart failure                    0.16               0.15               0.29
         Hypertension                                0.84               0.83               0.48
         Age  65                                     0.51               0.52               0.76
         Diabetes                                    0.36               0.35               0.15
         Previous stroke                             0.15               0.14               0.14

        Number of physicians                        2,950              2,802
        Number of patients                         64,592             48,678              6,707
Notes: This table reports mean and standard deviations of characteristics of patients in the VHA data and in the
AFI database. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses. Columns 1 and 2 show characteristics of patients
in the VHA data, with sample selection steps described in Table 2, for patients with physicians who have
adopted the CHADS2 guideline and for those with physicians who have adopted the guideline, respectively.
Column 3 shows characteristics of patients from the AFI database.




                                                      46
                                                  Table 4: Probit Estimates

                                                                           Dependent Variable: Anticoagulant Prescription
                                                                               (1)              (2)              (3)
                                                          ( )
 CHADS2 -related stroke treatment effect, ^                     ( )
                             ( )
  Pre-awareness baseline, pre                                              -4.705***        -4.885***        -6.707***
                                                                            (0.698)          (1.003)          (1.233)
                                      ( )          ( )
   Post-awareness difference,        post   -     pre                      -6.078***        -6.042***        -5.252***
                                                                            (1.097)          (1.138)          (1.474)
                                 ( )           ( )
   Never-aware difference,      never -       pre                            0.941            0.906            1.214
                                                                            (0.711)          (0.750)          (1.397)
                                            ( )
 Residual stroke treatment effect, ^                ( )
                              ( )
   Pre-awareness baseline, pre                                              0.609**            0.450            0.423
                                                                            (0.308)           (0.327)          (0.668)
                                      ( )          ( )
   Post-awareness difference,        post   -     pre                       -0.925*           -0.778           -0.794
                                                                            (0.481)           (0.495)          (0.785)
                                 ( )           ( )
   Never-aware difference,      never -       pre                           0.0430             0.144            0.392
                                                                            (0.404)           (0.422)          (0.961)
 Bleed treatment effect, ^       ( )
   Pre-awareness baseline      pre                                         -3.272***        -3.128***         -3.066**
                                                                            (0.793)          (0.864)           (1.551)
   Post-awareness difference,        post -       pre                       2.462*           2.232*             1.933
                                                                            (1.280)          (1.345)           (1.896)
   Never-aware difference,      never -       pre                            1.065            0.911             0.311
                                                                            (1.037)          (1.097)           (2.036)

 Year fixed effects, age spline controls                                       Yes              Yes              Yes
 Differential trends on treatment effects                                      No               Yes              No
 Treatment effects interacted with year identities                             No               No               Yes
 Number of observations                                                      113,270          113,270          113,270
Notes: This table reports estimates from probit regressions of anticoagulation treatment decisions, as spec-
ified in Equation (13). Key regressors of interest are causal forest predictions of CATEs: CHADS2 -related
stroke treatment effects, or ^ ( ) ( ) ; residual stroke treatment effects, , or ^ ( ) ( ) ; and bleed treatment ef-
fects, or ^    ( ) . Column 2 includes linear trends interacted with each of these treatment effects. Column 3
includes three-way interactions of (i) each of the treatment effects, (ii) indicators for two-year periods, and (iii)
awareness status. These probit models allow that , may vary with awareness status and year fixed effects,
reported in Appendix Table A.6. Standard errors are clustered at the physician level. *** < 0.01, ** < 0.05,
* < 0.1.




                                                                      47
                   Table 5: Counterfactual Treatment Decisions and Outcomes

                                                            Treated           Strokes             Bleeds
                                                            Patients         Prevented           Induced
 A: Benchmarks
    Observed treatment choices                              49.8%                199                134
    Randomly assigned treatment                             49.8%                199                138

 B: Guideline Awareness
    No CHADS2 awareness                                     49.7%                197                133
    Universal CHADS2 awareness                              50.2%                205                137
    Universal awareness of stroke TE guideline              49.8%                222                134

 C: Strict Guideline Adherence, Fixed Bleeds Induced
    Strict adherence to CHADS2                       44.6%                      224                 134
    Strict adherence to adjusted CHADS score         58.2%                      247                 134
    Strict adherence to stroke TE guideline          45.1%                      274                 134
    Strict adherence to TE-ratio guideline           55.1%                      292                 134
Notes: This table reports treatment rates and patient outcomes in counterfactual awareness and adherence
scenarios for patients in the VHA data. Outcomes of strokes prevented and bleeds induced are reported per
10,000 patients. Panel A reports treatment rates and outcomes under the status quo, which we observe in our
data, and in a counterfactual assignment of the same number of treatments to random patients. Panel B reports
treatment rates and outcomes under counterfactual awareness scenarios, assuming adherence implied by our
structural model in Equation (13). "Universal awareness of stroke TE guideline" refers to guideline awareness
in which physicians become equally informed of CHADS2 -related and residual stroke treament effects (i.e.,
 ^ ( ) ( ) and ^ ( ) ( ) ). Panel C reports treatment rates and outcomes under patient orderings according to
scores implied by counterfactual strict adherence to different guidelines. Patients with the same score are
randomly ranked. "Strict CHADS2 adherence" orders patients by their CHADS2 score. "Strict adherence
to adjusted CHADS score" orders patients by a point system approximating ^           ( )/ ^      ( ) by CHADS2
indicators in Table 1. "Strict adherence to stroke TE guideline" orders patients by ^     ( ) . "Strict adherence
to TE-ratio guideline" orders patients by ^      ( )/ ^   ( ).




                                                       48
                   Online Appendix
       "Mastering the Art of Cookbook Medicine:
Machine Learning, Randomized Trials, and Misallocation"

                      Jason Abaluck
                        Leila Agha
                       David Chan
                      Daniel Singer
                        Diana Zhu

                     October 29, 2020
A.1        Bayesian Model of Decision-Making
In this appendix, we describe in greater detail the Bayesian model of decision-making specified in
Equation (10), which we restate here:

                                                          =1            ~, +           ~, + (                      )+          >0 ,

focusing on the Bayesian posterior beliefs about treatment effects: ~ , and ~ , . Recall that denotes
the awareness status of the physician. Awareness status may change the informativeness of physician
beliefs about treatment effects.


A.1.1      Component Treatment Effects, Signals, and Beliefs
Treatment effects and physician beliefs depend on patient characteristics, which we may orthogonal-
ize into components                     K . We can conceptualize each principal component as implying additional
(orthogonal) information about treatment effects. Specifically, assume that treatment effects are nor-
mally distributed and comprise component treatment effects that are also normally distributed:

                                                                                                        2
                                                                        ,                       ,           ( ),       ,                                                (A.1)

for outcome          and each                      K . We assume that physicians know the moments of each component
treatment effect                ,     2                   .1
                                           ( ),      =1
    For each component , physicians receive a noisy signal of the underlying treatment effect,                                                                            ,   :


                                                                            , ,   =         ,       +        , ,   ,                                                    (A.2)

where            is a normally distributed noise term with variance                                                            2            , or            0,   2                .
           , ,                                                                                                                     ( ), ,          , ,               ( ), ,
Note the dependence of signals on . This models the possibility that awareness status may change
the quality of information that physicians receive about treatment effects.
    Given prior beliefs and the noisy signals, physicians form posterior beliefs, ~ , . Specifically,

                                                               ~,   ,   =     ,       , ,       + (1 -                 ,   )       ,                                    (A.3)

                                2
                                    ( ),
where      ,     =   2          +      2            is the signal-to-noise ratio of the th component.
                         ( ),              ( ), ,



A.1.2      Regression Interpretation
The relationship between posterior beliefs and signals in Equation (A.3) can be interpreted as a re-
gression of posterior beliefs on signals. This relationship may also be interpreted as a regression
   1 Ourmodel in Equation (10) allows for potentially non-Bayesian beliefs that can shift decision-making via ( ) and
 . In order to study the effect of information in a Bayesian framework, we compartmentalize the two components of the
model and consider the first component, described in this appendix, as Bayesian.



                                                                                      A.1
of posterior beliefs on true treatment effects, since the noise component of signals is orthogonal to
treatment effects:

                               ~,    ,            =         ,       , ,             + (1 -             ,   )
                                                  =         ,       ,       + (1 -                ,    )           +           ,         , ,   ,

where the second line uses the definition of the signal in Equation (A.2). In other words, a unit
increase in the treatment effect              ,   should increase posterior beliefs by                                                                 ,   .
    We may use this framework to consider the relationship between overall treatment effects, overall
signals, and overall posterior beliefs, aggregated across components                                                                      K . These overall objects are,
respectively,         K    ,   ;         ,    =        K        , ,             ; and ~ , =                            K       ~,    ,    . Substituting the definition of
the component signals from Equation (A.3), we may also state the overall posterior belief as

                                             ~, =                       ,           , ,    + (1 -                  ,       )         .                                              (A.4)
                                                       K

    We now consider the overall signal-to-noise ratio in a regression predicting the overall posterior
belief using the signal:
                                                      ~, =                      ,    + (1 -                )           .                                                            (A.5)

Using Equation (A.4) for ~ , and the definition of the overall signal for                                                                          ,       , the coefficient       in this
regression is

                                                  Cov ~ , ,                 ,                     K                ,       Var           , ,
                                    =                                                =                                                                                              (A.6)
                                                      Var       ,                                          K Var                    , ,
                                                                                     2
                                                                    K                    ( ), ,
                                    =                                                                                      .                                                        (A.7)
                                                                2                         +   2
                                                      K             ( ), ,                            ( ), ,


Equation (A.6) reveals that the overall signal-to-noise ratio,                                                                 , can be thought of as a variance-
weighted average of the component signal-to-noise ratios,                                                      ,       . Equation (A.7) shows that a posterior
belief formed directly from the aggregate signal, as in Equation (A.5), will have the same signal-to-
noise ratio as a posterior belief aggregated from component posterior beliefs, as in Equation (A.4).


A.1.3    CHADS2 and Residual Treatment Effects
We are now in a position to state posterior beliefs as in Equations (11) and (12). For strokes, we
can separate the set of components K that predict CHADS2 -related treatment effects and K \ K
components that predict residual treatment effects. We expect that the component posterior beliefs
related to the CHADS2 score should increase in informativeness. That is, we expect that                                                                                        ,   should
increase with    = post, for         K . We first define the two components of stroke treatment effects:



                                                                                    A.2
  ( )                                          ( )
             K          ,       , and                            K          ,   . Restating Equation (11) as

                                                                       ( )           ( )          ( )         ( )
                                                           ~, =                            +                        +               +       ,   ,

we can then interpret the signal-to-noise coefficients in the equation as follows:

                                                                                                              2
                                                           ( )                                    K               ( ), ,
                                                                   =                                                                                ;
                                                                                                  2                +           2
                                                                                    K                 ( ), ,                       ( ), ,
                                                                                                              2
                                                           ( )                                    K               ( ), ,
                                                                   =                                                                                .
                                                                                                  2                +       2
                                                                                    K                 ( ), ,                       ( ), ,

                                                                                                                                                    ( )             ( )
If we conceptualize the posterior belief as directly formed from                                                                                                          +               K      , ,   and
  ( )       ( )
                  +         K           , ,    , then we can interpret the constant,                                                     , and error term,                        ,       as

                                                                                                        ( )                                             ( )
                                                   =               1-1(  K )                                    -1(  K )                                            ;
                                                            K
                                                                                                ( )                                         ( )
                                           ,       =               1(  K )                             +1(  K )                                           , ,   .
                                                            K

            ( )                  ( )
Unlike            and                  ,           and Var              ,           are not exactly invariant to the level of aggregation with
which posterior beliefs are                        formed.2        Nevertheless, regardless of this level of aggregation, qualitative
interpretations are unchanged:                                   is a function of the signal-to-noise ratio and prior beliefs, and                                                                       ,
is a function of signal-to-noise ratio and noise. If                                              ,     = 1 for all  K , there is no noise, and                                                    ,   = 0.
At the other extreme, if                       ,     = 0 for all                 K , there is no meaningful signal. In this case, physicians
will ignore all         ,       , and we will also have                              ,     = 0.
    For bleeding events, we are only interested in overall treatment effects:                                                                                                 K           ,    . Restating
Equation (12) as
                                                                        ~, =                      +         +          ,   ,

we interpret the signal-to-noise coefficient as

                                                                                                       2
                                                                                            K              ( ), ,
                                                                  =                                                                       .
                                                                                           2                +       2
                                                                                K              ( ), ,                   ( ), ,


If we conceptualize the posterior belief as directly formed from                                                                                          +         K         , ,         , then we can
similarly interpret the constant,                                , as a function of                           and prior beliefs, or                                     = 1-                       K         .
The error term,             ,    , is similarly a function of                                   and noise, or                        ,    =                   K         , ,   .
   2 For    to be invariant, we require                            to be a different weighted average of                                                , with weights proportional to
                                                                                                                                                    ,
rather than Var       , ,
                                . For Var              ,    to be invariant, we require (                         )2    to be a weighted average of (                                 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                          ) 2 , with weights
proportional to Var         , ,
                                       rather than Var                , ,
                                                                                .


                                                                                               A.3
A.2              Awareness of Guideline Revealing                                                               ( )(     ),            ( )(         )
In this appendix, we discuss how we evaluate a counterfactual scenario in which physicians adopt a
guideline that contains information on both                                   ( )(      ) and                   ( )(    ) . We assume that physicians who
have adopted this guideline will have equal information on ^                                                     ( )(    ) and ^             ( )(        ) , which implies that
     ( )          ( )
    post   =     post .   We assume the same distraction effects as the CHADS2 score, so that                                                                         post   remains
unchanged. To evaluate counterfactual outcomes, we need to know the effect of this policy on                                                                                     , post .
Although this object is not identified in the data, we proceed with a bounding exercise.
       We first note that awareness of the CHADS2 score did little to change                                                                       , post .   This suggest that,
although the CHADS2 score had a significant impact on physicians' information on                                                                                       ( )(    ) (i.e.,
                    ( )                      ( )                                         ( )(
doubling           post   relative to       pre ),    uncertainty about                                 ) accounts for very little in the variation in
treatment decisions across patients with the same treatment effects. We therefore expect very little
impact of the comprehensive guideline that also informs physicians of                                                                   ( )(        ).
       As a baseline assumption, we consider no additional effect of the comprehensive guideline on
     , post .    We also consider a lower bound on                                , post ,    which corresponds to an upper bound on the
welfare improvement from the comprehensive guideline. In this lower bound, we consider the effect
                                                                                                                 ( )
of the comprehensive guideline reducing the variance of                                                                     K            , ,       to 0. We note that

                                                                                                            2
                                                ( )                                            ( )                          2
                              Var                            , ,          =                                                     ( ), ,
                                                      K                                                          K
                                                                                             ( ) 2
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                  ( )                        2
                                                                          =                  ( )                                                 ( ), ,
                                                                                                                                K
                                                                                                        2   1
                                                                                              ( )                               2
                                                                                    2                                               ( ), ,
                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                  K
                                                                                                    2
                                                                                         ( )                            ( )
                                                                          =                             Var                   ( ) .

                                                                              2
                                                                      ( )                               2                                                      ( )    1
The inequality comes from the fact that                                                 K                   ( ), ,
                                                                                                                        is largest when                              =2 . This oc-
curs when                      2            =                2            . To evaluate this bound, we use the empirical variance
                          K        ( ), ,             K          ( ), ,
           ( )                                        ( )(
of ^             ( )  0.00013 for Var                        ) .


A.3              Optimal Treatment as Function of                                                               ( ),                ( )
In this appendix, we will examine the optimal ranking of patients as a function of                                                                              ( ),         ( ) . We
will use this ranking to characterize the optimal guideline under strict adherence, in which physicians
follow the ranking of patients specified by the guideline. Intuitively, we find that the optimal guide-
line should rank patients in terms of the ratio of stroke treatment effects per bleed treatment effect.
In other words, patients should be ranked by |                                     ( )|/            ( ) , and patients with the highest value of
|     ( )|/        ( ).


                                                                               A.4
       In order to see this intuition, we may first consider a social welfare function of the form

                                                 =       +          ,                                               (A.8)

where         and      are social preference weights with respect to stroke and bleeds, and                   and      are
realize stroke and bleed outcomes. Using notation from Section 5.1, we note that                       =       ( 1) + ( 1 -
   )     ( 0) , for    { , }. If the planner knows conditional treatment effects,                   ( ),    ( ) , defined
in Equations (2) and (3) as

                                      ( )              ( 1) -   ( 0)        =       ;
                                      ( )              ( 1) -   ( 0)        =       ,

she may maximize          [   ] with the following decision rule:

                                         = 1{      (   )+       (       ) > 0} .                                    (A.9)

This decision rule is equivalent to a rule that treats if and only if |            ( )|/    ( )>       / .
       Note the similarity between the decision rule implied by Equation (A.9) and our model of physi-
cian decision-making in Equation (10). Physician decisions                      will maximize              if and only if
  /       =     /     and (   )+    = 0 for all . The first condition reflects alignment in physician prefer-
ences and social preference weights. The second condition implies that physicians perfectly observe
   ( ),       ( ) and have no other decision-making considerations.
       The decision rule in Equation (A.9) can be generalized to any arbitrary social preference ratio                   =
  / . Suppose we consider optimal decisions under two preference ratios,                      and      < . All patients
who should be treated under the preference ratio should also be treated under the preference ratio                        .
No patients who are not treated under the preference ratio               should be treated under the preference
ratio . Therefore, there are only incremental patients who should be treated under                         and not under
 , and not vice versa. These patients have a ratio of treatment effects |                  ( )|/    ( )  ( , ] . This
equivalence between patient rankings and utility maximization is noted in Vytlacil (2002) and Chan
et al. (2019).


A.4        Predicting Physician Treatment Decisions
Observable variation in treatment effects, patient age, and time trends explain a relatively small frac-
tion of the total variation in treatment decisions. In this section, we explore other factors that might
drive physician treatment decisions. Specifically, we consider the following additional variables,
which may influence physicians' treatment decisions. None of these variables are available in the
AFI database, and so estimated treatment effects are not a direct function of these variables.

   1. Variables related to frailty and fall risk: neurologic disorder (including Parkinson's Disease),
         fall risk (neuropathy, muscle weakness, dizziness), vision problems, arthritis, head injury, frac-

                                                       A.5
      ture. Frailty and fall risk are frequently cited clinical explanations for not prescribing warfarin
      to patients with high CHADS2 scores. Patients with high fall risk may be more likely to suffer
      intracranial bleeds if they are taking warfarin.

   2. Elixhauser comorbidities that are not in the AFI database: HIV/AIDS, deficiency anemia,
      hypothyroidism, tumor, metastasis, lymphoma, obesity, weight loss, paralysis, pulmonary cir-
      culation disorders, ulcer, valvular disease. These are additional patient characteristics that have
      been shown to predict health care spending and mortality.

   3. Variables included in the HAS-BLED score to predict bleeding risk if anticoagulated: liver
      disease, renal failure, alcohol abuse, history of bleeds. These variables are included in the
      HAS-BLED score, which is a predictive risk score that aims to inform physicians of the risk
      of induced bleed, if the patient is anticoagulated. The HAS-BLED score incorporates three
      variables that we have already included into our predictions of bleed treatment effect hetero-
      geneity, including age, hypertension, and stroke history; we do not consider these variables sep-
      arately here, since included bleed treatment effects may already depend on these variables. The
      HAS-BLED also includes a measure of a measure of unstable or high INRs among treated pa-
      tients, which is not observed prior to treatment, and so not included here. Finally, HAS-BLED
      score also includes medication usage that predisposes patients to bleeding, such as aspirin or
      NSAIDS. Unfortunately, we do not consistently observe the use of these medications because
      they are widely available over the counter, without a prescription.

   4. Variables related to patient's ability to comply with warfarin monitoring: drug abuse, depres-
      sion, psychoses, number of years of military service. Appropriate management of patients on
      warfarin requires blood work repeated at regular intervals (typically every 2-4 weeks) to ensure
      the dosing is appropriate. Optimal dosing can depend on a patient's diet and other medications,
      and may need to be adjusted from time to time as those factors change. If the warfarin dosage
      is too low, the patient will not reap the benefits of anticoagulation for stroke reduction; if the
      dosage is too high, the patient will be at elevated risk of bleeds. These variables included here
      are related to the likelihood that the patient can comply with the monitoring regimen.

   5. Physician characteristics: doctor specialty code (cardiology, internal medicine, primary care).
      This specialty coding variable indicates the doctor's training and role at the VHA.

   Controlling for these variables in our model estimation does not materially change the conclusions
of our analysis. Figure A.4 reports the results of regressions that permute the control variable sets
to cover every possible combination of the above list. In Panel A, we find a similar increase in
sensitivity to the CHADS2 -component of stroke treatment effects after guideline awareness in each
model, regardless of the set of included controls. In Panel B, we show that the unexplained variance
in treatment propensity does not change substantially, even after we control for these detailed patient
and physician characteristics.



                                                  A.6
                          Figure A.1: Distribution of Physician Treatment Decisions
                                                 A. Treatment




                      8
                      6
                Percent
                 4    2
                      0




                            0          .2          .4              .6           .8            1
                                                 Patient treatment rate

                                            B. CHADS2 Adherence
                      10
                      8
                      6
                Percent
                      4
                      2
                      0




                            0          .2          .4            .6             .8            1
                                               Guideline adherence rate

Notes: These figures show the distribution of treatment rates and CHADS2 adherence rates across physicians.
They cover the subsample of 1,146 physicians treating at least 30 patients in our final analysis sample. This
covers 50,426 patients treated by the higher volume doctors, or a little less than half of the VHA sample defined
in Table 2. Panel A shows the distribution of treatment rates. Panel B shows the distribution of CHADS2
adherence rates. We define CHADS2 -adherent anticoagulation decisions as follows: No anticoagulation for
patients with a CHADS2 of 0 and anticoagulation for patients with a CHADS2 score greater than or equal 2;
we omit patients with a CHADS2 score of 1 from this calculation, since the ACC and ACCP guideline allowed
for either anticoagulation or aspirin for these patients.



                                                      A.7
                        Figure A.2: Treatment Probability by Patient Age
           .6
           .4
       Pr(Treat)
          .2
           0
           -.2




                   20    30        40        50        60         70        80        90        100
                                                      Age

Notes: This figure shows the probability of anticoagulation as a function of patient age in the VHA sample.
The curve fits the observed data with a kernel weighted local polynomial; the shaded area represents the 95%
confidence interval.




                                                    A.8
                                                       Figure A.3: Stroke Treatment Effects Among Treated Patients
                          -.02
       Average stroke TE among treated patients
                                 -.04




                                                                                                             CHADS2 score:
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                       3
                  -.06




                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                       6
                          -.08




                                                  -5      -4   -3    -2     -1    0   1    2    3   4    5
                                                                Year relative to CHADS2 awareness

Notes: This figure displays time trends in the average stroke treatment effect among treated patients, separately
by CHADS2 score. The physician's first CHADS2 mention occurs on the first day of year 0. Stroke treatment
effects are predicted using causal forest rules trained and validated in the AFI database; the causal forest rules
are then applied to patient characteristics in the VHA data. Awareness status and treatment decisions are
measured in the VHA data.




                                                                                   A.9
                                                             Figure A.4: Stability of the Structural Results
                                                                                                         ( )   ( )
                                                             A. Increase in Signal-to-Noise Ratio,      pre / post




                                  1
                                  .8
                Signal to noise ratio
                    .4        .6  .2
                                  0




                                                         0          1           2               3              4     5
                                                                           Number of patient control sets

                                                                  B. Explained Share of Latent Variable
                                  1
                Explained share of propensity variance
                  .2        .4    0    .6         .8




                                                         0          1           2               3              4     5
                                                                           Number of patient control sets

Notes: These graphs illustrate how key results of our structural model vary as we include various sets of
control variables in its estimation. Panel A examines the increase in the informativeness of physicians' beliefs
                                                                                   ( )    ( )
about CHADS2 -related stroke treatment effects with CHADS2 awareness, or pre           / post . Panel B examines
the proportion of variance in the latent variable that we can explain with observable characteristics (i.e., the
complement of the share explained by 2 , ). In each panel, we include varying sets of patient characteristics in
  ( ) in our structural model stated in Equation (13). We estimate the baseline specification, shown in Column
1 of Table 4. The solid line shows the mean value of the statistic among specifications with the indicated
number of control sets; the top (bottom) dashed line shows the maximum (minimum) of the statistic. The
control variables are detailed in Appendix Section A.4.

                                                                                   A.10
            Figure A.5: Counterfactual Outcomes with CHA2 DS2 -VASc Guideline
                                                                      A. Strict Guideline Adherence

                                                      0% treated



                               0
                                                                                                                   Sort randomly
                                                                                                                   Sort by CHA2DS2-Vasc
                                                                                                                   Sort by CHADS2
                                                                                                                   Sort by stroke TE
                                           -100
                  Total stroke effect per 10k


                                                                                                                   Sort by TE ratio
                -300         -200
                               -400




                                                                                                                     100% treated

                                                  0                          100                      200                              300
                                                                              Total bleed effect per 10k

                                                                      B. Guideline Awareness (Inset)
                               -180




                                                                                                                Sort randomly
                                                                                                                Sort by CHA2DS2-Vasc
                                                                                                                Sort by CHADS2
                                                                                                                Sort by stroke TE
                   Total stroke effect per 10k




                                                            No CHADS2 awareness
                                         -200




                                                            Universal CHADS2 awareness
                             -220




                                                                                   Full stroke TE information
                -240           -260




                                                  120                  130                140                    150                   160
                                                                               Total bleed effect per 10k

Notes: Relative to Figure 6, this figure includes an additional set of counterfactual outcomes under strict
adherence to the CHA2 DS2 -VASc guideline. Like other counterfactuals of strict adherence, strict adherence to
this guideline implies ranking patients by their CHA2 DS2 -VASc score. The CHA2 DS2 -VASc score assigns one
point for congestive heart failure, hypertension, age 65-74 years, female sex, vascular disease, and diabetes; it
assigns two points for age 75 years or older, and for stroke, transient ischemic attack, or thromboembolism.
Details for this figure are otherwise described in the notes for Figure 6.




                                                                                         A.11
             Figure A.6: Counterfactual Outcomes, Fixed Treated Age Distribution
                                                                        A. Strict Guideline Adherence

                                                      0% treated




                               0
                                                                                                                       Sort randomly
                                                                                                                       Sort by CHADS2
                                                                                                                       Sort by stroke TE
                                                                                                                       Sort by TE ratio
                                           -100
                  Total stroke effect per 10k
                -300         -200
                               -400




                                                  0                50             100             150                 200                 250
                                                                               Total bleed effect per 10k

                                                                      B. Guideline Awareness (Inset)
                               -180




                                                                                                                  Sort randomly
                                                                                                                  Sort by CHADS2
                                                                                                                  Sort by stroke TE
                   Total stroke effect per 10k




                                                            No CHADS2 awareness
                                         -200




                                                            Universal CHADS2 awareness
                             -220




                                                                                   Full stroke TE information
                -240           -260




                                                  120                   130               140                   150                       160
                                                                               Total bleed effect per 10k

Notes: Relative to Figure 6, this figure shows counterfactual outcomes for patient rankings that hold fixed the
age distribution of treated patients at every point along the curve. The fraction of treated patients in each 5-
year age bin matches the fraction observed treated in our sample. Within each age group, patients are ranked
according to scores in each guideline. In order to maintain a fixed age distribution of treated patients, it is
not possible to treat 100% of patients. This is reflected by curves for counterfactual outcomes not reaching
the same bottom-right corner of Figure 6. Only counterfactual outcomes for strict adherence and for random
sorting are changed in this figure; outcomes for awareness scenarios are unchanged from Figure 6. For more
details, see notes to Figure 6.



                                                                                         A.12
             Figure A.7: Counterfactual Outcomes, Unadjusted Treatment Effects
                                                                          A. Strict Guideline Adherence

                                                           0% treated




                                 0
                                                                                                                             Sort randomly
                                                                                                                             Sort by CHADS2
                                                                                                                             Sort by stroke TE
                                                -100
                                                                                                                             Sort by TE ratio
                    Total stroke effect per 10k
                -400      -300   -500-200




                                                                                                                          100% treated

                                                       0                   50                 100                     150                       200
                                                                                   Total bleed effect per 10k

                                                                          B. Guideline Awareness (Inset)
                                 -180




                                                                                                                          Sort randomly
                                                                                                                          Sort by CHADS2
                                                -200




                                                                                                                          Sort by stroke TE
                    Total stroke effect per 10k
                          -240       -220




                                                                         No CHADS2 awareness

                                                                        Universal CHADS2 awareness
                -260




                                                                                                Full stroke TE guideline awareness
                                 -280




                                                       70                  80                  90                     100                       110
                                                                                   Total bleed effect per 10k

Notes: Relative to Figure 6, this figure shows counterfactual outcomes that apply the raw stroke and bleed
treatment effects from the causal forest instead of the best linear predictor (BLP) adjusted estimates. For this
exercise, we bound stroke treatment effects above by 0, trimming the treatment effects for 0.06% of the sample
with wrong-signed predictions of stroke treatment effects. We bound bleed treatment effects from below by 0,
trimming the treatment effects for 6% of the sample with wrong-signed bleed treatment effects. While wrong-
signed bleed treatment effects are more common when we do not apply the BLP adjustment, the point estimates
are very close to zero, with the largest magnitude wrong-signed bleed treatment effect being -0.003. For more
details, see notes to Figure 6.



                                                                                          A.13
                     Table A.1: AFI Database Covariates and VHA Definitions
 AFI variable                             VHA definition
 Age                                      Coded demographic at time of AF diagnosis
 Sex                                      Coded demographic
 Height                                   Coded vital closest to AF diagnosis
 Weight                                   Coded vital closest to AF diagnosis
 Race - white                             Coded demographic
 Current smoker                           Smoking record ±1 year of AF diagnosis
 Former smoker                            Smoking record > 1 year prior to AF diagnosis
 Systolic blood pressure                  Vital closest to AF diagnosis, with valid reading in range [70,300]
 Diastolic blood pressure                 Vital closest to AF diagnosis, with valid reading in range [25,200]
 Hemoglobin                               Lab value closest to AF diagnosis
 History of angina                        ICD9: 433.X, 434.X, 436.X
 History of congestive heart failure      ICD9: 398.X, 402.01, 402.11, 402.91, 428.X
 History of diabetes                      ICD9: 249.X, 250.X, 357.20
 History of hypertension                  ICD9: 401.X-405.X
 History of myocardial infarction         ICD9: 410.X, 412.X
 History of peripheral vascular disease   ICD9: 093.0, 437.3, 440.X, 441.X, 443.1-443.9, 447.1, 557.1, 557.9, V43.4
 History of TIA or stroke                 ICD9: 433.XX, 434.XX, 435.XX, 436.XX
 Worst prior event: TIA or stroke         2 if stroke, 1 if TIA, 0 if none
 Time from last stroke or TIA             Calculated from most recent event
Notes: This table lists all the covariates from the AFI database that are used in our causal forest implementation.
We set the treatment variable to be 1 for patients treated with warfarin and 0 for patients patients on control
or ASA therapy (aspirin). Observations are dropped for those on low warfarin and low warfarin plus ASA
therapy. Patients with especially relevant disease histories missing are also excluded from the sample. These
disease histories include Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA), stroke, diabetes and hypertension. We regrouped
the variable "Race" so that it equals 1 when the patient is white and 0 otherwise. We constructed two binary
variables related to smoking history based on the variable "Smoker" in the AFI database, which takes 3 values.
The new variables, current smoker and never smoker indicates whether the patient is a current smoker and
whether he or she has ever smoked. Otherwise, missing variables are replaced by their mean and mode.




                                                         A.14
                                     Table A.2: Variable Importance

     Stroke Causal Forest         Stroke Regression Forest     Bleed Causal Forest Bleed Regression Forest
       Stroke Risk (-)         Past Stroke or TIA (+)            Bleed Risk (+)              Age (+)
           Age (-)                   CHADS2 (+)                     Age (+)                  Race (-)
 Systolic Blood Pressure (-)          White (-)                     Race (+)
      Hemoglobin (+)         Systolic Blood Pressure (+)
   Past Stroke or TIA (-)              Age (+)
          Height (+)              Hemoglobin (-)
         CHADS2 (-)                   Height (-)
          White (-)               Past Diabetes (+)
       Past Angina (-)             Past Angina (+)
      Past Diabetes (-)              Past MI (+)
         Past MI (-)
Notes: Each column of this table shows the important variables for each forest in descending order of impor-
tance. Only variables selected with the LASSO procedure are included for the forests. For bleeds, LASSO
only selected age and race. Risks computed from regression forest using only the control sample are then used
as an input into causal forests. The +/- signs following each variable indicates the sign of its coefficient in a
bivariate linear regression with the causal forest output as the dependent variable.




                                                     A.15
                                         Table A.3: Balance Table

                                          Control Group          Treatment
          Patient Characteristics                                                     Coefficient
                                             Mean               Group Mean
          Age                                   70.9                 70.7                0.134
                                                                                        (0.269)
          Congestive Heart Failure              0.27                 0.32               -0.004
                                                                                        (0.012)
          Age above 65                          0.76                 0.77                0.003
                                                                                        (0.012)
          History of Hypertension               0.47                 0.50               -0.007
                                                                                        (0.014)
          History of Stroke                     0.19                 0.15               -0.007
                                                                                        (0.008)
          History of Diabetes                   0.15                 0.15               -0.007
                                                                                        (0.010)
          Male                                  0.64                 0.66               -0.015
                                                                                        (0.013)
Notes: This table shows the unadjusted means of each patient characteristics in the treatment and control group.
The last column shows results of a regression of each patient characteristics on trial fixed effects and treatment
indicator in AFI database. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                       A.16
                        Table A.4: Causal Forest BLP Validation Regressions

                                                                Dependent Variable
                                                              Stroke                       Bleed
                                                       (1)            (2)                   (3)
             Treatment,                             -0.043            -0.041               0.024
                                                    (0.007)           (0.007)             (0.005)
             Treatment effect interactions
                  × ^- ( )                           1.027                                 1.149
                                                    (0.242)                               (0.324)
                           ( )
                    × ^-         (   )                                 0.763
                                                                      (0.340)
                           ( )
                    × ^-         (   )                                 1.301
                                                                      (0.348)
             Outcome mean                            0.071             0.071               0.030
             Observations                            6,707             6,707               6,707

             Trial fixed effects                      Yes               Yes                 Yes
             Predicted outcome controls
                 ^
                  - , 1 ( ) , control group           Yes               Yes                 Yes
                 ^
                  - , 2 ( ) , control and             Yes               Yes                 Yes
                treatment groups
Notes: This table reports the coefficients of best linear predictor (BLP) validation regressions of stroke and
bleed outcomes on treatment         and interactions with treatment effects. Treatment effects are demeaned, so
that the coefficient on the treatment indicator     reflects the average treatment effect. All specifications control
for trial fixed effects and for regression forest predictions of the outcome, ^- ,1 ( ) , that are estimated in the
control groups of leave-out trials as and analogous predictors ^- ,2 ( ) , that are estimated in both control and
treatment groups of leave-out trials. Columns 1 and 3 corresponds to Equation (6), which interacts treatment
with the full treatment effect, or ^- ( ) ; Column 2 corresponds to Equation (8), which interacts treatment with
the CHADS2 and the residual components of stroke treatment effects, or ^- ( ) (         ) and ^- ( ) (   ) . Standard
errors are shown in parentheses.




                                                       A.17
                                                Table A.5: Patient Characteristics in the VHA Data and Across Trials


                                     VHA Data                                                             AFI Database Trial
                                                                                                                                                         EAFT          PATAF
                                                        AFASAK1         BAATAF            CAFA          SPINAF           SPAF2        AFASAK2
                                                                                                                                                        Group 1        Group 1
        Age                              74.0               73.0           67.9            68.0            67.9           70.3            73.7            70.7          70.5
        Stroke treatment
                                        -0.05              -0.05          -0.03           -0.03           -0.03          -0.04           -0.04           -0.08          -0.03
        effect, ^
        Bleed treatment effect,
                                         0.03               0.03           0.02            0.02            0.02           0.02            0.03            0.02           0.02
        ^
        Congestive heart
                                         0.16               0.52           0.26            0.22            0.31           0.21            0.70            0.09           0.00
        failure




A.18
        Hypertension                     0.51               0.32           0.51            0.39            0.59            0.53           0.44            0.44           0.36
        Age  65                         0.84               0.84            0.67            0.68            0.69           0.73            0.90            0.81           0.79
        Diabetes                         0.15               0.08           0.15            0.12            0.19            0.16           0.12            0.13           0.17
        Stroke history                   0.18               0.06           0.03            0.03            0.08            0.06           0.05            0.76           0.00
        Male                             0.99               0.54           0.72            0.75            1.00            0.70           0.61            0.59           0.46
        Number of patients             113,270             1,007           420             378             571            1,100           339             668            272
       Note: This table shows the mean of each listed patient characteristic in the VHA data, as well as each of the eight trials with both control and treatment arms in the
       AFI database. There are a total of 10 trials in the AFI database. In three of the trials, patients are divided into eligible versus ineligible groups for anticoagulation
       and then randomized within each group. In the estimation of causal forest, we treat these groups as separate trials. AFASAK1: Atrial Fibrillation, Aspirin, and
       Anticoagulation Study 1; BAATAF: Boston Area Anticoagulation Trial for Atrial Fibrillation; CAFA: Canadian Atrial Fibrillation Anticoagulation; SPINAF: Stroke
       Prevention in Non-rheumatic Atrial Fibrillation; SPAF2: Stroke Prevention in atrial Fibrillation; AFASAK2: Atrial Fibrillation, Aspirin, and Anticoagulation Study
       1; EAFT Group 1: European Atrial Fibrillation Trial; PAATAF Group 1: Primary Prevention of Arterial Thromboembolism in Atrial Fibrillation.
                          Table A.6: Probit Estimates: Additional Results

                                                       Dependent Variable: Anticoagulant Prescription
                                                           (1)              (2)              (3)
 Awareness status intercepts
  Post-awareness intercept,          post               -0.296***          -0.274***          -0.232***
                                                         (0.046)            (0.048)            (0.052)
   Never-aware intercept,         never                   0.015              0.016              0.023
                                                         (0.038)            (0.038)            (0.041)
 Standard deviation of error term
   Post-awareness, ln     , post                             0.015            0.032              0.115
                                                            (0.077)          (0.080)           (0.0868)
   Never-aware, ln      , never                              0.012            0.013             0.0232
                                                            (0.055)          (0.055)           (0.0576)

 Year fixed effects, age spline controls                    Yes               Yes                Yes
 Differential trends on treatment effects                   No                Yes                No
 Treatment effects interacted with year identities          No                No                 Yes
 Number of observations                                   113,270           113,270            113,270
Notes: This table shows additional results from the specifications reported in Table 4. The probit models allow
that , may vary with awareness status (post-aware and never-aware) and year fixed effects. See notes for
Table 4 for additional details. *** < 0.01, ** < 0.05, * < 0.1.




                                                     A.19
                     Table A.7: Probit Estimates: Average Marginal Effects

                                                                 Dependent Variable: Anticoagulant Prescription
                                                                     (1)              (2)              (3)
                                                     ( )
 CHADS2 -related stroke treatment effect, ^                ( )
                     ( )
  Pre-awareness, pre                                             -1.861***        -1.916***        -2.429***
                                                                  (0.210)          (0.228)          (0.387)
                                  ( )          ( )
   Post-awareness difference,    post   -     pre                -2.404***        -2.369***        -1.903***
                                                                  (0.373)          (0.381)          (0.496)
                               ( )        ( )
   Never-aware difference,    never -    pre                       0.372            0.355            0.440
                                                                  (0.282)          (0.294)          (0.506)
                                        ( )
 Residual stroke treatment effect, ^           ( )
                      ( )
   Pre-awareness, pre                                                0.241           0.177            0.153
                                                                    (0.121)         (0.128)          (0.698)
                                  ( )          ( )
   Post-awareness difference,    post   -     pre                   -0.366*         -0.305           -0.288
                                                                    (0.188)         (0.191)          (0.283)
                               ( )        ( )
   Never-aware difference,    never -    pre                         0.017           0.056            0.142
                                                                    (0.160)         (0.165)          (0.347)
 Bleed treatment effect, ^      ( )
   Pre-awareness, pre                                            -1.294***        -1.226***         -1.111**
                                                                  (0.321)          (0.353)           (0.568)
                                  ( )          ( )
   Post-awareness difference,    post   -     pre                 0.974*            0.875             0.700
                                                                  (0.517)          (0.541)           (0.695)
   Never-aware difference,    never -    pre                       0.421            0.357             0.113
                                                                  (0.416)          (0.436)           (0.739)

 Year fixed effects, age spline controls                              Yes             Yes              Yes
 Differential trends on treatment effects                             No              Yes              No
 Treatment effects interacted with year identities                    No              No               Yes
 Number of observations                                             113,270         113,270          113,270
Notes: This table reports average marginal effects from the specifications reported in Table 4. See notes for
Table 4 for additional details. *** < 0.01, ** < 0.05, * < 0.1.




                                                             A.20
             Table A.8: Counterfactual Outcomes, Fixed Treated Age Distribution

                                                        Treated            Strokes             Bleeds
                                                        Patients          Prevented           Induced
  A: Benchmarks (repeated from Table 5)
     Status quo                                          49.8%                199                134
     Randomly assigned treatment                         49.8%                196                135

  B: Strict Guideline Adherence, Fixed Treated Age Distribution
     Strict CHADS2 adherence                     48.9%                        234                134
     Strict adherence to stroke TE guideline     49.1%                        275                134
     Strict adherence to TE-ratio guideline      55.6%                        287                134
Notes: This table reports counterfactual outcomes that hold the fixed the age distribution of treated patients.
The fraction of treated patients in each 5-year age bin matches the fraction observed treated in our sample. We
also hold the overall percentage of treated patients fixed at 49.8%. Within each age group, patients are treated
according to rankings implied by the noted guideline. Figure A.6 shows counterfactual outcomes varying the
overall percentage of treated patients. For more details, see notes to Table 5 and Figure A.6.




                                                     A.21
              Table A.9: Counterfactual Outcomes, Unadjusted Treatment Effects

                                                          Treated          Strokes             Bleeds
                                                          Patients        Prevented           Induced
 A: Benchmarks
    Observed treatment choices                            49.8%               245                89
    Randomly assigned treatment                           49.8%               246                93

 B: Guideline Awareness
    No CHADS2 awareness                                   49.7%               244                89
    Universal CHADS2 awareness                            50.2%               252                91
    Universal awareness of stroke TE guideline            49.8%               256                89

 C: Strict Guideline Adherence, Fixed Bleeds Induced
    Strict CHADS2 adherence                          43.1%                    273                89
    Strict adherence to stroke TE guideline          43.4%                    304                89
    Strict adherence to TE-ratio guideline           58.5%                    344                89
Notes: This table reports counterfactual outcomes that apply the raw stroke and bleed treatment effects from
the causal forest rather than the best linear predictor (BLP) adjusted estimates. For this exercise, we bound
stroke treatment effects above by 0, trimming the treatment effects for 0.06% of the sample with wrong-signed
predictions of stroke treatment effects. We bound bleed treatment effects from below by 0, trimming the
treatment effects for 6% of the sample with wrong-signed bleed treatment effects. While wrong-signed bleed
treatment effects are more common when we do not apply the BLP adjustment, the point estimates are very
close to zero, with the largest magnitude wrong-signed bleed treatment effect being -0.003. For more details,
see notes to Table 5 and Figure A.7.




                                                   A.22
