                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY IN PRODUCTION NETWORKS

                                           Jennifer La'O
                                       Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi

                                        Working Paper 27464
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27464


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




We thank Misaki Matsumura for her early contributions to this paper. We also thank Marios
Angeletos, Larry Christiano, Pooya Molavi, Nobu Kiyotaki, Matt Rognlie, Ali Shourideh, Pedro
Teles, Andrea Vedolin, Mike Woodford, and participants at NBER Summer Institute and
Workshop on Networks in the Macroeconomy (Harvard) for helpful suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jennifer La'O and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Monetary Policy in Production Networks
Jennifer La'O and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi
NBER Working Paper No. 27464
July 2020
JEL No. C67,E5

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the optimal conduct of monetary policy in a multi-sector economy in which
firms buy and sell intermediate goods over a production network. We first provide a necessary
and sufficient condition for the monetary policy's ability to implement flexible-price equilibria in
the presence of nominal rigidities and show that, generically, no monetary policy can implement
the first-best allocation. We then characterize the constrained-efficient policy in terms of the
economy's production network and the extent and nature of nominal rigidities. Our
characterization result yields general principles for the optimal conduct of monetary policy in the
presence of input output linkages: it establishes that optimal policy stabilizes a price index with
higher weights assigned to larger, stickier, and more upstream industries, as well as industries
with less sticky upstream suppliers but stickier downstream customers. In a calibrated version of
the model, we find that implementing the optimal policy can result in quantitatively meaningful
welfare gains.


Jennifer La'O
Columbia University
Department of Economics
1105A International Affairs Building
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jl4196@columbia.edu

Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208
alirezat@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1    Introduction

Optimal monetary policy in the canonical New Keynesian framework is well-known and takes a
particularly simple form: as long as there are no missing tax instruments, it is optimal to stabilize
the nominal price level. Price stability neutralizes the effects of nominal rigidities, implements
flexible-price allocations, and, in the absence of inefficient shocks, restores productive efficiency.
In the language of the New Keynesian literature, the "divine coincidence" holds: price stabilization
simultaneously eliminates inflation and the output gap.1
    The ability of monetary policy to replicate flexible-price allocations in the textbook New Keynesian
models, however, relies critically on the assumption that all firms are technologically identical: as
long as all firms employ the same production technology, a price stabilization policy that implements
zero relative price dispersion across firms equalizes firms' marginal products and hence achieves
productive efficiency, regardless of the extent of nominal rigidities (Correia, Nicolini, and Teles, 2008).
But once there are technological differences across firms--say, in a multi-sector economy with input-
output linkages--monetary policy may lose its ability to replicate flexible-price allocations: while
productive efficiency would dictate movements in relative quantities across different producers in
response to producer-specific shocks, monetary policy may not be able to induce the corresponding
relative price movements across the various sticky-price producers.
    In view of the above, it is not readily obvious what principles should guide the conduct of
monetary policy when firms employ heterogenous production technologies, rely on a host of different
intermediate goods and services produced by other firms in the economy, and are subject to various
degrees of nominal rigidities.
    In this paper, we address these questions by studying the optimal conduct of monetary policy
in a multi-sector New Keynesian framework while allowing for inter-firm trade over a production
network. We first provide a necessary and sufficient condition for the monetary policy's ability to
implement flexible-price equilibria in the presence of nominal rigidities and show that, generically,
no monetary policy can implement the first-best allocation. We then characterize the constrained-
efficient policy in terms of the economy's production network and the extent of nominal rigidities.
Our characterization result yields general principles for the optimal conduct of monetary policy in the
presence of input-output linkages.
                                                                                               ` la Long
    We develop these results in the context of a static multi-sector general equilibrium model a
and Plosser (1983) and Acemoglu et al. (2012) in which firms are linked to one another via input-output
linkages and are subject to industry-level productivity shocks.2 As in the New-Keynesian tradition,
we also assume that firms are subject to nominal rigidities. More specifically, we assume that firms
make their nominal pricing decisions under incomplete information about the productivity shocks.
As a result, nominal prices respond to changes in productivities only to the extent that such changes
   1
     While divine coincidence holds in the case of efficient shocks or in the presence of inefficient shocks neutralized by
tax instruments, it may fail more generally when inefficient cost-push shocks are introduced and state-contingent tax
instruments that may counteract these shocks are assumed away. In this case, monetary policy becomes an imperfect
instrument to fight inefficient cost-push shocks. As a result, the policymaker faces a trade-off between minimizing the output
gap and productive inefficiency due to inflation.
   2
     Throughout, we assume that these productivity shocks are the only payoff-relevant shocks in the economy, thus
abstracting away from inefficient markup, or cost-push, shocks.


                                                              1
are reflected in the firms' information sets. This nominal friction opens the door to potential price
distortions throughout the production network, as well as a role for monetary policy in shaping real
allocations.
       Within this framework, we start by characterizing the entire sets of sticky- and flexible-price
equilibria, defined as the sets of allocations that can be implemented as an equilibrium in the presence
and absence of nominal rigidities, respectively.3 We show that while both sets of allocations are
characterized by similar sets of conditions relating the marginal rates of substitution between goods
and their marginal rates of transformation, the conditions characterizing sticky-price allocations
exhibit an additional collection of wedges that depend on the interaction between the conduct of
monetary policy and the firms' information sets. Using these characterizations, we then provide
the exact conditions on the firms' technologies and information sets under which monetary policy
can implement flexible-price equilibria and hence restore productive efficiency. As an important
byproduct of this result, we also show that these conditions are violated for a generic set of information
structures, thus concluding that, generically, monetary policy cannot achieve productive efficiency.
       Having established the failure of monetary policy to implement the first-best allocation, we then
turn to the study of optimal monetary policy, i.e., the policy that maximizes household welfare over the
set of all possible sticky-price-implementable allocations. In order to obtain closed-form expressions
for the optimal policy, we impose a number of functional form assumptions by assuming that all firms
employ Cobb-Douglas production technologies and that all signals are normally distributed.
       We establish three sets of results. First, we show that firms' optimal pricing decisions can be recast
                                                    ` la Morris and Shin (2002), in which firms face
as a generalized version of a "beauty contest" game a
heterogenous strategic complementarities in their price-setting decisions due to interdependencies
arising from the production network. Second, we demonstrate that the constrained-efficient policy
faces a trade-off between three sources of welfare losses: misallocation due to price dispersion within
sectors, misallocation arising from pricing errors across sectors, and output gap volatility. Third,
building on our previous results, we derive the monetary policy that optimally trades off these three
components.
       Our characterization of the optimal policy yields general principles for the conduct of monetary
policy in the presence of input-output linkages. In particular, we establish that, all else equal, optimal
policy stabilizes a price index with higher weights assigned to (i) larger industries as measured by
their Domar weights, (ii) stickier industries, (iii) more upstream industries, and (iv) industries with
less sticky upstream suppliers but with stickier downstream customers.
       We then use our theoretical results to undertake a quantitative exercise and determine the
optimal monetary policy for the U.S. economy as implied by the model. Matching input-output
tables constructed by the Bureau of Economic Analysis with industry-level data on nominal rigidities
provided to us by Pasten, Schoenle, and Weber (2019), we compute the weights corresponding to
the optimal price-stabilization index and quantify the resulting welfare loss due to the presence of
nominal rigidities. We find that the optimal policy generates a welfare loss equivalent to a 2.98% loss
in quarterly consumption relative to the flexible-price equilibrium, with the overwhelming fraction
   3
    Our approach is thus similar to Correia et al. (2008, 2013) and Angeletos and La'O (2020), who apply the primal approach
to optimal taxation of Atkinson and Stiglitz (2015) and Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) to New Keynesian models.


                                                             2
of this loss arising from misallocation within and across industries. We then provide a comparison
between the performance of the optimal policy and four alternative, non-optimal, price-stabilization
policies. We find that, in our calibration, the welfare differences between the optimal policy and a
policy that stabilizes the output gap are minuscule, amounting to less than 0.01 percentage points
of quarterly consumption. In contrast, moving from price stabilization targets based on industries'
shares in the household's consumption basket (akin to CPI or PCE), industry size, or sectoral stickiness
to the optimal price index would result in quantitatively meaningful welfare gains.


Related Literature.        Our paper is part of the growing literature that studies the role of production
networks in macroeconomics.                Building on the multi-sector model of Long and Plosser (1983),
Acemoglu et al. (2012) investigate whether input-output linkages can transform microeconomic
shocks into aggregate fluctuations.4 We follow this line of work by focusing on a multi-sector general
equilibrium economy with nominal rigidities and investigating the interaction between monetary
policy and the economy's production network.                        Within this literature, our paper builds on the
works of Jones (2013), Bigio and La'O (2020), and Baqaee and Farhi (2020), who study misallocation
in economies with non-trivial production networks. However, in contrast to these papers, which
treat markups and wedges as exogenously-given model primitives, we focus on an economy in
which wedges are determined endogenously as the result of firms' individually-optimal price-setting
decisions and monetary policy. We investigate the monetary authority's ability to shape these wedges
using available policy instruments, and use this characterization to derive the optimal policy.
    In a series of recent papers, Pasten, Schoenle, and Weber (2019, 2020) and Ozdagli and Weber
(2020) study the production network's role as a possible transmission mechanism of monetary policy
shocks. We differ from these papers by providing a closed-form characterization of the optimal
monetary policy as a function of the economy's underlying production network and the extent of
nominal rigidities. Also related is the recent work of Wei and Xie (2020), who study the role of monetary
policy in the presence of global value chains. Whereas they focus on an open economy in which
production occurs over a single production chain, we provide a characterization of optimal policy
for a general production network structure in a closed economy.
    More closely related to our work is the independent and contemporaneous work of Rubbo (2020),
who also studies monetary policy in a production network economy, but with a different focus. In
particular, Rubbo mainly focuses on how the production network shapes the economy's Phillips curve.
In contrast, we provide a series of analytical results that distill the role of the various forces that shape
the optimal policy. Our normative analysis thereby yields general principles for the optimal conduct
of monetary policy. In addition, we obtain necessary and sufficient conditions under which flexible-
price allocations are implementable as sticky-price equilibria.5
    4
      Other papers in this line of work include Carvalho (2010), Foerster, Sarte, and Watson (2011), Acemoglu et al. (2016, 2017),
and Atalay (2017). See Carvalho (2014) and Carvalho and Tahbaz-Salehi (2019) for surveys of the theoretical and empirical
literature on production networks.
    5
      Also see Castro (2019), who studies the quantitative relevance of sectoral heterogeneity in production networks. He finds
that, compared to the standard one-sector model, aggregate inflation in the multi-sector economy reacts 30% less to the
output gap, rendering monetary policy less effective and inducing a welfare cost of trend inflation that is larger by one order
of magnitude.



                                                                3
    Our paper also belongs to a small strand of the New Keynesian literature that studies optimal
monetary policy in multi-sector economies. In one of the earliest examples of this line of work, Aoki
(2001) shows that in a two-sector economy with one sticky and one fully flexible industry (but no
input-output linkages), a policy that stabilizes the price of the sticky industry implements the first-
best allocation. Mankiw and Reis (2003), Woodford (2003b, 2010), Benigno (2004), and Eusepi, Hobijn,
and Tambalotti (2011) generalize this insight to multi-sector economies with varying degrees of price
stickiness and establish that the monetary authority should stabilize a price index that places greater
weights on industries with stickier prices.6 While most of this literature has abstracted from input-
output linkages, Huang and Liu (2005) consider a two-sector economy with a final and an intermediate
good and show that the second-best policy stabilizes a combination of the price of the two goods. To
the best of our knowledge, the prior literature has not studied optimal monetary policy with a general
production network.
    The importance of strategic complementarities in firms' price-setting behavior in the presence of
nominal rigidities has a long history. Investigating "in-line" and "roundabout" production structures,
Blanchard (1983) and Basu (1995) emphasize the role of intermediate inputs in creating strategic
complementarities in firms' price-setting behavior. We build on these papers by providing a closed-
form characterization of how strategic complementarities arising from input-output linkages shape
equilibrium nominal prices, quantities, and the optimal conduct of monetary policy. Furthermore, we
show that our micro-founded general equilibrium macro model is isomorphic to the "beauty contest"
games such as Morris and Shin (2002), Bergemann, Heumann, and Morris (2017), and Golub and
Morris (2018) that explore the consequences of strategic complementarities in more reduced-form
settings.7
    Finally, our approach in modeling nominal rigidities as an informational constraint on the firms'
price-setting decisions follows the extensive literature that proposes informational frictions as an
appealing substitute to Calvo frictions and menu costs on theoretical (Mankiw and Reis, 2002;
Woodford, 2003a; Mackowiak and Wiederholt, 2009; Nimark, 2008) and empirical (Coibion and
Gorodnichenko, 2012, 2015) grounds. We follow this approach not only because we find informational
frictions to be a priori more plausible than other alternatives, but also because, in the context
of our exercise, they lend themselves to a more transparent analysis. Importantly, this modeling
feature does not upset the key normative lessons of the New Keynesian paradigm; in particular, price
stability remains optimal insofar as monetary policy need not substitute for missing tax instruments
(Angeletos and La'O, 2020).


Outline.     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets up the environment and defines
the sticky- and flexible-price equilibria in our context. Section 3 characterizes these equilibria and
   6
     This principle of "sticky-price stabilization" was first proposed by Goodfriend and King (1997) and later formalized in the
above-mentioned papers. Also see Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000), who study an economy with both nominal price and
wage rigidities.
   7
     A smaller strand of this literature, such as Ballester, Calv´  o-Armengol, and Zenou (2006), Candogan, Bimpikis, and
Ozdaglar (2012), and Galeotti, Golub, and Goyal (2020), studies how various policies can impact aggregate action or welfare in
games of strategic complementarities over networks. In a departure from this literature, which models network interactions,
payoffs, and policy instruments in a reduced-form manner, we focus on a micro-founded general equilibrium economy and
provide a characterization of optimal policy in terms of primitives such as preferences, technologies, and information sets.


                                                               4
provides necessary and sufficient conditions for the monetary policy's ability to implement the first-
best allocation. Section 4 contains our closed-form characterization of the optimal policy in terms of
the economy's production network and the extent of nominal rigidities. We present the quantitative
analysis of the model in Section 5. All proofs and some additional mathematical details are provided
in the Appendix.


2    Framework

Consider a static economy consisting of n industries indexed by i  I = {1, 2, . . . , n}. Each industry
consists of two types of firms: (i) a unit mass of monopolistically-competitive firms, indexed by
k  [0, 1], producing differentiated goods and (ii) a competitive producer whose sole purpose is to
aggregate the industry's differentiated goods into a single sectoral output. The output of each industry
can be either consumed by the households or used as an intermediate input for production by firms
in other industries. In addition to the firms, the economy consists of a representative household as
well as a government with the ability to levy industry-specific taxes and control aggregate nominal
demand.
    The monopolistically-competitive firms within each industry use a common constant-returns-to-
scale technology to transform labor and intermediate inputs into their differentiated products. More
specifically, the production function of firm k  [0, 1] in industry i is given by

                                        yik = zi Fi (lik , xi1,k , . . . , xin,k ),

where yik is the firm's output, lik is its labor input, xij,k is the amount of sectoral commodity j
purchased by the firm, zi is an industry-specific productivity shock, and Fi is homogenous of degree
1. Throughout, we assume that labor is an essential input for the production technology of all goods,
in the sense that Fi (0, xi1,k , . . . , xin,k ) = 0 and that dFi /dlik > 0 whenever all other inputs are used in
positive amounts.
    The nominal profits of the firm are given by
                                                                            n
                                   ik = (1 - i ) pik yik - wlik -                 pj xij,k ,                   (1)
                                                                           j =1

where pik is the nominal price charged by the firm, pj is nominal price of the industry j 's sectoral
output, w denotes the nominal wage, and i is an industry-specific revenue tax (or subsidy) levied by
the government.
    The competitive producer in industry i transforms the differentiated products produced by the
unit mass of firms in that industry into a uniform sectoral good using a constant-elasticity-of-
substitution (CES) production technology
                                                      1                 i /(i -1)
                                                           ( -1)/i
                                       yi =               yik i    dk                                          (2)
                                                  0

                                                                                                      1
with elasticity of substitution i > 1. This producer's profits are thus given by i = pi yi -         0 pik yik dk ,
where pi is the price of the aggregated good produced by industry i. We include this producer--which

                                                              5
has zero value added--only for expositional purposes: it ensures that a homogenous good is produced
by each industry, while at the same time allowing for monopolistic competition among firms within
the industry.
       The preferences of the representative household are given by

                                             W (C, L) = U (C ) - V (L),                                              (3)

where C and L denote the household's final consumption basket and total labor supply, respectively.
We impose the typical regularity conditions on U and V : they are strictly increasing, twice
differentiable, and satisfy U < 0, V          > 0, and the Inada conditions. The final consumption basket
of the household is given by C = C (c1 , . . . , cn ), where ci is the household's consumption of the good
produced by industry i and C is a homogenous function of degree 1. The representative household's
budget constraint is thus given by
                                             n                            n        1
                                    PC =           pj cj  wL +                         ik dk + T,
                                            j =1                         i=1   0


where P = P (p1 , . . . , pn ) is the nominal price of the household's consumption bundle. The left-hand
side of the above inequality is the household's nominal expenditure, whereas the right-hand side is
equal to the household's total nominal income, consisting of wage income, dividends from owning
firms, and lump sum transfers from the government.8
       In addition to the firms and the representative household, the economy also consists of a
government with the ability to set fiscal and monetary policies. The government's fiscal instrument
is a collection of industry-specific taxes (or subsidies) on the firms, with the resulting revenue then
rebated to the household as a lump sum transfer. Therefore, the government's budget constraint is
given by
                                                       n             1
                                                 T =         i           pik yik dk,
                                                       i=1       0


where i is the revenue tax imposed on firms in industry i and T is the net transfer to the representative
household. Finally, to model monetary policy, we sidestep the micro-foundations of money and,
instead, impose the following cash-in-advance constraint on the household's total expenditure:

                                                        P C = m,                                                     (4)

where we assume that m--which can be interpreted as either money supply or nominal aggregate
demand--is set directly by the monetary authority.

2.1      Nominal Rigidities and Information Frictions

We model nominal rigidities by assuming that firms do not observe the realized productivity shocks
z = (z1 , . . . , zn ) and, instead, make their nominal pricing decisions under incomplete information.
   8
    Since sectoral aggregators are competitive, they make zero profits in equilibrium. Hence, we only need to account for
dividends from the monopolistically-competitive firms.


                                                                 6
This assumption implies that nominal prices respond to changes in productivities only to the extent
that such changes are reflected in the firms' information sets.
         Formally, we assume that each firm k in industry i receives a signal ik  ik about the economy's
aggregate state. The aggregate state includes not only the vector of realized productivity shocks, but
also the realization of all signals, that is,

                                                           s = (z,  ),

where  = (1 , . . . , n )   denotes the realized cross-sectional distribution of signals in the economy
and i = (ik )k[0,1] denotes the realized cross-sectional distribution of signals in industry i. We use
µ(·) to denote the unconditional distribution of the aggregate state over the set S = Rn
                                                                                       + × .
         Since ik is the only component of state s that is observable to firm ik , the nominal price set by this
firm has to be measurable with respect to ik . We capture this measurability constraint by denoting the
firm's price by pik (ik ). Similarly, we write pi (i ) and P ( ) to capture the fact that the nominal prices
of sectoral good i and the consumption bundle have to be measurable with respect to the profile of
signals in industry i and in the entire economy, respectively.9
         A few remarks are in order. First, note that the above formulation implies that state s = (z,  ) not
only contains all payoff-relevant shocks, but also contains shocks to the aggregate profile of beliefs.
Therefore, our framework can accommodate the possibility of higher-order uncertainty, as ik may
contain information about other firms' (first or higher-order) beliefs, as in Angeletos and La'O (2013).
Second, our framework is flexible enough to nest models with "sticky information" (Mankiw and Reis,
2002; Ball, Mankiw, and Reis, 2005) as a special case by assuming that a fraction of firms in industry
i set their nominal prices under complete information (ik = z ), whereas the rest of the firms in that
industry observe no informative signals (ik = ) and hence set their nominal prices based only on
the prior beliefs. Finally, note that while all firms set nominal prices under incomplete information,
we do not impose any form of wage rigidities, thus allowing the nominal wage to depend on the entire
state s. While this assumption simplifies the exposition, it is without loss of generality in our multi-
sector framework.
         In summary, we can represent the economy's price system by the collection of nominal prices and
nominal wage at any given state:

                                   =      (pik (ik ))k[0,1] , pi (i )   iI
                                                                             , P ( ), w(s)     sS
                                                                                                    .

While nominal prices are set under incomplete information, we assume that firms and the household
make their quantity decisions after observing the prices and the realization of productivities. As a
result, quantities may depend on the entire state s. We thus represent an allocation in this economy
by

                          =     (yik (s), lik (s), xik (s))k[0,1] , yi (s), ci (s)   iI
                                                                                          , C (s), L(s)      sS
                                                                                                                  ,

where lik (s), xik (s) = (xi1,k (s), . . . , xin,k (s)), and yik (s) denote, respectively, the labor input, material
input, and output of firm k in industry i, yi (s) is the output of industry i, ci (s) is the household's
                                                                                                        1      -i
     9
    More specifically, the sectoral good producer's CES technology implies that pi (i ) = (             0
                                                                                                            p1
                                                                                                             ik   (ik )dk)1/(1-i ) , whereas
the consumption good's price index is given by P ( ) = P (p1 (1 ), . . . , pn (n )).


                                                                 7
consumption of sectoral good i, and C (s) and L(s) are the household's consumption and labor supply,
respectively.
      We conclude this discussion by specifying how government policy depends on the economy's
aggregate state. Recall from equations (1) and (4) that the fiscal and monetary authorities can,
respectively, levy taxes and control the nominal demand. We assume that while the fiscal authority
has the ability to levy industry-specific taxes i , these taxes cannot be contingent on the economy's
aggregate state. In contrast, the monetary authority can set the nominal demand as an arbitrary
function m(s) of the economy's aggregate state s. This is equivalent to assuming that the monetary
authority has the ability to commit, ex ante, to a policy that can, in principle, depend on the realized
productivities and the profile of beliefs throughout the economy. Government policy can thus be
summarized as

                                                   = {(1 , . . . , n ), m(s)}sS .                                   (5)

      Note that our formulation of government's policy instruments in (5) allows for non-state-
contingent taxes to undo steady-state distortions due to monopolistic markups, while ruling out state-
contingent taxes. Were we to allow for a full set of state-contingent taxes, such taxes could be used to
undo the real effects of nominal rigidities and implement the first-best allocation under any monetary
policy. We also remark that while it may be far-fetched to assume that the monetary authority can
commit to a policy that is contingent not just on the payoff-relevant shocks, z , but also on the entire
profile of beliefs,  , we nonetheless make this assumption to illustrate the limit to monetary policy's
ability to implement allocations even under maximum policy flexibility.

2.2     Equilibrium Definition

We now define our notions of sticky- and flexible-price equilibria. To this end, first note that the
market-clearing conditions for labor and commodity markets are given by
                              n        1
                    L(s) =                 lik (s)dk                                                                (6)
                             i=1   0
                                            n          1                       1                        i /(i -1)
                    yi (s) = ci (s) +                      xji,k (s)dk =           yik (s)(i -1)/i dk               (7)
                                           j =1    0                       0


for all i  I and all s  S , whereas the production technology of firm k in industry i requires that

                                   yik (s) = zi Fi lik (s), xi1,k (s), . . . , xin,k (s)                            (8)

for all s  S . Given the above, the definition of a sticky-price equilibrium is straightforward:

Definition 1. A sticky-price equilibrium is a triplet (, , ) of allocations, prices, and policies such that

 (i) firms set prices pik (ik ) to maximize expected real value of profits given their information;

 (ii) firms optimally choose inputs to meet realized demand;

(iii) the representative household maximizes her utility;

                                                                     8
(iv) the government budget constraint is satisfied;

 (v) all markets clear.

         We next define our notion of flexible-price equilibria by dropping the measurability constraint on
prices imposed on the sticky-price equilibrium in Definition 1. More specifically, we assume that, in
contrast to the sticky-price firms, flexible-price firms make their nominal pricing decisions based on
complete information of the aggregate state. We can capture this scenario in our framework by simply
considering the special case in which all firm-level prices are measurable in the aggregate state, pik (s).
Accordingly, we also adjust our notation for the nominal price of sectoral goods and the consumption
bundle by expressing them as pi (s) and P (s), respectively.

Definition 2. A flexible-price equilibrium is a triplet (, , ) of allocations, prices, and policies that
satisfy the same conditions as those stated in Definition 1, except that all prices are measurable with
respect to the aggregate state s.

         While not the main focus of our study, the set of flexible-price-implementable allocations serves as
a benchmark to which we will contrast equilibria in the presence of nominal rigidities. We conclude
with one additional definition, whose meaning is self-evident.

Definition 3. An allocation  is feasible if it satisfies resource constraints (6), (7), and (8).


3         Sticky- and Flexible-Price Equilibria

In this section, we provide a characterization of the set of all allocations that can be implemented as
part of flexible- and sticky-price equilibria. We then use our characterization results to establish that,
except for a non-generic set of specifications, the two sets of allocations never intersect, thus implying
that, in our multi-sector framework, monetary policy cannot undo the effects of nominal rigidities.

3.1         First-Best Allocation

We start by focusing on the first-best allocation that maximizes household welfare among all feasible
allocations. Note that, by symmetry, a planner who maximizes social welfare dictates that all firms
within an industry choose the same input, labor, and output quantities.10 The planner's problem
thus reduces to maximizing (3) state-by-state subject to resource constraints (6)­(8). The equations
characterizing the planner's optimum are straightforward, summarized in the following lemma:

Lemma 1. The first-best optimal allocation is a feasible allocation that satisfies
                                                                              dC        dFi
                                                   V (L(s)) = U (C (s))           (s)zi     (s)                     (9)
                                                                              dci       dli
                                                 dC /dcj          dFi
                                                         (s) = zi      (s)                                         (10)
                                                 dC /dci          dxij

for all pairs of industries i, j  I and all states s.
    10
         Specifically, the planner chooses, xij,k = xij , lik = li , and yik = yi for all firms k in industry i.


                                                                        9
      Equation (9) states that, for any good, it is optimal to equate the marginal rate of substitution
between consumption of that good and labor with the marginal rate of transformation. In particular,
the planner equates the household's marginal disutility of labor on the left-hand side of (9) with
its marginal social benefit on the right-hand side, which itself consists of three multiplicative
components: the marginal product of labor in the production of commodity i, the marginal product
of good i in the production of the final good, and the marginal utility of consumption of the final good.
      The second condition (10) similarly indicates that the planner finds it optimal to equate the
marginal rate of substitution between two goods to their marginal rate of transformation. The
marginal rate of substitution on the left-hand side of equation (10) is the ratio of marginal utilities from
consumption of the two goods, whereas the marginal rate of transformation is simply the marginal
product of good i in the production of good j , as shown on the right-hand side of this condition.

3.2     Flexible-Price Equilibrium

We now turn to the set of allocations that are implementable as flexible-price equilibria. Since the tax
instruments (1 , . . . , n ) are industry-specific and, in a flexible-price equilibrium, all firms in the same
industry have identical information sets, we can once again drop the firm index k .

Proposition 1. A feasible allocation is part of a flexible-price equilibrium if and only if there exists a set
of positive scalars (f           f
                     1 , . . . , n ) such that

                                                                 dC        dFi
                                      V (L(s)) = f
                                                 i U (C (s))         (s)zi     (s)                       (11)
                                                                 dci       dli
                                     dC /dcj            dFi
                                             (s) = f
                                                   i zi      (s)                                         (12)
                                     dC /dci            dxij

for all pairs of industries i, j  I and all states s.

      The conditions in Proposition 1 are almost identical to those characterizing the first-best allocation
in Lemma 1, aside from the set of scalars (f           f
                                           1 , . . . , n ). The first condition (11) indicates that for any
good, the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and labor is equal to the marginal rate
of transformation, modulo a non-state-contingent wedge f
                                                       i . Similarly, the second condition equates
the marginal rate of substitution between two goods to their marginal rate of transformation, again
subject to the wedge f
                     i . This non-stochastic wedge, which is given by

                                                                i - 1
                                                 f
                                                 i = (1 - i )         ,                                  (13)
                                                                 i
consist of two terms: the tax or subsidy levied by the government and the markup that arises due
to monopolistic competition among firms within each industry. As a result, the scalars (f           f
                                                                                        1 , . . . , n )
parameterize the power of the fiscal authority. In particular, with sectoral taxes or subsidies, the fiscal
authority can move allocations by inducing wedges in conditions (11) and (12).
      Another immediate consequence of Proposition 1 is that the first-best allocation is implementable
as a flexible-price equilibrium. This follows from the observation that equations (11) and (12) reduce
to (9) and (10) whenever f
                         i = 1 for all i. Consequently, the first-best allocation can be implemented
as a flexible-price equilibrium with industry-specific subsidies i = 1/(1 - i ). This, of course, is not

                                                         10
surprising: the only distortion in the economy without nominal rigidities arises from monopolistic
competition. Therefore, it is optimal for the government to set industry-specific subsidies that are
invariant to the economy's aggregate state and undo the monopolistic markups.

3.3     Sticky-Price Equilibrium

With the above preliminary results in hand, we are now ready to characterize the set of equilibrium
allocations in the presence of nominal rigidities.

Proposition 2. A feasible allocation is implementable as a sticky-price equilibrium if and only if there
exist positive scalars (s           s
                        1 , . . . , n ), a policy function m(s), and firm-level wedge functions ik (s) such that

  (i) the allocation, the scalars (s           s
                                   1 , . . . , n ), and the set of wedge functions ik (s) jointly satisfy

                                                                                                       -1/i
                                                                 dC        dFi               yik (s)
                               V (L(s)) = s
                                          i ik (s)U (C (s))          (s)zi      (s)                           (14)
                                                                 dci       dlik              yi (s)
                                                                                   -1/i
                             dC /dcj                  dFi           yik (s)
                                     (s) = s
                                           i ik (s)zi      (s)                                                (15)
                             dC /dci                  dxij          yi (s)
       for all firms k , all pairs of industries i and j , and all states s;

 (ii) the policy function m(s) induces the wedge functions ik (s) given by
                                                            mci (s)Eik [vik (s)]
                                                ik (s) =                                                      (16)
                                                            Eik [mci (s)vik (s)]
       for all firms k , all industries i, and all states s, where
                                                                                              -1
                                                         V (L(s))                  dFi
                                    mci (s) = m(s)                            zi       (s)                    (17)
                                                     C ((s))U (C (s))              dli
                                                                                          (i -1)/i
                                                           dC              yik (s)
                                     vik (s) = U (C (s))       (s)yi (s)                                      (18)
                                                           dci             yi (s)
       are, respectively, the firm's nominal marginal cost and stochastic discount factor.

      Proposition 2 provides a characterization of the set of sticky-price-implementable allocations in
terms of model primitives and the monetary policy instrument m(s). It is straightforward to see that
conditions (14) and (15) are identical to their flexible-price counterparts (11) and (12) in Proposition
1, except for a new wedge ik (s). Also, as in Proposition 1, industry-specific wedges (s           s
                                                                                       1 , . . . , n ) are
given by (13) and capture the fiscal authority's ability to influence allocations via tax instruments.
      The new wedge ik (s) in equations (14) and (15), which is firm-specific and depends on the
economy's aggregate state, represents an additional control variable for the government, one that
encapsulates the power of monetary policy over real allocations in the presence of nominal rigidities.
Similar to the fiscal authority's ability to influence the allocation by setting taxes, the monetary
authority can implement different allocations by moving the wedges ik (s) in (14) and (15). This power
is non-trivial, but it is also restrained by conditions (16) and (17): unlike the fiscal authority's full
control over (s           s
              1 , . . . , n ), the monetary authority's choice of the single policy instrument m(s) pins
down all wedges ik (s) at the same time.

                                                            11
       The constraint on the monetary policy's ability in shaping real allocations can also be seen by the
fact that equation (16) implies Eik [vik (s)(ik (s) - 1)] = 0. This means the wedge ik (s) cannot be moved
around in an unconstrained manner, as it has to be equal to 1 in expectation irrespective of the policy.
This is because these wedges arise only due to "mistakes" by the sticky-price firms in setting their
nominal prices. But since firms set their prices optimally given their information sets, they do not
make any pricing errors in expectation.

3.4      The Power of Monetary Policy

As illustrated in Proposition 2, the monetary authority can use monetary policy to implement different
allocations by moving around the wedge ik (s) as a function of the economy's aggregate state. This
leads to the natural question of whether monetary policy can fully undo the effect of nominal rigidities.
Our first main result provides an answer to this question by characterizing the set of flexible-price
allocations that can be implemented as sticky-price equilibria.
       To state this result, let  (ik ) denote the  -field generated by the signal ik . Also let gi (z1 , . . . , zn )
denote the marginal product of labor in the production of commodity i (as a function of productivity
shocks) under the first-best allocation.                Note that gi only depends on the firms' production
technologies and is independent of household preferences, policy, and the firms' information
structure. We have the following result:

Theorem 1. A flexible-price allocation indexed by (f           f
                                                   1 , . . . , n ) is implementable as a sticky-price
equilibrium if and only if there exists a nominal wage function w(s) such that
                                            1
                                                · gi (f              f
                                                      1 z1 , . . . , n zn )   (ik )                                         (19)
                                           w(s)

for all firms k  [0, 1] in all industries i, where w(s) is pinned down by the monetary policy via w(s) =
m(s)V (L(s)) C (s)U (C (s)).

       The above result thus provides a joint restriction on the firms' technology, information structure,
and monetary policy under which a flexible-price allocation can be implemented as a sticky-
price equilibrium.11 More specifically, it establishes that monetary policy can implement a given
flexible-price allocation if there exists a policy-induced function w(s) that can make the product
1/w(s) · gi (f              f
             1 z1 , . . . , n zn ) measurable with respect to the information set of all firms in industry
i, simultaneously for all industries. To see the intuition underlying Theorem 1, note that the left-
hand side of (19) coincides with the nominal marginal cost of firms in industry i under complete
information. Therefore, condition (19) simply states that there exists a policy that can make all
firms' nominal marginal costs measurable with respect to their corresponding information sets. This
guarantees that all firms set their nominal prices as if they had complete information about their
nominal marginal costs, hence neutralizing the effect of nominal rigidities.
       We can now use the characterization in Theorem 1 to obtain the following corollary:
  11
    Note that gi (f               f
                   1 z1 , . . . , n zn ) only depends on the firms' production technologies and productivity shocks z ,  (ik ) is
only a function of the information structure  , and w(s) is controlled by the monetary policy.




                                                               12
Corollary 1. Let X f and X s denote the set of allocations that are implementable as flexible-price and
sticky-price equilibria, respectively. Then, X f  X s =  for a generic set of information structures.

    That is, in general, any allocation implementable as an equilibrium under flexible prices cannot
be implemented as an equilibrium under sticky prices with any monetary policy. Interpreted through
the lens of Theorem 1, the above result is an immediate consequence of the observation that, given
a generic information structure, it is impossible to satisfy condition (19) for all firms simultaneously.
The following result is then immediate.

Corollary 2. In a multi-sector economy with given preferences and technologies, the first-best allocation
is not implementable as a sticky-price equilibrium for a generic set of information structures.

    The intuition behind Corollary 2 is straightforward. Consider the planner's optimal allocation
which can itself be implemented as a flexible-price equilibrium with appropriate industry-level
subsidies.     The planner would like relative quantities across industries to move efficiently with
productivity shocks, while at the same time ensuring that all firms within each industry produce
the same quantity. In order to implement this under flexible prices, relative prices across industries
should move with relative productivities, while prices across firms within each industry should be
identical. This specific pattern of price movements with productivity shocks is necessary for flexible-
price allocations and in particular for the first-best allocation.
    However, inducing this pattern of price movements is in general impossible under sticky prices in
a multi-sector economy. In order to ensure that prices are uniform within a particular industry, the
monetary authority must target price stability for that industry. This is the typical first-best policy
in one-sector New Keynesian models as it implements zero price dispersion and hence productive
efficiency within that particular industry. But when there are multiple industries, if monetary policy
is used to achieve price stability within one particular industry, it cannot, in general, be used to target
price stability in any other industry. That is, monetary policy cannot stabilize prices in all industries
at once. And even if it could--for example, because the information structure is such that all firms
in any given industry set the same exact price--it is still not sufficient for achieving the first best: in
general, no monetary policy can induce relative prices of all pairs of industries to move with their
corresponding productivity shocks.
    Another consequence of condition (19) and Corollaries 1 and 2 is that monetary policy may not be
able to implement the first-best allocation even if all firms in the economy have perfect information
about their own productivities: incomplete information about productivity shocks to other far away
industries generically results in flexible-price allocations that are not sticky-price implementable.12
Furthermore, even if all firms know the realization of the entire vector z = (z1 , . . . , zn ), the first-best
allocation may still remain unattainable as long as this information is not common knowledge among
all firms in the economy, as higher-order uncertainty also induces nominal rigidities that cannot be
neutralized by any monetary policy.
    While Corollaries 1 and 2 illustrate the limitation of monetary policy in a generic multi-sector
   12
      Condition (19) implies that a sufficient condition for sticky-price implementability of flexible-price allocations is that
firms in industry i have complete information about productivity shocks to all their (direct and indirect) upstream industries.



                                                              13
economy, there are some non-generic, yet important, special cases in which the monetary authority
can implement the first-best allocation.

Corollary 3. If there is a single sticky-price industry i, any flexible-price equilibrium allocation can be
implemented as a sticky-price equilibrium with a monetary policy that stabilizes industry i's price.

    This result is an immediate consequence of Theorem 1: if there is a single sticky-price industry i,
then setting w(s) = M gi (f              f
                          1 z1 , . . . , n zn ) for any constant M > 0 ensures that the left-hand side of (19)
is measurable with respect to the information set of all firms in industry i. Importantly, such a policy
stabilizes the nominal marginal cost and hence the nominal price of firms in the sticky-price industry:
pik (ik ) = M , which is independent of the economy's aggregate state.
    Though focused on a non-generic class of economies, Corollary 3 nests two important economies
as special cases. The first special case is the textbook single-sector New Keynesian model with no
markup shocks. As is well-known (and in line with Corollary 3), the first-best allocation can always
be implemented by a combination of (i) price stabilization and (ii) an industry-level subsidy that
eliminates monopolistic markups. Importantly, the above result establishes that such a policy mix
is optimal irrespective of the nature and extent of information frictions, thus generalizing the insights
of Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008) to a broad class of nominal rigidities; also see Angeletos and
La'O (2020). The second special case is the two-sector model of Aoki (2001), who considers an
economy consisting of one flexible industry and one sticky industry subject to Calvo frictions and
shows that stabilizing the price of the sticky industry can implement the first-best allocation. Corollary
3 establishes that, as long as there is a single sticky-price industry, Aoki's result generalizes to a multi-
sector economy with input-output linkages and an arbitrary form of pricing friction.


4    Optimal Monetary Policy

Our results in Corollaries 1 and 2 establish that, in general, monetary policy cannot implement the
first-best allocation as a sticky-price equilibrium. In view of these results, we now turn to the study of
optimal monetary policy, i.e., the policy that maximizes household welfare over the set of all possible
sticky-price-implementable allocations.
    In order to obtain closed-form expressions for the optimal policy, we impose a number of
functional form assumptions on preferences, technologies, and the nature of price stickiness in
the economy.     More specifically, we assume that firms in each industry employ Cobb-Douglas
technologies to transform labor and intermediate goods into their differentiated products, with the
production technology of a firm k in industry i given by
                                                                                         n
                                                                                   i            aij
                              yik = zi Fi (lik , xi1,k , . . . , xin,k ) =   zi i lik          xij,k .   (20)
                                                                                        j =1

In the above expression, lik denotes the amount of labor hired by the firm, xij,k is the quantity of
good j used as an intermediate input, i  0 denotes the share of labor in industry i's production
technology, zi is a Hicks-neutral productivity shock that is common to all firms in industry i, and i is a
normalization constant, the value of which only depends on model parameters and is independent

                                                             14
of the shocks.13 The exponent aij  0 in (20) captures the fact that firms in industry i may rely
on the goods produced by other industries as intermediate inputs for production. Note that, for all
                                                                                                         n
technologies to exhibit constant returns, it must be the case that i +                                   j =1 aij   = 1.
       Input-output linkages in this economy can be summarized by matrix A = [aij ], which, with some
abuse of terminology, we refer to as the economy's input-output matrix. As is customary in the
literature, these input-output linkages can also be represented by a weighted directed graph on n
vertices, known as the economy's production network. Each vertex in this graph corresponds to an
industry, with a directed edge with weight aij > 0 present from vertex j to vertex i if industry j is an
input supplier of industry i. We also define the economy's Leontief inverse as L = (I-A)-1 , whose (i, j )
element captures the role of industry j as a direct or indirect intermediate input supplier to industry i.
       As in Section 2, we assume a monopolistically-competitive market structure within each industry,
with the output of firms in industry i aggregated into a sectoral good according to the CES production
function (2). We further assume that sector-specific taxes/subsidies in (1) are set to i = 1/(1 - i ) for
all i. As discussed in Section 3, this choice undoes the effect of monopolistic markups and guarantees
that the flexible-price equilibrium is efficient.
       The consumption basket is also a Cobb-Douglas aggregator of the sectoral goods given by
                                                                          n
                                                 C (c1 , . . . , cn ) =         (ci /i )i ,
                                                                          i=1

where ci is the amount of good i consumed and the constants i  0 measure various goods' shares in
                                                                                              n
the household's consumption basket, normalized such that                                      i=1 i   = 1. In addition, we assume the
representative household's preferences (3) are homothetic, with
                                                       C 1-                              L1+1/
                                            U (C ) =              ,       V (L) =               ,
                                                       1-                                1 + 1/
where recall that C and L denote the household's consumption and labor supply, respectively.
       To specify firms' information structure and the resulting nominal rigidities, we assume all
productivity shocks are drawn independently from a log-normal distribution,

                                                       log zi  N (0,  2 z
                                                                        2
                                                                          ).                                                     (21)

Each firm k in industry i then receives a collection of private signals ik = (i1,k , . . . , in,k ) about the
realized productivities given by

                                       ij,k = log zj +   ij,k         ,           ij,k
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                          N (0,  2 ik ),                         (22)

where the noise terms           ij,k   are independent from one another and the productivity shocks. In this
                                               2 measures firms' (common) prior uncertainty about
formulation,  > 0 is a normalization constant, z
                2 parametrizes the quality of information available to firm k in industry i.14 Hence,
the shocks, and ik
  13                                                                -i     n        ij   -a
      In what follows, we set the value of this constant to i = i          j =1 aij    . This choice has no bearing on the results, as
the sole purpose of this constant is to simplify the analytical expressions.
   14
      Throughout, we assume that all productivity shocks are drawn from a distribution with the same variance. This is a
normalization assumption to ensure that the optimal policy is driven by our main objects of study (i.e., the economy's input-
output structure and the extent of nominal rigidities) as opposed to differences in shock volatilities. In addition, we also
assume that signals {i1,k , . . . , in,k } observed by firm k in industry i have the same precision. This assumption allows us to
                                                                                                    2
capture the degree of price stickiness/flexibility of each firm by a single scalar parameter ik       . A simple generalization of this
framework can accommodate heterogeneity in shock volatilities and signal precisions.


                                                                   15
               2 / 2 corresponds to an increase in the extent of nominal rigidity faced by firm k in
an increase in ik z
                                               2 = 0 for all k and all i corresponds to an economy with
industry i. In contrast, the extreme case that ik
fully flexible prices. More generally, it is straightforward to verify that

                                      E[log zj |ik ] = ik ij,k
                                     var[log zj |ik ] = (1 - ik )var[log zj ],                                  (23)

where

                                                  2   2   2
                                             ik = z /(z + ik ).                                                 (24)

Equation (23) indicates that an increase in ik corresponds to a reduction in the firm's uncertainty
about the payoff-relevant productivity shocks. We thus refer to ik  [0, 1] as the degree of price
flexibility of firm k in industry i. Similarly, we define the degree of price flexibility of industry i as
                                                            1
                                                i =             ik dk.
                                                        0

                                   2  {0, } for all firms,   {1, 0} for all i and k , in which case our
Note that in the special case that ik                      ik
                                                                                          ` la Mankiw
framework reduces to an economy that is subject to "sticky information" pricing frictions a
and Reis (2002): firms in each industry can either set their prices flexibly with no frictions or face full
nominal rigidity.
      To keep the analysis tractable, we work with the log-linearization of the above economy as   0,
where recall from equations (21) and (22) that  > 0 simultaneously parametrizes the firms' prior
uncertainty about (log) productivity shocks and the noise in their private signals. This specific
parametrization leads to two desirable features. First, the fact that var(log zi ) =  2 z
                                                                                        2 means that our

small- approximation is akin to focusing on small departures from the economy's steady-state, as is
typical in the New Keynesian literature. Second, scaling var(            ij,k )   with  2 ensures that the degree of
price flexibility ik in equation (24) remains independent of  .
      As a final remark, we note that the independence assumption imposed on the noise shocks                    ij,k
implies that aggregate uncertainty in this economy is solely driven by the productivity shocks z =
(z1 , . . . , zn ). As a result, without loss of generality, we can restrict our attention to monetary policies
of the form m(z ) that only depend on the productivity shocks, as opposed to the entire state of the
economy s = (z,  ).

4.1     Strategic Complementarities and Monetary Non-Neutrality

In this subsection, we use Proposition 2 to obtain a set of preliminary results that will serve
as the basis of our characterization of the optimal policy. We first illustrate the central role of
strategic complementarities in firms' price-setting decisions in our production network economy. We
then show how the interaction of such strategic complementarities with nominal rigidities impacts
nominal prices and marginal costs and shapes the extent of monetary non-neutrality in the economy.




                                                        16
Lemma 2. The nominal price set by firm k in industry i satisfies

                             log pik = Eik [log mci ] + o( )                                                                        (25)
                                                                               n
                                      = i Eik [log w] - Eik [log zi ] +              aij Eik [log pj ] + o( )                       (26)
                                                                              j =1

up to a first-order approximation as   0.

       Equation (25), which is a consequence of Proposition 2, establishes that, up to a first-order
approximation, each firm sets its nominal price equal to its expected marginal cost, given its
information set. This is a consequence of monopolistic competition and the assumption that sector-
specific taxes/subsidies are set to i = 1/(1 - i ) to eliminate monopolistic markups.15
       Lemma 2 also illustrates that our multi-sector New Keynesian model is isomorphic to a "beauty
contest" game over the production network (Bergemann, Heumann, and Morris, 2017; Golub and
Morris, 2018). In particular, equation (26) is identical to the first-order conditions of a network game
of incomplete information in which firms in industry i choose their log nominal prices to match an
industry-specific "fundamental" (given by i log w - log zi ), while simultaneously coordinating with
                                                                                                                    n
a linear combination of the (log) prices set by their supplier industries (given by                                 j =1 aij   log pj ).16
This coordination motive is the consequence of strategic complementarities in firms' price-setting
behavior in the presence of input-output linkages: all else equal, an increase in the price set by firms
in an industry increases the incentive of its downstream customers to also raise their prices.
       To capture the implications of the interaction between such strategic complementarities and
nominal rigidities, we next define the following concept:

Definition 4. The upstream (price) flexibility of industry i is given by
                                                                    n
                                                      i = i +             aij j j ,                                                 (27)
                                                                   j =1

where j is the degree of price flexibility of industry j and i is the labor share of industry i.

       A few observations are in order. First, note that while the definition in (27) is recursive, the vector
of upstream flexibilities has a simple closed-form representation given by  = (I - A)-1 , where
 = diag(1 , . . . , n ) is the diagonal matrix of (own) price flexibilities and  = (1 , . . . , n ) is the
vector of industry labor shares. Second, it is straightforward to verify that i  [0, 1] for all i. Third, and
more importantly, the recursive nature of (27) implies that upstream flexibility of industry i is strictly
increasing in the own (j ) and upstream (j ) price flexibilities of any of i's supplier industries j , with
these terms weighted by the importance of j in i's production technology, aij . As a result, i decreases
if any of i's direct or indirect upstream suppliers are subject to more pricing frictions, whereas i takes
its maximum value of 1 if none of its direct and indirect upstream suppliers are subject to any pricing
  15
      The relationship between the firm's marginal cost and its nominal price is, in general, more complicated. As we show in
the proof of Proposition 2, the nominal price set by the firm is equal to pik = Eik [mci · vik ]/Eik [vik ], where vik is given by (18).
However, in the limit as   0, this relationship reduces to (25).
   16
      More specifically, equation (26) coincides with the first-order conditions of a game in which the payoff of firms in industry
i is given by ui (log pik , log p, log w, log z ) = -(log pik - (i log w - log zi ))2 - (log pik - n                2
                                                                                                   j =1 aij log pj ) .



                                                                  17
friction. This observation clarifies the sense in which i serves as a summary statistic for the extent of
nominal rigidities in industries upstream to i.
       We now use Definition 4 and the representation in Lemma 2 to characterize equilibrium nominal
prices and marginal costs as a function of model primitives and the nominal wage.

Proposition 3. Equilibrium log nominal marginal costs and prices are, respectively, given by
                                                                n
                                    log mci = i log w -              hij log zj + o( )                                   (28)
                                                             j =1
                                                                       n
                                      log pi = i i log w - i                 hij log zj + o( )                           (29)
                                                                      j =1

up to a first-order approximation as   0, where hij is the (i, j ) element of matrix H = (I - A)-1 .

       Proposition 3 illustrates that the interaction between nominal rigidities and the strategic
complementarities that arise from the economy's production network amplifies the sluggishness of
the response of nominal variables to real and monetary shocks. In particular, it is immediate from
(28) and (29) that the pass-through of changes in the nominal wage to i's nominal marginal cost and
nominal price are given by
                                          d log mci                  d log pi
                                                    = i      ,                =  i i ,                                   (30)
                                           d log w                   d log w
respectively, both of which are increasing in industry i's upstream flexibility, i .17
       An important consequence of this observation is that, in our production network economy, the
observed frequency and magnitude of price changes by any given firm reflect not just the pricing
friction faced by that firm, but also the nominal rigidities faced by any of its direct and indirect
upstream suppliers. This is in contrast to the standard one-sector models, in which one can simply
treat the frequency of price changes as the exogenous price flexibility parameter.
       We conclude our set of preliminary results in this subsection by characterizing how the strategic
complementarities arising from the economy's production network shape the extent of monetary
non-neutrality. To this end, let
                                                            n
                                                     0 =            j j j ,                                              (31)
                                                           j =1

where j is the share of good j in the household's consumption basket. In view of (30), 0 captures the
pass-through of changes in the log nominal wage to the price of the household consumption basket.18
Recall from our previous discussion that this quantity has a closed-form representation in terms of
model primitives given by 0 =  (I - A)-1 . Furthermore, as expected, 0 is increasing in the
extent of price flexibilities (1 , . . . , n ) of all industries in the economy, regardless of whether they sell
directly to the household or not. We have the following result:
  17
      This is in line with Blanchard (1983), Basu (1995), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2010), who, in simpler settings, argue
that the strategic complementarities arising from the presence of input-output linkages amplify the effect of nominal
rigidities and increase the sluggishness of the response of nominal variables to shocks.
   18
      Alternatively, and in view of (27), 0 can also be interpreted as the degree of (upstream) price flexibility faced by the
household.


                                                             18
Proposition 4. The degree of monetary non-neutrality is

                                           d log C         1 - 0
                                       =           =                   ,                                                      (32)
                                           d log m   1 + ( - 1 + 1/ )0

where C is the household's consumption and m is the nominal demand.

      Proposition 4, which generalizes the result of Pasten, Schoenle, and Weber (2019), characterizes
how nominal rigidities interact with the economy's production network to generate monetary non-
neutrality. As a first observation, note that  is monotone decreasing in 0 , which itself is decreasing
in the degree of price stickiness of all industries in the economy. Therefore, as expected, an increase
in nominal rigidities anywhere in the economy results in a higher degree of monetary non-neutrality.
Furthermore, the recursive nature of equation (27) underscores how the strategic complementarities
arising from the economy's production network amplify monetary non-neutrality: an increase in the
degree of price stickiness of industry j (i.e., a decrease in j ) not only decreases 0 directly as is evident
from (31), but also does so indirectly by making the marginal cost of any industry i that rely on j more
sluggish (thus reducing 0 by reducing i ).

4.2     Welfare Loss and Policy Objective

In the remainder of this section, we use our preliminary results in Subsection 4.1 to obtain a closed-
form expression for the optimal monetary policy, which maximizes the expected welfare of the
representative household over the set of all sticky-price equilibrium allocations.
      We express the household's welfare relative to a benchmark with no nominal rigidities, which
corresponds to the first-best allocation. More specifically, let W and W  denote the representative
household's welfare in the presence and absence of nominal rigidities, respectively. Similarly, let
 = (pik , pi , w) and      = (p           
                               ik , pi , w ) denote the nominal price systems under the two scenarios. Given
the indeterminacy of prices in the flexible-price equilibrium, we normalize the nominal wage such
that w = w. We also use eik = log pik - log pik to denote the "pricing error" of firm k in industry i in
the sticky-price economy relative to the benchmark with no nominal rigidities. The cross-sectional
average and dispersion of pricing errors within industry i are thus given by
                                                    1
                                         e
                                         ¯i =           eik dk                                                                (33)
                                                0
                                                    1                      1            2
                                         i =            e2
                                                         ik dk -               eik dk       .                                 (34)
                                                0                      0

We have the following result:

Proposition 5. The welfare loss due to the presence of nominal rigidities is given by
                           n                              n
              1
      W -W =-                  i i i + ( + 1/ ) +                      e1 , . . . , e
                                                               i vari (¯            ¯n ) + var0 (¯            ¯n ) + o( 2 )
                                                                                                 e1 , . . . , e               (35)
              2
                        i=1                              i=1

up to a second-order approximation as   0, where i = pi yi /P C is the steady-state Domar weight of



                                                                 19
industry i, i is the dispersion of pricing errors in industry i defined in (34),
                                                                                             2
                                                                                   n
                                                                   1
                             = (log C - log C  )2 =                                       ¯j  + o( 2 )
                                                                                        j e                                (36)
                                                                ( + 1/ )2
                                                                                j =1

is the volatility of output gap, and
                                                                                              2
                                                                 n                  n
                                          e1 , . . . , e
                                    vari (¯            ¯n ) =              ¯2
                                                                       aij ej -
                                                                                          aij e
                                                                                              ¯j 
                                                                j =1               j =1
                                                                                              2                            (37)
                                                                 n                  n
                                         e1 , . . . , e
                                   var0 (¯            ¯n ) =             ¯2
                                                                       j ej -
                                                                                          j e
                                                                                            ¯j 
                                                                j =1               j =1

are the inter-industry dispersion of pricing errors from the perspectives of industry i and the household,
respectively.

       Proposition 5 thus generalizes the well-known expression for welfare loss in single-sector New
Keynesian models (e.g., Woodford (2003b) and Gal´
                                                i (2008)) to our multi-sector economy with input-
output linkages.19 In particular, equation (35) illustrates that the loss in welfare due to the presence of
nominal rigidities manifests itself via four separate terms.
       The first term, i i i measures welfare losses due to price dispersion within each industry i and is
the counterpart of welfare loss due to inflation in the textbook New Keynesian models: relative price
dispersion i in industry i translates into output dispersion and hence misallocation of resources,
with the extent of this misallocation increasing in the elasticity of substitution i between firms in that
industry. This term vanishes if all firms in industry i make their nominal pricing decisions under the
same information. Not surprisingly, the loss due to price dispersion in industry i is weighted by the
industry's Domar weight, i .
       The second term on the right-hand side of (35) is proportional to the volatility of output gap
 = (log C - log C  )2 . This term, which is also present in the benchmark New Keynesian models
and vanishes as the Frisch elasticity of labor supply   0, captures loss of welfare due to inefficient
supply of labor by the household, i.e., the aggregate labor wedge.                                  Equation (36) characterizes
how output gap volatility relates to industry-level pricing errors in our multi-sector economy. This
equation also illustrates that, unlike textbook New Keynesian models--which assume exogenous cost-
push shocks--an output gap emerges endogenously in this multi-sector economy with only efficient
shocks.
       In contrast to the first two terms, the third and fourth terms on the right-hand side of (35) only
appear in multi-sector economies and correspond to welfare losses arising from misallocation of
resources across industries. To see this, consider the expression vari (¯            ¯n ) in equation (37). This
                                                                        e1 , . . . , e
term measures the dispersion in the average pricing error of i's supplier industries, with higher weights
  19
    It also generalizes the corresponding expressions in Woodford (2003b, 2010) for a two-sector economy with no input-
output linkages and that of Huang and Liu (2005) when the economy consists of two industries forming a vertical production
chain.




                                                                  20
assigned to industries that are more important input-suppliers to i. To be even more specific, suppose
industry i has two suppliers indexed j and r such that aij + air = 1. In this case, it is immediate that
                                                                                                         2
                         vari (¯
                               ej , e                    ¯r )2 = aij air log(pj /pr ) - log(p
                                                    ej - e
                                    ¯r ) = aij air (¯                                            
                                                                                             j /pr )


simply measures the extent to which nominal relative prices of i's inputs diverge from the relative
prices that would have prevailed under the flexible-price (and hence efficient) allocation. Finally, note
that vari (¯            ¯n ) = 0 whenever industry i has only a single input supplier j with aij = 1, as this
           e1 , . . . , e
corresponds to a scenario in which there is no room for misallocation between i's input suppliers.20
       In summary, Proposition 5 indicates that, in a multi-sector economy, the monetary authority faces
an inherent trade-off between minimizing the various losses captured by equation (35). Importantly,
as we already established in Corollaries 1 and 2, this trade-off cannot be circumvented, in the sense
that, generically, there is no policy that can simultaneously eliminate all forms of welfare loss. Finally,
note that, unlike the textbook New Keynesian models, the various trade-offs faced by the monetary
authority arises from the structural properties of the economy's production network as opposed to ad
hoc markup shocks.

4.3      Optimal Monetary Policy

We are now ready to present our main result of this section, which characterizes the optimal policy as
a function of the economy's production network and the extent of nominal rigidities.
                                                                                                              n   
Theorem 2. The optimal monetary policy is a price-stabilization policy of the form                            s=1 s log ps    = 0,
with the weight assigned to industry s in the target price index given by

                                                   o.g.   within   across
                                               s = s    + s      + s      ,                                                   (38)

where

                                o.g.                          1 - 0
                                s    = (1/s - 1)s                                                                             (39)
                                                               + 1/
                                within
                                s      = (1 - s )s s s                                                                        (40)
                                                                              n
                               across
                               s      = (1/s - 1) (0 - s )s +                     (1 - i )i i   is                            (41)
                                                                            i=1

and i is the degree of upstream price stickiness in (27).

       Theorem 2 provides a characterization of the optimal policy in terms of model primitives, with
each term on the right-hand side of (38) aimed at minimizing a specific source of welfare loss in
(35). Recall from Subsection 4.2 that the monetary authority faces a trade-off between minimizing
the various sources of allocational inefficiencies due to nominal rigidities. Not surprisingly then, the
optimal policy in (38) consists of three different terms corresponding to the relative importance of
each of these misallocations for household welfare: the first term on the right-hand side of (38) aims
  20
   The interpretation for the term var0 (¯            ¯n ) in equation (35) is identical, with the household replacing industry i as
                                         e1 , . . . , e
purchaser of various goods.


                                                                21
to minimize the welfare loss induced by the labor wedge (or equivalently, output gap volatility), the
second term arises due to the policymakers' concern about within-industry price dispersion, and the
last term is in response to misallocation across industries.21 Note that the three terms constituting the
optimal policy in (38) are in general not proportional to one another, thus indicating that the monetary
authority faces a real trade-off between the corresponding misallocation losses.
       The above result also illustrates that the optimal policy is shaped by how nominal rigidities interact
                                                                  assigned to any given industry
with the economy's production network. In particular, the weight i
i in the optimal policy depends not just on that industry's size (as measured by its Domar weight i )
and price flexibility (as parametrizes by i ), but also on i's position in the production network and
the nominal rigidities faced by other industries in the economy. This dependence is consequence of
strategic complementarities in firms' price-setting decisions discussed in Subsection 4.1.
       As a final remark, we note that in deriving the above result, we did not restrict our attention to the
class of price-stabilization policies to begin with. In particular, the monetary authority can choose the
nominal demand, m(z ), as an arbitrary function of productivities in an unrestricted manner, including
policies that do not stabilize any specific price index.22 Nonetheless, Theorem 2 establishes that the
                                                     n   
optimal policy stabilizes the price index            s=1 s log ps   with weights given by (38). This reflects the fact
that the underlying flexible-price economy is efficient: even though our multi-sector economy gives
rise to an endogenous output gap, the absence of inefficient cost-push shocks means that there are no
forces driving optimal policy away from price stabilization.

4.4      Comparative Statics

In what follows, we present a series of comparative static results to distill the role of the various
forces that shape the optimal policy (38) in a transparent manner. These results allow us to obtain
general insights on how optimal policy depends on the production network and the distribution of
pricing frictions throughout the economy. In particular, we establish that, all else equal, optimal
policy stabilizes a price index with higher weights assigned to (i) larger industries as measured by their
Domar weights, (ii) stickier industries, (iii) more upstream industries, (iv) industries with less sticky
upstream suppliers but with stickier downstream customers, and (v) industries whose customers
exhibit higher upstream flexibilities.
       We start with a definition.
Definition 5. Industries i and j are upstream symmetric if air = ajr for all industries r. They are
downstream symmetric if ari = arj for all industries r and i = j .
       While upstream symmetry means that i and j have the same production technology, downstream
symmetry means that the two industries take identical roles as input suppliers of other firms in the
economy as well as in household preferences. Consequently, if i and j are upstream symmetric,
then they have the same degree of upstream flexibilities (i = j ), whereas if they are downstream
symmetric, they have the same steady-state Domar weights (i = j ). We have the following result:
  21
     Alternatively, the expressions in (39), (40), and (41) correspond to the optimal price-stabilization policies of a planner
who only intends to minimize welfare losses arising from output gap volatility, within-industry price dispersion, and inter-
industry price dispersion, respectively.
  22
     Lemma A.1 in the appendix characterizes the set of policies m(z ) that can be implemented as a price-stabilization policy.


                                                              22
Proposition 6. Suppose industries i and j are upstream and downstream symmetric. Also suppose i =
           >   in the optimal policy if and only if  <  .
j . Then, i  j                                      i  j


       This result thus extends what Eusepi, Hobijn, and Tambalotti (2011) refer to as the "stickiness
principle" to our multi-sector economy with input-output linkages: all else equal, the monetary
authority should stabilize a price index that places larger weights on producers with stickier prices.
       To see the intuition underlying Proposition 6, note that, by the upstream symmetry assumption,
mci and mcj have the same ex ante distribution. Yet, firms in the stickier of the two industries respond
more sluggishly to changes in their realized marginal costs. Therefore, by targeting the industry that
is subject to more nominal rigidities for price stabilization, the optimal policy reduces the need for
price adjustments by firms in that industry and thus reduces the overall level of within-industry price
dispersion. In fact, equation (40) in Theorem 2 implies that, due to upstream symmetry, if i < j ,
     within   within
then i      > j      . At the same time, the downstream symmetry assumption implies that a policy
that targets the stickier industry more also reduces output gap volatility and the inter-industry price
dispersion faced by i and j 's common customers. In fact, from equations (39) and (41), it is easy to
                                                                            o.g.          o.g.       across   across
see that whenever i < j , it must be the case that i                                > j          and i      > i      . Putting these
                                            > ,
inequalities together then guarantees that i  j
       By assuming that i and j take symmetric positions in the production network, Proposition 6
effectively assumes away how differences in input-output linkages may matter for optimal policy. In
our subsequent results, we instead assume that the two industries are equally sticky and focus on the
role of network connections in shaping the optimal policy.

Proposition 7. Suppose i and j are downstream symmetric. Also suppose i = j < 1 and i = j . Then,
 >   if and only if  >  .
i  j                i  j


       This result encapsulates the second general principle that emerges from our characterization of
optimal policy: all else equal, the optimal target price index places a higher weight on the industry
with less sticky upstream suppliers, as summarized by a higher degree of upstream flexibility .
       The intuition underlying Proposition 7 is straightforward. Since i and j are downstream symmetric,
stabilizing the price of either industry would have the same exact effect on the labor wedge and the
extent of inter-industry relative price distortions perceived by their (direct and indirect) customers.
As a result, any differential treatment of i and j by the optimal policy is solely driven by concerns
for within-industry misallocation.23 At the same time, the fact that i > j means that industry j 's
marginal cost responds more sluggishly to shocks, making the lack of complete information about
the realized shocks less material for price-setting by firms in j compared to those in i. As a result,
all else equal, the within-industry price dispersion would be lower in j than in i, despite the fact that
both industries are equally sticky. Not surprisingly then, the optimal price-stabilization target assigns
a lower weight to the industry with stickier suppliers, which has an already more stabilized marginal
cost.

  23                                                               o.g.     o.g.       across   across
       In fact, it is easy to verify that (39) and (41) imply that i      = j      and i      = j      .




                                                                       23
Proposition 8. Suppose industries i and j are upstream symmetric. Also suppose i = j < 1, i = j ,
                   >   if and only if
and i = j . Then, i  j

                                       n
                                            (1 - s )s s (        si   -   sj )   > 0.                        (42)
                                      s=1

   The above result highlights yet another important dimension along which the production network
structure shapes the optimal policy. In particular, it establishes that, all else equal, industry i receives
a higher weight in the optimal price-stabilization index if (i) it is a more important supplier to stickier
industries and (ii) its customers have a higher degree of upstream flexibility. To see these from
inequality (42), recall that expression    si   -   sj   captures the differential importance of i and j as direct
or indirect input suppliers to any industry s. Therefore, the left-hand side of (42) is positive if, relative
to j , industry i is a more important supplier of industries with lower degree of price flexibility s but
higher degree of upstream price flexibility s .
   Why is it optimal to stabilize the price of the industry with stickier downstream customers? This
is because such a policy would reduce the need for the firms in the customer industry to adjust their
nominal price. Therefore, the stickier are those customers, the higher is the welfare gain of stabilizing
their marginal cost by assigning a higher weight on their suppliers in the target price-stabilization
index.
   The argument for why optimal policy places a larger weight on the industry whose customers have
a higher degree of upstream flexibility  is also similar. Recall that, all else equal, a higher degree of
upstream flexibility s means that firms in industry s face a more volatile nominal marginal cost and
hence, on average, have to adjust their nominal price by more. Therefore, stabilizing the price of one
of their inputs, i, would reduce the need for such price adjustment and hence reduce the welfare loss
arising from nominal rigidities.

Proposition 9. Suppose j is the sole input-supplier of i and i is the sole supplier of j . Also, suppose
                             < .
i = j < 1 and i = j . Then, i  j

   The assumption that i and j are, respectively, each other's only customer and supplier and have
identical stickiness and substitution elasticities is meant to ensure that the difference between the
two industries is solely in their respective positions in the chain of production, with industry j taking
an unambiguously upstream position vis-`
                                       a-vis industry i. As such, Proposition 9 establishes that, all
else equal, the optimal policy assigns a higher weight to more upstream industries. The differential
treatment of the two industries by the optimal policy is driven purely by concerns about within-
industry misallocation.
   Taken together, our results presented as Propositions 6­9 yield general principles for the optimal
conduct of monetary policy in the presence of input-output linkages. In particular, they establish
that, all else equal, optimal policy stabilizes a price index with higher weights assigned to industries
that are stickier (Proposition 6), have more flexible upstream suppliers (Proposition 7) but more sticky
downstream customers (Proposition 8), have downstream customers with a higher degree of upstream
flexibility (Proposition 8), and are themselves more upstream (Proposition 9).


                                                            24
4.5     Examples

We conclude this section by providing a series of examples to further clarify the dependence of optimal
policy on model primitives.

Example 1 (vertical production network). Consider the economy depicted in Figure 1(a), in which
each industry i = n depends on the output of a single other industry as its input for production
(ai,i+1 = 1), industry n only uses labor (n = 1), and the household, labeled as vertex 0 in the figure,
only consumes the good produced by industry 1 (1 = 1 and i = 0 for all j = 1).
      Given the vertical nature of production, it is immediate that in this economy--a variant of which
is studied by Huang and Liu (2005) and Wei and Xie (2020)--there is no room for inter-industry
misallocation. Indeed, the expressions in (37) corresponding to welfare losses arising from inter-
industry misallocation are equal to zero, irrespective of the extent of nominal rigidities. It is therefore
not surprising that this source of welfare loss is immaterial for the design of optimal policy: equation
                               across
(41) in Theorem 2 implies that s      = 0 for all s.
      There is, however, room for within-industry misallocation, as firms' incomplete information about
productivity shocks may result in a non-trivial price dispersion within each industry. Indeed, equation
(40) implies that the corresponding component of optimal policy is non-zero and is given by
                                          within
                                          s      = (1 - s )s s ,

where s = s+1 s+2 . . . n is the degree of upstream flexibility of industry s. Note that due to the
presence of strategic complementarities, s is smaller for industries further downstream: s  s+1 .
      Combining the above with equation (39)--which captures the component of optimal policy
that aims at reducing welfare losses arising from the labor wedge--implies that the optimal price-
stabilization target is given by
                         within   o.g.                                     1 - 1 2 . . . n
                     s = s      + s    = (1 - s )s s+1 s+2 . . . n +                       .
                                                                               + 1/
Consequently, the optimal policy assigns a larger weight to (i) industries with higher degrees of price
stickiness (i.e., lower s ), (ii) those with higher elasticities of substitution s , and (iii) more upstream
industries. This latter observation is of course consistent with the prescription of Proposition 9.

Example 2 (horizontal production network). Next, consider the economy depicted in Figure 1(b), in
which all industries only rely on labor as their input for production, i.e., i = 1 for all i. This economy
is therefore similar to the multi-sector economies with no input-output linkages that were studied in
the prior literature, such as Mankiw and Reis (2003), Benigno (2004), and Woodford (2010).
      Unlike the economy in Example 1, nominal rigidities in the horizontal economy result in
misallocation not only within but also across industries: while efficiency requires relative prices
across industries to move with corresponding productivities, such movements are in general not
possible. This observation means that the component of optimal policy that targets inter-industry
misallocation losses is non-zero. In particular, equation (41) in Theorem 2 implies that
                                                            n
                                   across
                                   s      = (1/s - 1)s            i (i - s ).
                                                            i=1


                                                       25
                               n




                                                                  1      2                  n


                               1

                                                                                 0
                               0

            (a) vertical production network                       (b) horizontal production network

Figure 1. Horizontal and vertical production networks. Each vertex corresponds to an industry, with a directed
edge present from one vertex to another if the former is an input-supplier to the latter. The vertex indexed 0
represents the household.


Next, note that all industries in this economy are upstream symmetric, and in fact, since no industry
has a sticky-price supplier, s = 1 for all s. As a result, (40) reduces to

                                               within
                                               s      = (1 - s )s s ,

whereas (39) implies that

                                      o.g.                   1- ni=1 i i
                                      s    = (1/s - 1)s                      .
                                                                + 1/

Taken together, the above expressions imply that, consistent with the results of Benigno (2004) and
Woodford (2010), industries with (i) higher levels of price stickiness and (ii) higher shares in the
household's consumption basket receive a larger weight in the optimal price-stabilization policy.

Example 3. Finally, consider the economy depicted in Figure 2, in which industries s and t only rely
on labor as their input for production (s = t = 1) and are in turn input-suppliers to industries 1
and 2, with a1s = a2t = a < 1. To isolate the role of the network structure, we in addition impose the
symmetry assumptions that s = t =  and s = t =  and that s and t have the same steady-state
Domar weight, i.e., s = t = . Therefore, any heterogeneity across s and t only comes from the
stickiness of their respective customers 1 and 2 and the latter firms' other suppliers 3 and 4.
   As a first observation, note that since the two industries are identical in size and stickiness and are
upstream symmetric, they contribute equally to welfare losses arising from output gap volatility and
within-industry misallocation. Not surprisingly then equations (39) and (40) imply that the weights
in the optimal policy corresponding to output gap and within-industry misallocation losses are also
             o.g.     o.g.       within   within
equal, i.e., s      = t      and s      = t      .
   The contributions of s and t to across-industry misallocation, on the other hand, depend on
their downstream supply chains, which are not necessarily identical. In particular, an immediate
                                                       across   across
application of equation (41) in Theorem 2 implies that s      > t      if and only if

                                              (1 - 1 )1 > (1 - 2 )2 .                                    (43)


                                                        26
                                                     s        t

                                         3                            4

                                                 1                2



                                                         0

Figure 2. Each vertex corresponds to an industry, with a directed edge present from one vertex to another if the
former is an input-supplier to the latter. The vertex indexed 0 represents the household.


    To further clarify the nature of optimal policy, suppose that industries 3 and 4 are equally sticky, so
                                                                >   if and only if  <  . In other
that 1 = 2 . In such a case, the above inequality implies that s  t                1  2
words, all else equal, the optimal policy places a larger weight on the industry whose downstream
customer is stickier, as prescribed by Proposition 8. This is because by stabilizing the industry with the
stickier customer, the policy can reduce the need for the firms in the customer industry to adjust their
nominal price, thus effectively reducing the variance of pricing errors by more. A similar argument
                                                                                              >   if and
also illustrates that if firms in industry 1 and 2 are equally sticky (so that 1 = 2 ), then s  t
only if 3 > 4 , which guarantees that 1 > 2 .


5    Quantitative Analysis

In this section, we use our results in Section 4 to determine the optimal monetary policy for the U.S.
economy as implied by the model.
    Our analysis relies on two sources of data. As our first source, we use the 2018 input-output
tables constructed by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to determine the intermediate input
expenditure by various industries. The BEA tables also detail total compensation of employees for
each industry as well as each industry's contribution to final uses.
    The second source of data is provided to us by Pasten, Schoenle, and Weber (2019), who use
the confidential micro data underlying the Bureau of Labor Statistics producer price index (PPI)
to calculate the frequency of price adjustment at the industry level. The PPI measures changes in
producers' selling prices of all goods-producing industries including mining, manufacturing, gas and
electricity, as well as retail and service sectors. Pasten et al. (2019) calculate the frequency of producer
price changes as the ratio of the number of price changes to the number of sample months. We use
this data to obtain proxies for each industry's degree of price flexibility.
    We merge price-adjustment data with the BEA input-output data at the 3-digit North American
Industry Classification System (NAICS) level, while excluding sectors corresponding to finance,
insurance, and real estate. This results in a matched dataset consisting of 44 industries. The mean and
median price change frequency across industries are 23.4% and 19.4%, implying a mean and median
price duration of 3.75 months and 4.64 months, respectively. These frequencies and implied durations
are in line with prior estimates of price frequencies and durations produced by Bils and Klenow (2004)


                                                         27
and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008).24


Calibration.      We interpret each period as a quarter.                We calibrate the input-output matrix, A,
and labor expenditure shares, , so as to match the intermediate good expenditure shares and
compensation of employees by industry in the BEA input-output data, respectively. We similarly
construct the vector of consumption shares,  , to match final uses of each industry's output.
       In order to calibrate the model's vector of price flexibilities , recall from our discussion in
Subsection 4.1 that, due to the presence of strategic complementarities in firms' price-setting
decisions, the observed frequency and magnitude of price changes may differ from the underlying
degrees of price flexibilities. In particular, price adjustments by firms in industry i depend not just
on i but also on nominal price adjustments by i's suppliers, who themselves are subject to pricing
frictions. To account for this endogeneity, we thereby treat the observed price change frequencies
measured by Pasten et al. (2019) as the empirical counterpart of i i , where i is the degree of upstream
flexibility of industry i in Definition 4. We then back out the implied vector of price flexibilities .
       Next, we calibrate the volatility of the idiosyncratic productivity shocks in order to match the
average absolute size of price changes in micro data. Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) find that conditional
on the occurrence of a price change, the average absolute size of a price change is 11.5%. We thus set
the standard deviation of sectoral shocks such that the average standard deviation of price changes
match this number under complete information in our model. This procedure yields a standard
deviation of sectoral productivity equal to 8.8%.25
       We set the within-industry elasticity of substitution, , equal to 6. This number is consistent with
values commonly used in the New Keynesian literature, typically set to match steady-state levels of
markups. For example, Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Wieland (2012) set the elasticity of substitution
equal to 7 in order to match steady-state markups of 17% as estimated by Burnside (1996) and Basu
and Fernald (1997). Similarly, McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016) and Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Rebelo (2011) set the elasticity of substitution equal to 6, consistent with steady-state markups of
20%. While we allow for a subsidy in our model that eliminates all steady-state markups, we keep the
value of this elasticity in line with the rest of the literature.
       Finally, the preference parameters  and  are chosen as follows. We set the Frisch elasticity
of labor supply to  = 2; this value is consistent with "macro" elasticities of labor supply (Hall,
2009). As for  , note that risk aversion and intertemporal substitution play no role in our setting
as all choices are static and the representative household faces no uncertainty.                            Therefore, the
parameter  merely controls the household's wealth effect on labor supply. We thus set  = 0.1;
this value essentially minimizes the income effect on labor supply, similar to using GHH preferences
(Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman, 1988).
  24
     In particular, Bils and Klenow (2004) report a median duration of prices across all categories to be 4.3 months for posted
prices and 5.5 months for regular prices. For posted prices, Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) report the mean and the median to
be 6.8 and 3.7 months, respectively.
  25
     When they exclude sale-related price changes, Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) find that the average absolute size of price
changes falls to 9.7%. It is unclear whether one should exclude or include sales; we choose to target the number that includes
sales. Furthermore, we calibrate z to match the average size of price changes under complete information rather than under
incomplete information, as this yields a smaller standard deviation for zi .



                                                              28
                                  Table 1. Welfare Loss under Various Policies


                                                optimal          output-gap       CPI          Domar         stickiness
                                                 policy      stabilization      targeting     weighted       weighted
                                                   (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)

Welfare loss (percent consumption)                2.98              2.99          3.51           3.75           3.22
       within-industry misallocation              2.66              2.67          3.00           3.16           2.80
       across-industry misallocation              0.32              0.32          0.40           0.42           0.36
                                                       -5
       output gap volatility                      10                 0            0.11           0.17           0.05

Cosine similarity to optimal policy                 1              0.9957        0.5181         0.5929         0.6260

Notes: The table reports the welfare loss due to the presence of nominal rigidities under various monetary policies as a
percentage of quarterly consumption in the flexible-price economy. The various components of welfare loss are defined in
accordance with the decomposition in equation (35). The last row reports the cosine similarity between each policy and the
optimal policy defined as cos(,   ) =    /(  2 ·   2 ), where  and   denote the vector of weights in target price index
of the policy and the optimal policy, respectively.


Optimal Monetary Policy.          With the calibrated model in hand, we use our characterization results
in Section 4 to obtain the optimal monetary policy implied by the model as well as the associated
welfare loss. In particular, we use equation (38) in Theorem 2 to calculate the weights corresponding
to the optimal price-stabilization index, while using equation (35) to obtain the welfare loss due to
the presence of nominal rigidities under the optimal policy. This equation also provides us with a
decomposition of the welfare loss in terms of the various sources of misallocation as well as the labor
wedge. We measure the welfare loss in our sticky-price economy as a percentage of consumption in
its flexible-price counterpart.
   The first column of Table 1 reports the results. We find that the optimal policy generates a welfare
loss equivalent to a 2.98% loss in quarterly consumption relative to the flexible-price equilibrium, with
the largest component due to misallocation within industries accounting for 2.66 percentage points of
loss in consumption. The second largest component is due to misallocation across industries, which
accounts for another 0.32 percentage points loss in consumption. Finally, as the table indicates, under
the optimal policy, there is nearly zero welfare loss due to the third component: volatility of the output
gap.
   Table 1 also provides a comparison between the performance of the optimal policy and four
alternative, non-optimal, price-stabilization policies. The first of these is the policy that minimizes
the volatility of output gap. Recall from equation (39) that such a policy stabilizes a price index with
                 o.g.
weights given by s     (1/s - 1)s for all s, where s is the degree of price flexibility of industry s
and s is the corresponding Domar weight. As the second column of the table indicates, the policy
that minimizes the volatility of output gap generates a welfare loss that is equivalent to a 2.99% fall in
quarterly consumption. This welfare loss is incredibly similar to that under the optimal policy both in
magnitude as well as in decomposition.
   The third and fourth columns of Table 1 present welfare losses corresponding to two policies that
weigh sectors by size. The first of these policies, which is akin to targeting CPI or PCE, stabilizes the


                                                            29
                                                                                        CPI =
household's consumption price index, with weights that are equal to consumption shares: s
                                                                                          Domar
s . The second policy weighs sectors not by consumption shares but by their sales shares: s     
s . As is evident from the table, and in contrast to the output-gap-stabilization policy, these policies
result in materially larger welfare losses compared to the optimal policy: consumption-weight-based
price stabilization leads to a welfare loss equivalent to a 3.51% fall in quarterly consumption, while
the Domar-weights-based price stabilization results in a welfare loss equivalent to a 3.75% reduction
in quarterly consumption. Further note that, unlike the output-gap stabilization policy, these two
policies generate a non-zero welfare loss due to volatility of the output gap.
       Finally, the last column of Table 1 reports the composition of welfare losses under a policy that
targets a price index with weights proportional to the sectors' degree of price stickiness. The rationale
behind this policy--which applies the stickiness principle by placing greater weights on sticky-price
sectors and less weight on more flexible ones--is the same rationale that underlies the targeting of
core price indices. For this policy, we set the weights in the target price index based on the sectors'
"observed" degree of price stickiness, as this is the typical estimate of price stickiness without taking
                                                              sticky
the input-output linkages into consideration, i.e., s                   1 - s s for all s. We find that such a policy
generates a welfare loss equivalent to 3.22% of quarterly consumption. Thus, moving from the price-
stickiness policy to the optimal policy reduces welfare losses by 0.76 percentage points in quarterly
consumption.
       All four alternative, sub-optimal policies we consider are within the class of price stabilization
                         n
policies, in which       s=1 s log ps    = 0 for some vector of weights (1 , . . . , n ). One could, however,
consider policies that lie outside of this class. Quantitative explorations suggest that policies that
are not in the form of price stabilization result in significantly larger welfare loss relative to the
five policies presented in Table 1. This is not surprising given that the underlying flexible-price
economy is efficient. In the absence of inefficient cost-push shocks, there are no forces driving optimal
policy away from price stabilization; therefore any such non-price-stabilization policy only moves the
economy even further away from the efficient allocation.


Approximate Optimality of Output-Gap Stabilization.                    As already discussed, the welfare differences
between the optimal and output-gap-stabilization policies in our calibration are minuscule,
amounting to less than 0.01 percentage points of quarterly consumption. Crucially, the industry-
specific weights in the implied target price indices of the two policies are also very similar. This
similarity can be seen from Figure 3, which plots the weights corresponding to the two policies side by
side (normalized such that the weights in each policy add up to 1).
       To quantify the similarity between various policies, the last row of Table 1 reports the cosine
similarities between the optimal policy and each of the four alternative policies.26 According to this
metric, the optimal and the output-gap-stabilization policies are more than 99% similar--that is, they
are virtually identical. It is thereby no surprise that the difference in welfare between the two is
  26
    We define the cosine similarity between two policies as the cosine of the angle between with vectors representing the
weights in the policies' corresponding target price indices  and   ^. More specifically, cos(,  ^) =  / ^  2     ^ 2 . The
cosine similarity between two policies is always between -1 and 1, and is equal to 1 if and only if  and ^ are (positively)
proportional. If  and  ^ are element-wise non-negative, then cos(,  ^) is always between 0 and 1.



                                                            30
               Optimal policy
 0.15
               Output-gap stabilization


  0.1


 0.05


   0



             et nd r ica rod es




                                          er es
              Pi uck ans rta n


            bl ou an rta n
                       ct pt tra ng
                               es an n

                                              in s
                      , b C Ut ing



                             re xti cco




                                                    s


                                                    y




                                                   ng




                       Ra an e s res




                                                   ge
                     an ra Se et
                    He em e se ices




                             co cr ies
                                        od ion
                                                     r
                               tin ro ts
    No tic Ch coa ctiv cts


                         m er odu s
                               er ro cts
                    at Pri l pro ucts

                               et y m cts


                      ip nd ch ts


                                                    s
                                       ve es




                        Ai an e st rs




              a lin an rt n

                     in ng or on
                                ce sto on




                                                    s
             or ex as e fish s




                          pa Te ba n




           Fo icle ho fac ture
                                ag u s



                               oo le lls




                               an ur les




                        er era ea e



                      at an rt es




                                ca serv es


                          bl re spit s




                                                    n
                            Pa d p athe
                                       rm a




                                      pr etal
                    lic ubb l pr uct




                            M ppl nic




                             in fa al
          pp g, g d m




                            en ec er
                             er str tie




                   ga d Ho vice
                   l m ev s d d




                   Tr r tr spo tio


        Pu reh e tr spo atio
                            iti oil ctio




                  pe tr po tio
                                        to o




                                                io
                 um Prin er p duc




                 qu a Ma duc




                                       g le




                 m ist al tern
        nm s a em l p iti




                                                ic
                                   or anc
                                    fo d g




                  W il tr spo tor




                                   pt ra




                                                 c
                            W nd mi
                                                 i




       Ge d nd les uri




                ish si sp ti

                                                 i
               ra d b art e tra




                         Ac , re cilit
                                     e, cti




                          nd g du




                                    ar du




                                               o
                          s m F ic
                         m el in
      Su nin and an Far




                                               t
                         g, an tat




                         al ent rvi




                                             at
                          ev n ili




                                              v
                                              a




                                 m ea
                                   a ro
                                             d




                           W u ni
                                            h




                                            r
                                            t
                                p ro




                                          o
                                l a le




                                           i




                                         n
                                          t




                                p al




                                        s
                                        i
                            in p
                                      a




                                       s




                            ex d
                  t a ce x




                                     m
                                    re
                           r t di
                                   al




                         ag iv
                                   a
                        ed m




            te in eg
                                  o




                       m ca
                                ot




                                g
                                t,




                                 t
          M Oil stry




                              L
                              r
                            m




                           ch




                           th

             ts, an
                         iv
                         re




            l e ers




                         e
                         a
                      ou
                        a
                     Ap




           ne an
                     Fo




          en ing
         as m
         ca ut
                 od




                 ne
                 ic
                 al




       W Ad
      tri mp




     em rs
               h
               o
              la
            Fo




            br
             le




           ve




  us Nu
           W
            i




           el
         tro




         Fa


 El Co
        as




       isc


        or
     Pe


     Pl




    ot
    M
   ec




   M




Am
              Figure 3. Industry Weights under Optimal and Output-Gap-Stabilization Policies

Notes: The figure plots the weights assigned to each industry in the price indices corresponding to the optimal and output-
gap-stabilization policies. The weights for each policy are normalizes such that they add up to 1.


negligible. For comparison, the cosine similarity between the optimal policy and any of the other
three policies never exceeds 63%.
       It is important to note that, while the optimal and output-gap-stabilization policies are nearly
identical, this does not mean that welfare losses due to within- and across-industry misallocation are
immaterial. For one thing, as Table 1 illustrates, the bulk of the loss is due to these terms irrespective
of the policy.27 Furthermore, these losses are also not policy-invariant, as the magnitude of the welfare
loss due to misallocation between and across industries changes depending on the policy. Rather, the
similarity between the optimal and output-gap-stabilization policies is driven by the fact that, in our
calibration, the three components that contribute to the optimal policy weights in equation (38) are
more or less aligned, with cosine similarities that exceed 90%. In particular, cos( o.g. ,  within ) = 99.08%,
cos( o.g. ,  across ) = 92.07%, and cos( across ,  within ) = 90.01%.
       We conclude by noting that, as indicated by Figure 3, both the optimal and the output-gap-
stabilization policies place the greatest weight on certain service sectors--e.g.                           administrative,
health care, legal services, and hospitals--as well as manufacturing sectors such as computers and
electronics, machinery, fabricated metal products, and motor vehicles. The reason these particular
sectors command such large weights is due to the fact that they exhibit both large Domar weights but
low price flexibility. The service and health care sectors in particular comprise a generous portion
of the economy but are relatively sticky.28 At the same time, many of the largest sectors in the data
exhibit very flexible prices--examples include wholesale trade, oil and gas extraction, and petroleum,
coal, and chemical products. These sectors, despite being large and important sectors in the economy,
  27
      One can also measure the the contribution of each of the three components to the optimal policy weights using equation
(38). We find that while, on average, the term corresponding to output gap volatility ( o.g. ) accounts for 18.6% of the optimal
weight   , the terms corresponding to within- and across-industry misallocations are, on average, responsible for 75% and
6.4% of optimal weights, respectively.
   28
      See Bils and Klenow (2004), Dhyne et al. (2006), and Gorodnichenko and Weber (2016) for more evidence on the stickiness
of health care and service sectors in the cross-section (both in the U.S. and in Europe).


                                                              31
command less weight under the optimal policy than their size alone would dictate. Conversely, sectors
like apparel, printing, accommodation, and waste management are relatively sticky but are small; as
a result, stabilizing the prices of these sectors also becomes less of a priority.


6    Conclusion

In this paper, we study the optimal conduct of monetary policy in a multi-sector economy in which
firms buy and sell intermediate goods over a production network. We introduce nominal rigidities
into a rather canonical multi-sector, input-output model along the lines of Long and Plosser (1983)
and Acemoglu et al. (2012) by assuming that firms make nominal pricing decisions under incomplete
information about the aggregate state.
    Within the context of this model, we make two theoretical contributions. First, we obtain necessary
and sufficient conditions on the economy's disaggregated production structure and the nature of
nominal rigidities under which monetary policy can implement flexible-price equilibria and hence
restore productive efficiency. As an important byproduct of this result, we also show that these
conditions are violated for a generic set of information structures, thus concluding that, generically,
monetary policy cannot achieve productive efficiency. This is in stark contrast to the canonical one-
sector New Keynesian model in which, in the absence of inefficient shocks, the efficient allocation can
be implemented with price stability.
    Given that the first-best allocation cannot be attained generically, our second theoretical
contribution is thereby to characterize the constrained-optimal policy and to provide general
principles for the optimal conduct of monetary policy in the presence of input-output linkages. In
particular, we show that the optimal policy faces a trade-off between three components of welfare loss:
misallocation across sectors, misallocation within sectors, and volatility of the output gap. We find
that the optimal monetary policy is a price-index-stabilization policy with higher weights assigned to
larger, stickier, and more upstream industries, as well as industries with less sticky upstream suppliers
but stickier downstream customers.
    Finally, in a quantitative application of our framework, we determine the optimal price index for
the U.S. economy and find that welfare gains (as measured as percentages of first best consumption)
from moving to the optimal policy is rather large. In particular, moving from CPI targeting to the
optimal price index results in a welfare gain equivalent to more than 0.5 percentage points of quarterly
consumption. At the same time, we also find that, in our calibration, the difference in welfare loss
under the optimal policy and under the policy that stabilizes the output gap is rather negligible.
    Our theoretical and quantitative results can inform the policy debate around the appropriate
price level the central bank should target (Mishkin, 2007; Bullard, 2011; Thornton, 2011). There are
numerous measures of the aggregate price level; the indices most often considered by policymakers
are overall measures of consumer prices (the CPI or the PCE), measures of consumer prices that
exclude food and energy categories (core CPI or core PCE), as well as measures of producer prices (the
PPI). On the theoretical side, our results provide a formal framework to account for the disaggregated
nature of production in designing the proper target index.           On the quantitative side, the near
optimality of the output-gap-stabilization policy indicate that core inflation measures that discount

                                                     32
flexible price sectors (such as wholesale trade and energy) but also weigh sectors by their sales shares
are desirable stabilization targets.
   We view our paper as a step towards exploring the implications of the disaggregated nature of
production for the transmission and the optimal conduct of monetary policy. Several important
issues, however, remain open for future research. First, as emphasized throughout the paper, we
assumed that the underlying flexible-price allocation in our economy is efficient. While this was a
conscious modeling decision made in order to isolate how the multi-sector, input-output feature of
our economy fundamentally changes the policy prescriptions of one-sector New Keynesian models,
the role of monetary policy would be more complicated in an economy with an inefficient steady-
state, as the monetary policy faces an additional trade-off between stabilizing prices and substituting
for missing tax instruments. Exploring the implications of such a trade-off for the conduct of monetary
policy would be a natural next step.
   Second, a growing empirical literature has documented the propagation of real shocks --such as
natural disasters (Carvalho et al., 2016), trade shocks (Huneeus, 2019), and demand shocks (Acemoglu
et al., 2016)--over input-output linkages. We believe that similar empirical investigations on the
production network's role as a monetary transmission mechanism, along the lines of Ozdagli and
Weber (2020), would shed further light on how monetary policy can shape real economic outcomes.




                                                  33
A    Proofs
Proof of Proposition 2

First, we establish that if an allocation is implementable as a sticky-price equilibrium, then it satisfies
equations (14) and (15). To this end, first note that in any sticky-price equilibrium, the first-order
conditions corresponding to household's optimization problem are given by

                                                    V (L(s)) = c (s)w(s)                                        (A.1)
                                                       dC
                                             U (C (s))     (s) = c (s)pi (i )                                   (A.2)
                                                       dci
for all i, where c (s) is the Lagrange multiplier corresponding to the household's budget constraint.
From the above it is therefore immediate that
                                                            w(s)             dC
                                        V (L(s)) =                 U (C (s))     (s)
                                                           pi (i )           dci
                                             n
for all i. Furthermore, the fact that        i=1 pi (i )ci (s)   = m(s) for all s  S implies that the nominal wage
satisfies
                                                                  V (L(s))
                                              w(s) = m(s)                     ,                                 (A.3)
                                                               C (s)U (C (s))
where we are using that the consumption aggregator C is homogenous of degree 1.
    Next, consider the firms' price setting problem. In any sticky price equilibrium, the nominal price
set by firm k in industry i is the solution to the optimization problem

                         max       Eik [M (s) ((1 - i ) pik (ik )yik (s) - mci (s)yik (s))]                     (A.4)
                          pik

                          s.t.     yik (s) = (pik (ik )/pi (i ))-i yi (s),                                      (A.5)

where the expectation is taken with respect to the firm's information set and M denotes the
household's nominal stochastic discount factor. Note that we are using the fact that the realized
marginal cost of all firms in the same industry are identical, i.e., mcik (s) = mci (s) for all s  S and
all firms k in industry i. Plugging the constraint into the objective function and taking first-order
conditions implies that
                                                 -i
                                   pik (ik )                         i - 1
               Eik M(s)yi (s)                          (1 - i )                pik (ik ) - mci (s)      = 0.    (A.6)
                                    pi (i )                           i

On the other hand, note that U (C (s))dC /dci (s) -M(s)pi (i ) = 0 for any given industry i, thus implying
that the household's nominal stochastic discount factor is given by
                                                          1             dC
                                         M(s) =               U (C (s))     (s).
                                                      pi (i )           dci
Plugging the above into equation (A.6), we obtain
                                                             1-i
                             dC                pik (ik )                       i - 1         mci (s)
             Eik   U (C (s))     (s)yi (s)                          (1 - i )            -                = 0.
                             dci                pi (i )                         i           pik (ik )


                                                               34
Using the demand function yik (s) = yi (s) (pik (ik )/pi (i ))-i one more time, we get
                                                      (i -1)/i
                            dC              yik (s)                              i - 1           mci (s)
            Eik U (C (s))       (s)yi (s)                        (1 - i )                   -                    = 0.
                            dci             yi (s)                                i             pik (ik )
As a result, the nominal price pik (ik ) set by firm k in industry i is given by
                                                                  -1
                                                        i - 1          Eik [vik (s) mci (s)]
                            pik (ik ) = (1 - i )                                             ,
                                                         i                 Eik [vik (s)]
where vik (s) is given by
                                                                                 (i -1)/i
                                                      dC               yik (s)
                               vik (s) = U (C (s))        (s)yi (s)                         .
                                                      dci              yi (s)
Consequently, the nominal price set by the firm can be written as
                                                   1
                                     pik (ik ) = s       mci (s),                                                        (A.7)
                                                i ik (s)
where s
      i = (1 - i )(i - 1)/i is a wedge arising due to government taxes/subsidies and monopolistic
markups and
                                                        mci (s)Eik [vik (s)]
                                            ik (s) =                                                                     (A.8)
                                                        Eik [mci (s)vik (s)]
is the pricing error due to nominal rigidities. On the other hand, note that the firm's cost minimization
implies that
                                       mci (s) = w(s) (zi · dFi /dlik (s))-1 .                                           (A.9)
Therefore, replacing mci (s) in the above equation into (A.8) and using (A.3) thus establishes equation
(16).
   Next, note that
                                                                                                              -1/i
                                       dC       w(s)               dC        w(s)               yik (s)
               V (L(s)) = U (C (s))        (s)         = U (C (s))     (s)                                           ,
                                       dci     pi (i )             dci     pik (ik )            yi (s)
where the second equality follows from the fact that the demand faced by firm k in industry i satisfies
(A.5). Now replacing for pik (ik ) from (A.7) implies that
                                                                                            -1/i
                                                            dC       w(s)         yik (s)
                         V (L(s)) = s
                                    i ik (s)U (C (s))           (s)                                 .
                                                            dci     mci (s)       yi (s)
On the other hand, recall that the firm's cost satisfies (A.9). Therefore, replacing for mci (s) from (A.9)
into the above equation establishes (14).
   The proof is therefore complete once we establish (15). Recall that the household's first-order
condition requires that (A.2) is satisfies for all pairs of industries. As a result, for any pairs of industries
i and j , we have
                                                                                                 -1/i
                      dC        pj (j ) dC                 dC      pj (j )           yik (s)
                          (s) =             (s) = s
                                                  i ik (s)     (s)                                        ,
                      dcj       pi (i ) dci                dci     mci (s)           yi (s)
where once again we are using (A.5) and (A.7). On the other hand, whenever industry j is an input-
supplier of industry i, the cost minimization of firm ik implies that
                                     mci (s) = pj (j ) (zi · dFi /dxij,k (s))-1 .

The juxtaposition of the last two equations now establishes (15) and completes the proof.

                                                           35
Proof of Proposition 1

We establish Proposition 1 as a special case of Proposition 2. Recall from Definitions 1 and 2
that a flexible-price equilibrium is sticky-price equilibrium if all productivity shocks are common
knowledge. As a result, the right-hand sides of equations (17) and (18) are both measurable with
respect to ik for all k and all i. Consequently, (16) implies that ik (s) = 1 for all k  [0, 1], all i  I , and
all s  S . Plugging this into equations (14) and (15) then immediately establishes (11) and (12), thus
completing the proof.

Proof of Theorem 1

Suppose that there exists some feasible allocation that is implementable as an equilibrium under
both flexible and sticky prices. By Propositions 1 and 2, this allocation must simultaneously satisfy
equations (11)­(12) and (14)­(15). As a result,
                                                                           -1/i
                                                                 yik (s)
                                          f   s
                                          i = i ik (s)
                                                                 yi (s)

for all firms (i, k )  I × [0, 1] and all states s  S , where the wedge function ik (s) satisfies equation
(16). Since in any flexible-price allocation, the output of all firms in the same industry coincide, we
have yik (s) = yi (s) for all k  [0, 1], and as a result,

                                                  f   s
                                                  i = i ik (s)


for all (i, k )  I × [0, 1] and all s  S . Note that, by assumption, the scalars f     s
                                                                                 i and i representing
the fiscal policy are assumed to be invariant to the state s and do not depend on the firm index k .
Therefore, the above equation implies that ik (s) is also independent of s and k for all i, i.e., ik (s) = i .
   On the other hand, note that equation (16) guarantees that Eik [vik (s)(ik (s) - 1)] = 0, where vik (s)
is given by equation (18). As a result,

                                              (i - 1)Eik [vik (s)] = 0

for all i. But note that vik (s) > 0 for all s  S in any feasible allocation, which guarantees that i = 1 for
all i. Also, recall from the proof of Proposition 2, that in any sticky-price equilibrium, each firm's price
and marginal cost satisfy equation (A.7). Therefore,
                                                             1
                                              pik (ik ) =       mci (s).                                (A.10)
                                                             si

The above observation has three implications. First, given that the right-hand side of the above
expression is independent of k , it implies that all firms within the same industry set the same nominal
price. Thus, we can write pik (ik ) = pi (i ), with the understanding that pi (i ) is measurable with
respect to the information set of any individual firm k in industry i. Second, equation (A.10) also
implies that the marginal cost of industry i is measurable with respect to the information set of all
firms in that industry. Finally, it establishes that, whenever an allocation can be implemented as both a



                                                            36
sticky- and a flexible-price equilibrium, all firms employ constant markups to set their nominal prices.
Consequently, we can write i's nominal price as a function of industry i's input prices as
                                               1
                                pi (i ) =           Ci w(s), p1 (1 ), . . . , pn (n ) ,
                                            s
                                            i i (s)
                                              z

where Ci is homogenous of degree 1 and denotes the cost function of firms in industry i. Dividing
both sides of the above equation by the nominal wage, we obtain

                                              -1
                        pi (i )/w(s) = (s
                                        i zi ) Ci 1, p1 (1 )/w (s), . . . , pn (n )/w (s) .                (A.11)

We thus obtain a system of n equations and n unknowns, relating all industries' nominal prices relative
to the wage to the productivity shocks and the vector of wedges s . Since we have assumed that
labor is an essential input for the production technology of all industries, Theorem 1 of Stiglitz (1970)
guarantees that there exists a unique collection of relative prices that solves system of equations (A.11).
Hence, for any given industry i, there exists a function gi such that the nominal price set by firms in
industry i can be written as

                                      pi (i ) = w(s)/gi (s              s
                                                         1 z1 , . . . , n zn ),


where the collection of functions (g1 , . . . , gn ) only depend on the production technologies (F1 , . . . , Fn )
and are independent of the economy's information structure. But recall that the left-hand side of the
above equation is measurable with respect to the information set of all firms in industry i. Therefore,
a feasible allocation is implementable as an equilibrium under both flexible and sticky prices only if
there exists a function w(s) such that

                                       w(s)/gi (s              s
                                                1 z1 , . . . , n zn )   (ik )


simultaneously for all firms k in all industries i, a relationship that is equivalent to condition (19).
Finally, equation (A.3) guarantees that the nominal wage and the nominal demand are related to one
another via w(s) = m(s)V (L(s)) C (s)U (C (s)).

Proof of Corollary 3

Suppose all firms in all industries j = i set their prices under complete information. This means that
the aggregate state s is measurable with respect to jk for all k  [0, 1] and all j = i. Hence, by equation
(16), the wedge functions of firms in industry j = i are equal to

                                            mcj (s)Ejk [vjk (s)]   mcj (s)vjk (s)
                               jk (s) =                          =                =1                       (A.12)
                                            Ejk [mcj (s)vjk (s)]   mcj (s)vjk (s)

for all s. Let the monetary policy function m(s) be given by

                                                     U (C (s))C ((s)) dFi
                                     m(s) = M zi                          (s),                             (A.13)
                                                        V (L(s))      dli

for some constant M that does not depend on the aggregate state. By equation (17), such a policy
induces mci (s) = M for all s. As a result, equation (16) implies that ik (s) = 1 for all firms k  [0, 1].

                                                          37
This, alongside equation (A.12), therefore establishes that the above policy can eliminate all wedges
arising from nominal rigidities, thus reducing equations (14)­(15) to (11)­(12). In other words, any
flexible-price-implementable allocation can be implemented as part of a sticky-price equilibrium.
   The proof is therefore complete once we show that the policy in (A.13) stabilizes the price of
industry i. As we already established, such a policy induces mci (s) = M for all s. Thus, by equation
(A.7), pik (ik ) = M/s
                     i , which means that the nominal price set by the firms in industry i is invariant
to the economy's aggregate state.

Proof of Lemma 2

Recall from equations (A.7) and (A.8) in the proof of Proposition 2 that the nominal price set by firm k
in industry i is given by

                                                            Eik [mci · vik ]
                                                    pik =                    ,
                                                              Eik [vik ]

where vik is given by equation (18) and we are using the fact that s
                                                                   i = 1. Consequently,


     log pik - Eik [log mci ] = log Eik elog vik -Eik [log vik ]+log mci -Eik [log mci ] - log Eik elog vik -Eik [log vik ] .

Since the standard deviations of log productivity shocks in (21) and noise shocks in (22) scale linearly
in  , it must be the case that log vik - Eik [log vik ] = o( ) and log mci - Eik [log mci ] = o( ) as   0. As a
result,

          log pik - Eik [log mci ] = log 1 + Eik log vik - Eik [log vik ] + log mci - Eik [log mci ] + o( )

                                  - log 1 + Eik log vik - Eik [log vik ] + o( ) ,

which in turn implies that log pik - Eik [log mci ] = log (1 + o( )) - log (1 + o( )). Hence,

                                               log pik = Eik [log mci ] + o( )

as   0. Finally, the fact that all firms in industry i have Cobb-Douglas production technologies, as
                                                                                                            n
in (20), implies that their marginal cost is given by log mci = i log w - log zi +                          j =1 aij   log pj , thus
completing the proof.

Proof of Proposition 3

As a first observation, we note that since noise shocks                  ij,k   in firms' private signals are idiosyncratic
and of order  , the log-linearization of all industry-level and aggregate variables only depends on the
productivity shocks as   0. We thus let
                                                            n
                                               log w =           j log zj + o( )                                             (A.14)
                                                          j =1
                                                            n
                                               log pi =          bij log zj + o( )                                           (A.15)
                                                          j =1



                                                                 38
denote, respectively, the log-linearization of the nominal wage and the nominal price of sectoral good
i as   0. Furthermore, recall from Lemma 2 that the nominal price set by firm k in industry i is given
by (26) up to a first-order approximation as   0. Therefore,
                                 n                                          n      n
                 log pik = i           j Eik [log zj ] - Eik [log zi ] +               aij bjr Eik [log zr ] + o( )
                                j =1                                       j =1 r=1
                                  n                                 n      n
                          = i          j ik ij,k - ik ii,k +                    aij bjr ik ir,k + o( ),                 (A.16)
                                j =1                               j =1 r=1

where ik is the degree of price flexibility of firm k in industry i given by (24). Integrating both sides of
the above equation over all firms k in industry i implies that
                                        n                                   n      n
                      log pi = i i            j log zj - i log zi + i                  aij bjr log zr + o( ),
                                       j =1                                j =1 r=1

               1
where i =     0 ik dk   is the degree of price flexibility of industry i and we are using the facts that ik 
                        1
[0, 1] and log pi =    0 log pik dk    + o( ). The juxtaposition of the above equation with equation (A.15)
                                                                   n
therefore implies that bij = i i j - i I{j =i} + i                 r=1 air brj ,   which can be written in matrix form as
B =  -  + AB, where  = diag(). Solving for matrix B and using the fact that  = (I - A)1
lead to

                                         B = (I - A)-1 (I - A) 1 - L .                                                  (A.17)

Multiplying both sides by log z and using equations (A.14) and (A.15) then establishes that industry-
level prices satisfy (29).
                                                                            n
   To establish (28), note that log mci = i log w - log zi +                j =1 aij    log pj , which can be written in vector
form as log mc =  log w - log z + A log p. Using (29) therefore implies that

                                log mc = (I + A(I - A)-1 ) ( log w - log z ) ,

which reduces to (28).

Proof of Proposition 5

We prove this result in three steps. First, we solve for household welfare in terms of nominal prices and
the nominal wage. We then compare the result to welfare under the first-best allocation to obtain an
expression for welfare loss, given all nominal prices. Finally, we provide a quadratic log-approximation
to the welfare loss in terms of the distribution of firm-level pricing errors.


Expressing welfare in terms of nominal prices:                 As our first step, we obtain an expression for welfare
as a function of all nominal prices and the wage.
   Recall from equation (A.5) that the output of firm k in industry i is given by yik = yi (pik /pi )-i ,
whereas cost minimization implies that the firm's demand for sectoral good j is xij,k = aij yik mci /pj .



                                                              39
                                                                                                                  1                                     1
Therefore, total demand for sectoral good j by firms in industry i is                                            0 xij,k dk         = aij mci /pj      0 yik dk   =
aij pi yi i /pj , where
                                                                                       1
                                                                   i -1
                                                        i = mci pi                         p- i
                                                                                            ik dk.                                                         (A.18)
                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                          n
Hence, market clearing (7) for sectoral good i implies that pi yi = pi ci +                                               j =1 aji pj yj j .     Dividing both
sides by aggregate nominal demand P C and using the fact that pi ci = i P C , we obtain
                                                                             n
                                                             i = i +               aji j j ,                                                               (A.19)
                                                                            j =1

where i is the Domar weight of industry i. On the other hand, the household's budget constraint is
given by
                               n       1                        n                                  1                               n
           P C = wL +                      ik dk = wL +                 pi yi - mci                    yik dk    = wL +                  pi yi (1 - i ),
                            i=1    0                           i=1                             0                                   i=1

                                                       n
thus implying that P C = wL/(1 -                       i=1 i (1       - i )). Furthermore, note that the household's optimal
labor supply requires that L1/ = C - w/P . Therefore, solving for household's aggregate consumption
and aggregate labor supply from the last two equations, we obtain
                                                                                                               1
                                                                              n                            - 1+ 
                                                              1+
                                            C = (w/P )       1+        1-             i (1 - i )                                                           (A.20)
                                                                            i=1
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                  n                             1+
                                                              (1- )
                                            L = (w/P )       1+         1-                 i (1 - i )                .
                                                                              i=1

Plugging the above into (3) now characterizes household welfare as a function of all nominal prices
and the nominal wage via the expression
                                                                            1-
                                                 n                       - 1+                                                  n
        1       (1+ )(1- )                                                                          (1 -  )
   W =    (w/P ) 1+                         1-         i (1 - i )                           1-                       1-            i (1 - i )          ,   (A.21)
       1-                                                                                           1+
                                                 i=1                                                                         i=1

where i is given by (A.18) and only depends on nominal prices.


Welfare loss:     We now use the above expression to determine the first-best welfare W  under flexible
prices, which we then use to calculate the welfare loss arising from nominal rigidities.
    Recall that, in the flexible-price equilibrium, all firms in industry i set identical prices and charge
no markups, i.e., mc                                                       
                    i = pik = pi . Therefore, equation (A.18) implies that i = 1 for all industries
                                                                                                     (1+ )(1- )
                                                                                     +1/
i. Plugging this back into (A.21) leads to W  =                                                   
                                                                                 (1- )(1+1/ ) (w/P )
                                                                                                        1+      ,                      where recall that, by
assumption, w =       w .   Hence, we can rewrite (A.21) as
                                                                                 1-
                                                       n                      - 1+                                       n
                            
                               (1+ )( -1)                                                                 (1 -  )
         W = W (P/P )             1+           1-            i (1 - i )                        1+                              i (1 - i ) .                (A.22)
                                                                                                         1 + 
                                                       i=1                                                               i=1




                                                                         40
Similarly, we can use (A.20) to relate aggregate output in the sticky-price equilibrium to that in the
flexible-price equilibrium in the form of
                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                          n                     - 1+ 
                                                                 1+
                                       C = C  (P/P  )-          1+          1-                 i (1 - i )                  .                                 (A.23)
                                                                                         i=1

The juxtaposition of the last two equations now implies that welfare in the sticky- and flexible-price
equilibria are related to one another via
                                                            (1 -  )
                    W = W  (C/C  )1- 1 +                            1 - (C/C  )-(1+ ) (P/P  )-(1+)                                              .            (A.24)
                                                           1 + 

Second-order approximations:                     We next derive quadratic log approximations of our main equations,
(A.18), (A.19), (A.23), and (A.24), as   0.
   First consider equation (A.18). Taking logarithms from both sides and using the fact that log mci =
                          n
 log w - log zi +         j =1 aij    log pj implies that
                            n                                                                                                  1
                 log i =          aij (log pj - log p                            
                                                     j ) + (i - 1)(log pi - log pi ) + log                                         (pik /pi)
                                                                                                                                            -i
                                                                                                                                               dk.
                           j =1                                                                                            0

Consequently, under a second-order approximation,
                                       n                             n
                                                           1                              1
                         log i =                 ¯j - e
                                             aij e    ¯i +                 aij (1 - j )j + (2i - 1)i + o( 2 ),                                               (A.25)
                                                           2                              2
                                      j =1                          j =1

where e
      ¯i and i are the cross-sectional average and dispersion of pricing errors in industry i defined
in equations (33) and (34), respectively.
   Next, consider equation (A.19). Recall that i = 1 in the flexible-price equilibrium. As a result,
                                                                                                                               n
Domar weights in the flexible-price equilibrium satisfy i = i +
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                               j =1 aji j      and a first-order
approximation of Domar weights in the sticky-price equilibrium as   0 is given by
                                                                                     n
                                             i = (1 - log i )i +
                                                                                                
                                                                                             ji j log j      + o( ),                                         (A.26)
                                                                                 j =1

where   ji   is the (j, i) element of the economy's Leontief inverse L = (I - A)-1 . As a result,
             n                         n                        n                                      n               2
                                                      1                        1 2
log 1 -          i (1 - i )       =         i log i +                i log i -                              i log i        + o( 2 )
                                                      2                        2
          i=1                         i=1                    i=1                                      i=1
                                       n                    n       n                                            n                                  n             2
                                                                                                           1                             1
                                  =         i log i    +                   j ji log j
                                                                                                   log i -                 2
                                                                                                                      i log i
                                                                                                                                       -                i log i       + o( 2 ),
                                                                                                           2                             2
                                      i=1                  i=1 j =1                                             i=1                              i=1

where the second equality follows from replacing i by its first-order approximation in (A.26). By
also replacing log i by its first-order approximation in (A.25) and simplifying the result, we obtain
the following second-order approximation:
                   n                                                                     n
                                                                                 1
     log 1 -            i (1 - i )         = -(log P - log P  ) +                              i i i
                                                                                 2
                  i=1                                                                    i=1
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                          2                  (A.27)
                                                   n                        n                  n                           n
                                               1                1                                              1
                                             +             ¯2
                                                         i ei -                  i                       ¯j  -
                                                                                                     aij e                         i e
                                                                                                                                     ¯i       + o( 2 ).
                                               2                2                                              2
                                                   i=1                     i=1                j =1                     i=1


                                                                                41
                                                                  n                         n
where we are using the fact that log P - log P  =                       ¯i
                                                                  i=1 i e        +   1
                                                                                     2      i=1 i (1      - i )i + o( 2 ).
   Next, consider equation (A.23). A second-order log-approximation leads to
                                                                                                     n
                                  1                           1
              log C - log C = -       (log P - log P  ) -                                                  i i  i
                                 + 1/                     2(1 +  )
                                                                                                    i=1
                                              n                       n                              n            2                          (A.28)
                                                                                      2
                                          +           ¯2
                                                    i e i   -               aij e
                                                                                ¯j         -              i e
                                                                                                            ¯i            + o( ),2

                                              i=1                    j =1                           i=1

where we are using (A.27) and . Note that the above expression also implies that, up to a first-order
approximation,
                                                        1
                           log C - log C  = -               (log P - log P  ) + o( ).                                                        (A.29)
                                                       + 1/
   Finally, consider the second-order approximation of for welfare loss in (A.24) as   0. We have

                                                                   1                      1
   log(W/W  ) = (1 -  )(1 +  ) (log C - log C  ) +                     (log P - log P  ) -  (log C - log C  )2
                                                                  + 1/                    2

                  1 (1 +  )2                       1+
                 -          2
                              (log P - log P  )2 -       (log C - log C  )(log P - log P  ) + o( 2 ).
                  2 (1 +  )                         + 1/

To simplify the above, replace for log P - log P  in the last two terms from its first-order approximation
in (A.29) to obtain
                                                                         1                       1
        log(W/W  ) = (1 -  )(1 +  ) log C - log C  +                         (log P - log P  ) -  + o( 2 ),
                                                                        + 1/                    2
where  = (log C - log C  )2 is the volatility of output gap. Finally, replacing for log C - log C  in terms
of its second-order approximation in (A.28) leads to
                                    n                  n                     n             n                          n
                 1 (1 -  )(1 +  )                                                                         2                      2       1 + 
log(W/W  ) = -                            i i i +              ¯2
                                                             j e j -              i              aij e
                                                                                                     ¯j       -           i e
                                                                                                                            ¯i       +         + o( 2 ).
                 2     1 +                                                                                                                  
                                    i=1               j =1                  i=1           j =1                    i=1

Further simplification reduces the above to
                                                       n
                      1 (1 -  )(1 + 1/ )
        log(W/W ) = -                                       i i i + ( + 1/ )
                      2     ( + 1/ )
                                                      i=1
                                                            n
                                                      +          i vari (¯
                                                                         e1 , . . . , e
                                                                                      ¯n ) + var0 (¯            ¯n ) + o( 2 )
                                                                                                   e1 , . . . , e
                                                           i=1
                                                                                                                      +1/
On the other hand, observe that W - W  = W  log(W/W  ) + o( 2 ) and W  =                                          (1- )(1+1/ )       + O( ). The
juxtaposition of these observations with the above equation establishes (35).

Proof of Proposition 4

We start by stating and proving a lemma, which we will also use in proof in the proof of Theorem 2.
Statement (a) of the lemma establishes that even though in our model the policy instrument is the
nominal demand m(z ), as long as no industry is perfectly sticky, there is an isomorphism between
setting the nominal demand and the nominal wage w(z ). Statement (b) of the lemma then provides
conditions under which a policy can be implemented as a price-stabilization policy.

                                                                42
Lemma A.1. Suppose i > 0 for all i. Then, up to a first-order approximation,

(a)) an allocation is implementable by setting the nominal demand if and only if it is implementable
    by setting the nominal wage;
                                                                                                       n
(b)) if vector  = (1 , . . . , n ) satisfies   = 1, then the nominal wage log w(z ) =                  i=1 i log zi   can
                                                                               n
    be implemented by a price-stabilization policy of the form                 i=1 i log zi    = 0 form some vector
     = (1 , . . . , n ) .


Proof of part (a)    Is sufficient to show that, as long as i > 0 for all industries i, there exists a one-to-
one correspondence between the nominal wage w(z ) and nominal demand m(z ) for all realizations of
productivity shocks z . Since m = P C , it is immediate that
                                              1
                            log m =    1-           (log P - log P  ) + log P  + log C  ,
                                             + 1/
where P  and C  are, respectively, the consumption price index and aggregate output in the flexible-
price economy.      In deriving the above expression we are using equation (A.29) in the proof of
Proposition 5 to write the output gap in terms of distortion in the consumption price index.
   Next, recall from Proposition 3 that industry-level nominal prices satisfy (29). Therefore, the vector
of average pricing errors defined in (33) is given by

                  ¯ = (I - A)-1  ( log w - log z ) - (I - A)-1 ( log w - log z ) + o( ),
                  e

which can be rewritten as

                                            ¯ = Q(L - 1 ) log z + o( ),
                                            e                                                                    (A.30)

where Q = (I - A)-1 (I - ). Therefore, the fact that log P - log P  =  e
                                                                       ¯ implies that
                                        1
                  log m =      1-              Q(L log z - 1 log w) + log P  + log C  + o( ).
                                       + 1/
It is also immediate to verify that, in the flexible-price economy, the consumption price index and
                                                                                  1+1/
aggregate output are given by log P  = log w -  log z and log C  =                 +1/        log z , respectively. As a
result, up to a first-order approximation, the nominal wage and the nominal demand are related to
one another via the following relationship:
                          1                                    1                  -1
  log m = 1 - 1 -                      Q1 log w +     1-              QL -               log z + o( ).           (A.31)
                         + 1/                                 + 1/                 + 1/
The above expression thus establishes a one-to-one correspondence between w(z ) and m(z ) as long
           1
as 1 -    +1/    Q1 = 1. The proof is therefore complete once we show that this condition is indeed
satisfied. To this end, note that it is sufficient to show that 0   Q1 < 1. The fact that  Q1  0
is a straightforward implication of the fact that H = (I - A)-1 is an inverse M-matrix and hence is
element-wise non-negative. To show that  Q1 < 1, note that
                                                                          n
                             1 -  Q1 =  (I - A)-1 (I - A)1 =                   i hij j j ,
                                                                      i,j =1



                                                        43
where H = (I - A)-1 . Once again, the fact that H is an inverse M-matrix implies that the right-hand
side of the above equation is non-negative. To show that it is in fact strictly positive, suppose to the
contrary that it is equal to zero. This means that

                                                i hij j j = 0

for all pairs of industries i and j . But for any industry i, there exists at least one industry j (which may
                                                                                          n
coincide with i) such that j > 0 and hij > 0. This coupled with the fact that             i=1 i   = 1 and the
assumption that j > 0 for all j leads to a contradiction. Therefore, it must be the case that  Q1 < 1,
which completes the proof.


Proof of part (b)   Let  = (1 , . . . , n ) satisfy   = 1. We show that stabilizing the price index  log p
with weights given by

                                            =  -1 (I - A)                                               (A.32)

induces a nominal wage given by log w =  log z + o( ). To this end, note that the juxtaposition of
 log p = 0 and equation (29) implies that  (I-A)-1 (I-A)(1 log w -L log z ) = o( ). Consequently,
                                           1
                      log w =                                  (I - A)-1  log z + o( ).
                                 (I -   A)-1 (I    - A)1
                                                                      1
Replacing for  from (A.32) into the above implies that log w =             log z + o( ). Using the assumption
that   = 1 then completes the proof.


Proof of Proposition 4:    With Lemma A.1 in hand, we are now ready to prove the proposition. First,
note that the identity P C = m implies that degree of monetary non-neutrality satisfies
                                           d log P     d log P d log w
                                  =1-              =1-                 .
                                           d log m     d log w d log m
                                               n
On the other hand, the fact that log P =       i=1 i log pi   coupled with equation (29) implies that
                                                      n
                                         d log P
                                                 =         i i i = 0 ,
                                         d log w
                                                     i=1

where the second equality is a consequence of definition of 0 in (31). The juxtaposition of the above
equations with (A.31) then leads to
                                                                           -1
                                                             1
                                  = 1 - 0 1 - 1 -                     Q1        ,
                                                            + 1/

where Q = (I - A)-1 (I - ). To simplify the above further, note that Q1 = 1 - , which implies
that  Q1 = 1 - 0 . Consequently,
                                                     1 - 0
                                         =                       ,
                                               1 + ( - 1 + 1/ )0

which coincides with (32).

                                                       44
Proof of Theorem 2

By statement (a) of Lemma A.1, any allocation that is implementable by setting the nominal demand
m(z ) is also implementable by setting the nominal wage w(z ). Therefore, we first determine the
optimal policy by characterizing how the wage should optimally respond to productivity shocks. More
                                                                                                                                        n
specifically, we characterize the vector of optimal weights  = (1 , . . . , n ) in log w =                                              j =1 j   log zj
that minimizes the expected welfare loss in (35). We then determine the price-stabilization policy that
implements such a nominal wage.
   To calculate the expected welfare loss in (35), we need to determine the average pricing and
dispersion of pricing errors of each industry, defined by (33) and (34), respectively. In the proof of
Lemma A.1, we already established that the vector of average pricing errors is given by (A.30). To
determine the within-industry dispersion of pricing errors, note that since all firm-level nominal
prices within the same industry coincide with one another in the flexible-price economy, it is
immediate that the dispersion of pricing errors in industry i satisfies
                                   1                          1              2             1
                       i =             e2
                                        ik dk      -              eik dk         =             (log pik - log pi )2 dk.
                               0                          0                            0

Furthermore, recall from the proof of Proposition 3 that the nominal price of firm k in industry i in the
sticky-price equilibrium is given by (A.16), which implies that
                                                                                 n
                                                                        ik
                                                       log pik        =               bij ij,k ,
                                                                        i
                                                                             j =1

where matrix B is given by (A.17). Consequently,
                                                                             n                                     n
                                                         ik                                       ik
                       log pik - log pi =                   -1                       bij log zi +                        bij   ij,k .
                                                         i                                        i
                                                                           j =1                                   j =1

Therefore, the expected dispersion of pricing errors in industry i is given by
                                        n                         1                                       1
                               2
                     E[i ] =                  b2  2
                                               ij z                   (ik - i )2 dk +                         2  2
                                                                                                              ik ik dk
                               2
                               i       j =1                   0                                       0
                                              n                   1                                       1
                              2    2
                            = z                    b2
                                                    ij                (ik - i )2 dk +                         ik (1 - ik )dk ,
                                   2
                                   i        j =1              0                                       0


where the second equality is a simple consequence of the definition of ik in (24). Hence,
                                                                                                n
                                                              2 2          1 - i
                                                  E[i ] =     z                                       b2
                                                                                                       ij .
                                                                             i
                                                                                               j =1

   With the expected within-industry price dispersion and the industry-level pricing errors in (A.30)
in hand, we now minimize the expected welfare loss by optimizing over the vector  = (1 , . . . , n ),
                             n
where recall that log w =    j =1 j         log zj . Taking expectations from both sides of (35), differentiating it




                                                                           45
with respect to s , and setting it equal to zero implies that
                                n                              n                               n      n
                        2 2                    1 - i                      dbij     1                                d¯
                                                                                                                     ej
                        z              i i                          bij        +                          i j E e
                                                                                                                ¯i
                                                 i                        ds      + 1/                              ds
                              i=1                          j =1                                i=1   j =1
                                                                                                                       
                                               n           n                               n    n
                                                                            d¯
                                                                             ej                                   d¯
                                                                                                                   ej 
                                           +         i                   ¯j
                                                                   aij E e      -                    aij air E e
                                                                                                               ¯r       = 0,
                                                                            ds                                    ds
                                               i=0        j =1                            j =1 r=1


with the convention that 0 = 1 and a0j = j for all j . To simplify the above, note that (A.30) implies
                                      n
      ¯j /ds = - log zs
that de                               r=1 qjr ,      while equation (A.17) implies that dbij /ds = 0 if j = s. As a result,
                                                                                               
 n                                                            n     n                                 n   n
                1 - i    dbis         1
       i i                    bis -                                       i qij ( js - s )                      i qij 
                  i      ds          + 1/
i=1                                                       i=1 j =1                                   i=1 j =1
                                                                                                                                                  
      n    n             n                                n                    n           n    n                  n     n
-               i aij         qjr (   rs   - s )                  qjm      +         i               aij qjr                 aij qjr (   rs   - s ) = 0.
     i=0 j =1           r=1                              m=1                   i=0        j =1 r=1                j =1 r=1


Since the above first-order condition has to hold for all industries s, it can be rewritten in matrix form
as
                                                                                        1
                 diag()(I - )-1 (I - diag(Q1))(I - Q) +                                     ( Q1) Q
                                                                                       + 1/

                 +  A diag(Q1)Q +  diag(AQ1)AQ +  diag(Q1)Q + ( Q1) Q (L - 1 ) = 0,

where we are using the fact that B = (I - Q)(1 - L). Solving for  then implies that the vector of
weights in the optimal wage-setting policy is given by  =  /( ), where
                                                                1
                   =  diag()(I - )-1 (I - diag(Q1))(I - Q)L +      ( Q1) QL
                                                              + 1/                                                                                 (A.33)
                        +  A diag(Q1)QL -  diag(AQ1)AQL +  diag(Q1)QL - ( Q1) QL.

     Having determined the nominal wage that minimizes expected welfare loss, we next determine the
price-stabilization policy that implements such a nominal wage. First, note that since  =  /( ), we
have   = 1. As a result, we can apply statement (b) of Lemma A.1. In particular, the lemma implies
that the above nominal wage can be induced by a price-stabilization policy  log p = 0, with weights
given by (A.32), i.e.,  =  -1 (I - A). Hence,
                                              1
      =  diag()(I - )-1 (I - diag(Q1)) +         ( Q1) L(I - )-1
                                            + 1/
             +  A diag(Q1) -  diag(AQ1)A L(I - )-1 +  diag(Q1) - ( Q1) L(I - )-1 ,

where we are using matrix identities QL-1 (I - A) = L(I - )-1 and (I - Q)L-1 (I - A) = I.
Next, note that the definition of  in (27) implies that Q1 = 1 - . Therefore,

                                                        1 -  
      =  (I - ) diag() diag() +                                             (-1 - I)
                                                          + 1/
          +  (A - A diag() - diag(A1 - A)A) L(-1 - I) + ( ) -   diag() L(-1 - I).
                                                                             (A.34)


                                                                                46
To simplify the above further, note that A =  - (I - A)1, which implies that

                    A - A diag() - diag(A1)A + diag(A)A = diag()A - A diag().

As a result, equation (A.34) simplifies to

                                                    1 -  
             =  (I - ) diag() diag() +                               (-1 - I)
                                                      + 1/
                  +  (diag()A - A diag()) L(-1 - I) + ( ) -   diag() L(-1 - I).

Noting that  A =  -  and 0 =  , we can further simplify the above equation as

                                         1 - 0
 =  (I - ) diag() diag() +                           (-1 - I) +  ((I - ) diag()L + 0 I - diag()) (-1 - I).
                                          + 1/

The above expression therefore implies that the weight assigned to the price of industry s in the
optimal price-stabilization policy satisfies
                                                                        n
                                                     1 - 0
                  s = (1/s - 1) s s s s + s                         +         (1 - i )i i    is   + (0 - s )s ,
                                                      + 1/
                                                                        i=1

which coincides with (38).

Proof of Proposition 6

Since i and j are upstream symmetric, it is immediate that i = j . Furthermore, the fact that they are
downstream symmetric implies that they have identical steady-state Domar weights, i.e., i = j . As
                                                                                         o.g.         o.g.
                                                                                                        across   across
a result, equations (39)­(41) in Theorem 2 imply that if i < j , then i                           > j , i      > j      , and
within
i        within
       > j                                                                      > .
                . Putting the three inequalities together then guarantees that i  j


Proof of Proposition 7

Since i and j are downstream symmetric, they have identical steady-state Domar weights, i.e., i =
j = . In addition, recall that by assumption i = j = . Therefore, equation (39) implies that
 o.g.      o.g.
i       = j . Furthermore, equation (41) implies that
                                                              n
                          across       across
                          i        -   j        = (1/ - 1)         (1 - s )s s (    si   -   sj )   = 0,
                                                             s=1

where once again we are using the assumptions that i and j are downstream symmetric and that i =
j = . Finally, equation (40) and the assumption that i = j =  implies that

                                        within   within
                                        i      - j      = (1 - )(i - j ).

                      within
Thus, if i > j , then i        within
                             > j                  > .
                                      and hence, i  j




                                                             47
Proof of Proposition 8

By assumption, i = j , i = j , and i = j . Furthermore, the assumption that i and j are upstream
                                                                                                                                  o.g.
symmetric implies that i = j . Therefore, equations (39) and (40) in Theorem 2 imply that i                                              =
o.g.       within   within
j      and i      = j      . Turning to the dimension of policy targeting across-industry misallocation,
equation (41) implies that
                                                                 n
                           across   acorss
                           i      - j      = (1/ - 1)                (1 - s )s s (     si   -    sj ),
                                                              s=1

                                                                                >   if and only
where once again we are using the fact that i = j = . It is now immediate that i  j
if inequality (42) is satisfied.

Proof of Proposition 9

Suppose i = j =  and i = j =  < 1. Also suppose industry j is the sole input-supplier of industry
i and i is the sole customer of j . This implies that both industries have identical Domar weights in the
                                                                                o.g.            o.g.
economy's efficient steady-state, i.e., i = j . Therefore, by (39), i                  = j .
   The fact that j is the sole supplier of i also implies that i = j j < j , where we are using the
definition of upstream flexbility in (27). As a result, equation (40) implies that, in the optimal policy,
within   within
i      < j      .
   Finally, note that the proposition's main assumption guarantees that                         sj     =   si   + I{s=j } for all s. As a
result, equation (41) implies that
                                     n        n                                                            n
       across   across
       i      - j      = (1/ - 1)         t         ats (t - s s )(   si -   sj ) = (1/ - 1)                    t atj (j j - t ).
                                    t=0       s=1                                                        t=0

Note that, by assumption, atj = I{t=i} . As a result, the right-hand side of the above equation is equal
                                                                 across   across
to (1/ - 1)(j j - i ). Now the fact that i = j j guarantees that i      = j      .




                                                            48
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Ufuk Akcigit, and William Kerr (2016), "Networks and the macroeconomy: An
  empirical exploration." In National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual (Martin
  Eichenbaum and Jonathan Parker, eds.), volume 30, 276­335, University of Chicago Press.

Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2012), "The
  network origins of aggregate fluctuations." Econometrica, 80(5), 1977­2016.

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2017), "Microeconomic origins of
  macroeconomic tail risks." American Economic Review, 107(1), 54­108.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La'O (2013), "Sentiments." Econometrica, 81(2), 739­779.

Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La'O (2020), "Optimal monetary policy with informational
  frictions." Journal of Political Economy, 128(3), 1027­1064.

Aoki, Kosuke (2001), "Optimal monetary policy responses to relative-price changes." Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 48(1), 55­80.

Atalay, Enghin (2017), "How important are sectoral shocks?"            American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics, 9(4), 254­280.

Atkinson, Anthony and Joseph Stiglitz (2015), Lectures on Public Economics Updated edition, 2 edition.
  Princeton University Press.

Ball, Laurence, N. Gregory Mankiw, and Ricardo Reis (2005), "Monetary policy for inattentive
  economies." Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(4), 703­725.

Ballester, Coralio, Antoni Calv´
                               o-Armengol, and Yves Zenou (2006), "Who's who in networks. Wanted:
  The key player." Econometrica, 74(5), 1403­1417.

Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi (2020), "Productivity and misallocation in general
  equilibrium." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(1), 105­163.

Basu, Susanto (1995), "Intermediate Goods and Business Cycles: Implications for Productivity and
  Welfare." American Economic Review, 85(3), 512­531.

Basu, Susanto and John G Fernald (1997), "Returns to scale in U.S. production: Estimates and
  implications." Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 249­283.

Benigno, Pierpaolo (2004), "Optimal monetary policy in a currency area." Journal of International
  Economics, 63(2), 293­320.

Bergemann, Dirk, Tibor Heumann, and Stephen Morris (2017), "Information and interaction." Cowles
  Foundation Discussion Paper No. 2088.

Bigio, Saki and Jennifer La'O (2020), "Distortions in production networks." Quarterly Journal of
  Economics (forthcoming).

                                                  49
Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow (2004), "Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices." Journal of
  Political Economy, 112(5), 947­985.

Blanchard, Olivier J. (1983), "Price asynchronization and price-level inertia." In Inflation, Debt and
  Indexation (Rudiger Dornbusch and Mario H. Simonson, eds.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Bullard, James B. (2011), "Measuring inflation: the core is rotten." Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
  Review, 93(4), 223­233.

Burnside, Craig (1996), "Production function regressions, returns to scale, and externalities." Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 37(2), 177­201.

Candogan, Ozan, Kostas Bimpikis, and Asuman Ozdaglar (2012), "Optimal pricing in networks with
  externalities." Operations Research, 60(4), 883­905.

Carvalho, Vasco M. (2010), "Aggregate fluctuations and the network structure of intersectoral trade."
  Department of Economics and Business, Universitat Pompeu Fabra Economics Working Paper
  1206.

Carvalho, Vasco M. (2014), "From micro to macro via production networks." The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 28(4), 23­47.

Carvalho, Vasco M., Makoto Nirei, Yukiko Saito, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2016), "Supply chain
  disruptions: Evidence from the Great East Japan Earthquake." Becker-Friedman Institute working
  paper 2017-01.

Carvalho, Vasco M. and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2019), "Production networks: A primer." Annual Review
  of Economics, 11(1), 635­663.

Castro, Nicol´
             as (2019), "The importance of production networks and sectoral heterogeneity for
  monetary policy." Working paper.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011), "When is the government
  spending multiplier large?" Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), 78­121.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2012), "What can survey forecasts tell us about
  information rigidities?" Journal of Political Economy, 120(1), 116­159.

Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2015), "Information rigidity and the expectations
  formation process: A simple framework and new facts." American Economic Review, 105(8), 2644­
  78.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland (2012), "The optimal inflation rate in
  New Keynesian models: Should central banks raise their inflation targets in light of the zero lower
  bound?" The Review of Economic Studies, 79(4), 1371­1406.

Correia, Isabel, Emmanuel Farhi, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles (2013), "Unconventional fiscal
  policy at the zero bound." American Economic Review, 103(4), 1172­1211.

                                                  50
Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles (2008), "Optimal fiscal and monetary policy:
  Equivalence results." Journal of Political Economy, 116(1), 141­170.

Dhyne, Emmanuel, Luis J. Alvarez, Herve Le Bihan, Giovanni Veronese, Daniel Dias, Johannes
  Hoffmann, Nicole Jonker, Patrick Lunnemann, Fabio Rumler, and Jouko Vilmunen (2006), "Price
  changes in the Euro Area and the United States: Some facts from individual consumer price data."
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 171­192.

Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees (1971), "Optimal taxation and public production: I­production
  efficiency." American Economic Review, 61(1), 8­27.

Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000), "Optimal monetary policy with
  staggered wage and price contracts." Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(2), 281­313.

Eusepi, Stefano, Bart Hobijn, and Andrea Tambalotti (2011), "CONDI: A cost-of-nominal-distortions
  index." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(3), 53­91.

Foerster, Andrew T., Pierre-Daniel G. Sarte, and Mark W. Watson (2011), "Sectoral versus aggregate
  shocks: A structural factor analysis of industrial production." Journal of Political Economy, 119(1),
  1­38.

Galeotti, Andrea, Benjamin Golub, and Sanjeev Goyal (2020), "Targeting interventions in networks."
  Econometrica (forthcoming).

   i, Jordi (2008), Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
Gal´
  Keynesian Framework. Princeton University Press.

Golub, Benjamin and Stephen Morris (2018), "Expectations, networks, and conventions." Working
  paper.

Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert King (1997), "The new neoclassical synthesis and the role of monetary
  policy." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997 (Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds.),
  volume 12, 231­296, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Michael Weber (2016), "Are sticky prices costly? evidence from the stock
  market." American Economic Review, 106(1), 165­199.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Gregory W Huffman (1988), "Investment, capacity utilization,
  and the real business cycle." American Economic Review, 78(3), 402­417.

Hall, Robert E. (2009), "Reconciling cyclical movements in the marginal value of time and the marginal
  product of labor." Journal of Political Economy, 117(2), 281­323.

Huang, Kevin X. D. and Zheng Liu (2005), "Inflation targeting: What inflation rate to target?" Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 52(8), 1435­1462.

Huneeus, Federico (2019), "Production network dynamics and the propagation of shocks." Working
  paper.

                                                  51
Jones, Charles I. (2013), "Misallocation, economic growth, and input-output economics." In
  Proceedings of Econometric Society World Congress (Daron Acemoglu, Manuel Arellano, and Eddie
  Dekel, eds.), Cambridge University Press.

Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov (2008), "State-dependent or time-dependent pricing: Does it
  matter for recent U.S. inflation?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3), 863­904.

Long, John B. Jr and Charles I Plosser (1983), "Real Business Cycles." Journal of Political Economy,
  91(1), 39­69.

Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt (2009), "Optimal sticky prices under rational inattention."
  American Economic Review, 99(3), 769­803.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2002), "Sticky information versus sticky prices: A proposal to
  replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1295­1328.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis (2003), "What measure of inflation should a central bank target?"
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5), 1058­1086.

McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and J´
                                    on Steinsson (2016), "The power of forward guidance revisited."
  American Economic Review, 106(10), 3133­3158.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007), "Headline versus core inflation in the conduct of monetary policy." Speech
  at the Business Cycles, International Transmission and Macroeconomic Policies Conference, HEC
  Montreal, Canada. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20071020a.htm.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2002), "Social value of public information." The American
  Economic Review, 92(5), 1521­1534.

Nakamura, Emi and J´
                   on Steinsson (2010), "Monetary non-neutrality in a multisector menu cost
  model." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3), 961­1013.

Nimark, Kristoffer (2008), "Dynamic pricing and imperfect common knowledge." Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 55(2), 365­382.

Ozdagli, Ali and Michael Weber (2020), "Monetary policy through production networks: Evidence
  from the stock market." Federal Reserve Bank of Boston working paper.

Pasten, Ernesto, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber (2019), "The propagation of monetary policy
  shocks in a heterogeneous production economy." Journal of Monetary Economics (forthcoming).

Pasten, Ernesto, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber (2020), "Price rigidity and the origins of
  aggregate fluctuations." Working paper.

Rubbo, Elisa (2020), "Networks, Phillips curves, and monetary policy." Working paper.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1970), "Non-substitution theorems with durable capital goods." The Review of
  Economic Studies, 37(4), 543­553.

                                                  52
Thornton, Daniel L. (2011), "Core versus headline inflation: an opportunity for greater transparency."
  Economic Synopses.

Wei, Shang-Jin and Yinxi Xie (2020), "Monetary policy in an era of global supply chains." Journal of
  International Economics (NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics), 124, 103299.

Woodford, Michael (2003a), "Imperfect common knowledge and the effects of monetary policy."
  Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S.
  Phelps.

Woodford, Michael (2003b), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
  University Press.

Woodford, Michael (2010), "Optimal monetary stabilization policy." In Handbook of Monetary
  Economics (Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds.), volume 3B, chapter 14, 723­828,
  Elsevier.




                                                 53
