                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CLASS RANK AND LONG-RUN OUTCOMES

                                        Jeffrey T. Denning
                                         Richard Murphy
                                         Felix Weinhardt

                                       Working Paper 27468
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27468


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




We thank Sandra Black and Brigham Frandsen as well as participants of the Society of Labor
Economists Annual Meetings, the IZA Junior/Senior Symposium, the CESifo Area Conference
on the Economics of Education, University of Utah Department of Finance, and the STATA
Texas Empirical Microeconomics Conference for feedback and comments. Weinhardt gratefully
acknowledges financial support by the German Science Foundation through CRC TRR 190
(Project number 280092119). All errors are our own. Disclaimer: The research presented here
utilizes confidential data from Texas Education Research Center (TERC) at The University of
Texas at Austin. The views expressed are those of the authors and should not be attributed to
TERC or any of the funders or supporting organizations mentioned herein. Any errors are
attributable to the authors alone. The conclusions of this research do not reflect the opinion or
official position of the Texas Education Agency, Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board,
the Texas Workforce Commission, the State of Texas, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Correspondence: richard.murphy@austin.utexas.edu

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jeffrey T. Denning, Richard Murphy, and Felix Weinhardt. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Class Rank and Long-Run Outcomes
Jeffrey T. Denning, Richard Murphy, and Felix Weinhardt
NBER Working Paper No. 27468
July 2020
JEL No. I20,I23,I28

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper considers an unavoidable feature of the school environment, class rank. What are the
long run effects of a student's ordinal rank in elementary school? Using administrative data from
all public school students in Texas, we show that students with a higher third grade academic
rank, conditional on achievement and classroom fixed effects, have higher subsequent test scores,
are more likely to take AP classes, to graduate from high school, enroll in college, graduate from
college, and ultimately have higher earnings 19 years later. The paper concludes by exploring the
tradeoff between higher quality schools and higher rank in the presence of these rank-based peer
effects.

Jeffrey T. Denning                              Felix Weinhardt
Department of Economics                         DIW Berlin
Brigham Young University                        Mohrenstraﬂe 58
435N CTB                                        10117 Berlin
Provo, UT 84602                                 Germany
and NBER                                        fweinhardt@diw.de
jeffdenning@byu.edu

Richard Murphy
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway, C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
richard.murphy@austin.utexas.edu
1. Introduction


There is a large literature examining peer effects in education. This literature typically focuses
on either the benefits of high performing peers (Sacerdote, 2001; Whitmore, 2005; Kermer and

Levy, 2008; Carrell et al., 2009; Black et al., 2013; Booij et al., 2017), or the negative effects of

having disruptive peers (Hoxby and Weingarth, 2006; Lavy et al., 2012; Carrell and Hoekstra,

2010; Carrell et al., 2018). However, there is another mechanism, where having lower-

performing peers could improve student outcomes--namely a student's rank. 1 We will explore

a student's ordinal rank in their classroom and the persistence of this effect on their outcomes

into adulthood. Rank is an appealing attribute to study because it occurs naturally in any

group of people.

        We consider a student's academic rank in third grade (8 to 9 years old), conditional on

their achievement, on short and long run outcomes. We use the universe of public-school

students in Texas from 1994-2006 and combine this with an identification strategy that

leverages idiosyncratic variation in rank. We find that a student's rank in third grade impacts

grade retention, test scores, AP course taking, high school graduation, college enrollment, and
earnings up to 19 years later.

        Academic achievement and rank are highly correlated. So, to isolate the effect of a

student's rank, we develop the method used in Murphy and Weinhardt (2014/forthcoming) and

leverage the idiosyncratic variation in the distribution of test scores across schools, subjects,

and cohorts. We define a student's achievement by their test score expressed as a percentile of

the state population. We then compute a student's rank within their school, subject, and cohort

and express it as a percentile.

        Consider the following hypothetical: two students in successive cohorts of the same

size and mean attainment, at the same school, who have the same math achievement (as

measured by their place in the state-wide distribution). Because school cohorts are small

relative to the state cohort, there will be variation in the test score distribution such that one

student may be the fifth best student in the class while the other may be the eighth. This is the


1This can occur through various channels. These channels can be categorized as internal (learning about
ability, development of non-cognitive skills) or external (parental and school investments).

                                                  2
idiosyncratic variation we leverage to identify the effect of rank, which we argue originates

from sampling variation in the distribution of human capital within subjects and cohorts of

each school. This variation exists because these groups sample relatively small numbers of

students only so that distributional differences emerge by chance. 2

         Our idealized experiment would be to compare students with the same level of

human capital who are randomly assigned to different classrooms. Sampling variation would

lead to naturally occurring variation in rank for students with the same human capital. The

question of this paper is whether a student's outcome is dependent upon their rank in the

group. In this idealized setting this would be comparing students with the same pre-

determined human capital who have the same classroom setting in expectation. We discuss

this idealized experiment and its relation to our empirical strategy in detail in section 2.

        We perform a battery of further robustness checks to establish the underlying

assumptions are valid including balancing of rank on individual-level covariates, alternate

functional forms, and definitions of rank. We also present estimates for small schools where

there is likely to be one classroom per grade. We address any further concerns about

measurement error in student test scores resulting in rank being a proxy for student human

capital: we show that individual non-systematic additive measurement error in student test

scores, which would be non-rank preserving, would cause a small downward bias to our

estimates. Meaning that to the extent that test scores are a noisy measure of human capital

and student rank, our estimates should be interpreted as lower bound.

        We test for heterogeneous rank effects by gender, parental income, and race. We find

the impact of rank on male and female students to be very similar, regardless of outcome. In

contrast, we find that disadvantaged students (non-white or Free and Reduced Price Lunch)

are significantly more affected by rank than their advantaged counterparts. This is seen

throughout a student's life, affecting eighth grade test scores, high school graduation, college

enrollment, and earnings.




2Hoxby (2000) is an early example of a study using sampling variation in the context of peer effect
estimation. Importantly, the variation in the treatment of interest in this paper (rank) occurs within a
class which means we can condition on class effects.

                                                    3
          A natural question to ask is, why would third grade rank conditional on achievement,

impact these outcomes? One possibility is that humans think in terms of heuristics (Tversky

and Kahneman, 1974) and therefore rely on ordinal rank position rather than the more

detailed cardinal position within a group. Alternatively, ordinal rank may be easier to observe

than cardinal position. Regardless of the precise behavioral origins of the effect, its impact can

be seen in the findings that an individual's ordinal position within a group predicts well-being

(Luttmer, 2005; Brown et al., 2008) and job satisfaction (Card et al., 2012), conditional on

cardinal measures of relative standing. Hence, rank may also impact investment decisions and

subsequent productivity. In the education literature, this is known as the Big-Fish-Little-Pond

effect where individuals gain in confidence, when they are highly ranked in their local peer
group (for a review see Marsh et al., 2008). 3

          In this paper however, we are agnostic about what is driving the effects. We define the

rank effect to include any reactions to the rank a student acquires from entering a group by

any individual. For example, if teachers invest more effort in the worst (or best) students,

irrespective of their absolute performance, then this would be included into the rank effect.

Students may also adjust their effort as a result a of rank and hence change their academic

achievement which in turn changes their rank (Tincani 2017). However, this change in rank

operates through a change in achievement, whereas we are primarily focused on the effects

of rank conditional on achievement. In summary, anything that is a reaction to a student's

rank is a potential mechanism including student effort, parental investment, and teacher

investment. Predetermined confounding factors would need to covary with rank conditional

on achievement in order to generate a bias. We establish the lasting impact of elementary

school rank on long run outcomes. Note that, while we are agnostic about the mechanisms

that give rise to the rank effect, we do take great care in establishing that the rank effect is not

a product of confounding factors.

          Recent studies have documented that a student's relative rank affects short run

outcomes independent of achievement. Murphy and Weinhardt (forthcoming) document the

effect of primary school rank, conditional on achievement, on high school test scores and

confidence. Two papers by Elsner and Isphording apply the same idea to the United States


3   This has been referred to as the invidious comparison peer effect by Hoxby and Weingarth (2006).

                                                    4
using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (AddHealth)

to study effects of contemporaneous high school rank on high school completion, college

going (2017a), and health outcomes (2017b). 4 Zax and Rees (2002) consider the effect of peers

and other student characteristics, including IQ and rank within high school on earnings at

ages 35 and 53, using a sample of approximately 3,000 male students from Wisconsin. 5

        We make two contributions to this literature. The first is conceptual--we discuss

identification and threats to identification in ways that have not been discussed in this

literature. We also propose tests for and solutions to identification challenges that are common

to many papers in this literature. The second contribution is empirical. We extend the

literature by using administrative data on three million individuals to look at the long-term

effects of a rank at a young age (in third grade) on adult outcomes.

        Explicitly, we consider a student's rank at ages younger than have previously been

considered (age 8-9) on outcomes up to 19 years later. 6 Our large dataset allows us to examine

nonlinear effects of rank and we find that rank has a nonlinear relationship with outcomes in

several instances. We also consider the effects of rank in elementary school. Studying the

effects of rank in high school is interesting but conceptually different. Elementary school

students are arranged in classrooms where students share the same teacher, peers, and

curriculum for the majority of the day; whereas, high school students do not share the same

teacher, peers, or curriculum. Hence, rank may affect things like course taking (and peers),

which complicates the interpretation of rank in high school.



4 The AddHealth home-survey contains a sample of only 34 students for each school cohort, which are
used to compute a measure of rank (Elsner and Isphording 2017a, 2017b). More recently, there is a set
of working papers which estimates the impact of rank within college on contemporaneous outcomes
in various countries (Elsner et al. 2018; Payne and Smith, 2018; Ribas et al. 2018, Ribas et al. 2020,
Delaney Devereux 2019).
5 A distinct literature has studied the introduction of relative achievement feedback measures in

education settings. Azmat and Iriberri (2010) find that providing information on relative performance
feedback during high school increases productivity of all students when they are rewarded for absolute
test scores. In contrast, Azmat et al. (2019) find relative feedback in college causes significant short run
decreases in student performance, but no long run effects.
6 Murphy and Weinhardt (forthcoming) consider the effect of rank on test scores 3 and 5 years later.

Elsner and Isphording (2017a) consider rank in high school on college enrollment and graduation--
approximately 2 to 8 years later. Elsner and Ishpording (2017b) consider the effect of rank on risky
behavior as reported 18 months later. Murphy and Weinhardt consider rank at age 10-11. Elsner and
Isphording consider rank at age 14-18.

                                                     5
        Our findings contribute to a growing literature that documents how childhood

conditions affect adult outcomes. These conditions range from a child's health (Oreopoulos et

al., 2008), where a child lives (Chetty et al., 2016), the quality of a student's teacher (Chetty et

al., 2014), size of a student's classroom (Chetty et al., 2011), the age of a student when they

start school (Black et al., 2011), and the presence of disruptive peers (Carrell et al., 2018;

Bietenbeck, 2020) among others. We add to this list that a child's rank in their third grade

classroom, independent of their achievement, has meaningful effects on education and

earnings in adulthood.

        We find that rank effects are larger for historically disadvantaged groups such as non-

white students or students eligible for Free or Reduced Price Lunch (FRPL). One implication

of this is that, unlike linear in means peer effects, where moving students between groups

would have no net impact, rearranging students with rank in mind could improve overall

outcomes. However, this sort of exercise merits caution because the changes in classroom

distribution will have general equilibrium effects not accounted for in this paper (Carrell et

al., 2013).

        The more practical implication of this finding is that programs that move

disadvantaged students into `high quality' schooling sometimes comes at a cost that they will

be the lowest ranked student. The extensive literature on selective schools and school

integration has shown mixed results from students attending selective or predominantly non-

minority schools (Angrist and Lang, 2004; Clark, 2010; Cullen et al., 2006; Kling et al., 2007;

Abdulkadirolu et al. 2014; Dobbie and Fryer, 2014; Bergman, 2018). Our findings would

speak to why the potential benefits of prestigious schools may be attenuated among these

marginal/bussed students. We explore the magnitude of the tradeoffs between rank and

school quality in Section 7.

        To examine any such potential rank school-quality tradeoffs, we address the parental

question of which school parents should select for their children, given the existence of the

rank effects. We find that, if parents were to choose schools solely on the basis of mean peer

achievement, rank effects would reduce 39 percent of the potential gains for median

performing students in the state. In contrast, when choosing based on value added, rank

effects only reduce the gains from choosing a better school by 12 percent.


                                                 6
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 briefly sets out the empirical design.

Sections 3 describes the data. Section 4 determines the appropriate specification. Section 5

presents the results. Section 6 performs a series of robustness tests, and examines

heterogeneity. Section 7 discusses implications for school choice. Lastly, Section 8 concludes.


2. Empirical Design

    In this section we will discuss how to identify the effect of class rank. We will first discuss

the ideal experiment. Next, we will discuss how reality departs from this ideal experiment

and how that motivates our choice of specification.


    2.1. Idealized experiment

        Our idealized experiment would be to compare students with the same pre-

determined level of human capital who were randomly assigned to different classrooms.

Sampling variation would lead to naturally occurring variation in rank for students with the

same human capital. We are interested in whether a student's outcome is dependent upon

their rank in the group. In the ideal setting with randomization to classrooms, our identical

students would be assigned to classrooms that are balanced with respect to other

characteristics such as teacher quality, peer quality, test score distribution, etc. We then would

compare outcomes for students who with the same predetermined human capital but differed

in rank due to sampling variation to identify the effect of rank apart from human capital. 7

        With the ideal experiment we would estimate the following equation among students

with the same human capital. Let  be the outcome of student  who attended elementary

school  in subject  from cohort . Let  be a student's rank.

                                          = ( ) +                                                   (1)




7This sampling variation will cause changes in other relative measures of student achievement.
However, they are unlikely to be systematically related to rank. If other relative measures are
correlated with rank, they can be thought of as a feature of rank because they are inextricably linked
to rank, and so we consider to be part of the rank effect. For example, it would be difficult for a
student of very low ability to not have the bottom rank without the presence of other extremely low
ability students. Stated differently, if rank is always associated with some other feature of the
distribution, we call this the effect of rank. Rank can be thought of as a summary measure of ordinal
position.

                                                   7
        To identify () we would need a conditional independence assumption that   =

0 which would be true in the ideal experiment due to randomization. Equation 1 would

identify the effect of rank for students of fixed level of human capital. 8

        We could extend this to students with different levels of human capital by estimating

the following where  is a measure of human capital. 9

                                    =   +   +                                                       (2)

        Even in this ideal experiment we would consider all reactions to the rank of a student

as part of the rank effect. This includes reactions by students, teachers, parents, or other

students. Understanding the mechanisms for the rank effect is interesting but not the primary

focus of this paper.

        We replicate such an ideal experiment with an illustration. Figure 1 shows the Math

test score distributions of seven hypothetical elementary school classes. The classes share a

similar test score distribution, each has a student scoring 22 and 38 and have a mean test score

of 30. In four of the classes there is a student scoring exactly 35, however due to the

idiosyncratic variation in the test score distributions, each of these students have a different

third grade math rank, ranging between 0.7 and 0.9. 10

        Despite these similarities, reality departs from the idealized experiment in two ways.

We do not have direct measures of pre-determined human capital, and we do not have

random allocation to schools and classes. These two differences could yield omitted variable

bias if we simply compared students with the same achievement measure but with different

ranks. We now set out the specifics of how these departures could generate a spurious




8
 This also requires something akin to an "exclusion restriction" where assignment to classroom only
affects future outcomes via the effect of rank. In this ideal experiment this is likely to hold since
classrooms should be balanced on other factors such as teacher quality, school resources, etc. due to
randomization.
9Equation 2 adds an assumption that the effect of rank is the same regardless of human capital. This is

not required but simplifies the analysis. Moreover, assuming the same effect of rank across subjects
which is relaxed in the estimates shown in Figures 5 and 7.
10To compare ranks across classrooms of different sizes, we normalize rank to range from zero to one
(Section 3.2. for details).

                                                   8
correlation between rank and future outcomes to illustrate how our specification addresses

them.


     2.2. Measurement error in Human Capital

        First, we do not have direct measures of human capital, instead we use student

achievement in externally graded statewide examinations. 11 A concern is that despite having

the same absolute achievement measures (e.g. the same scores on the same test), these test

scores are a noisy measure of true human capital. Measurement error could be at the

individual level, or at the class level. Individual-level measurement error would attenuate any

rank effects as is common in many settings. 12 However, class-level measurement error in test

scores could generate a spurious relationship between rank and achievement. An example of

a class level measurement error would be a disturbance on test day. This class shock would

affect all students' test scores creating measurement error in our measure of human capital,
but would also be rank preserving.

        Class level measurement error in test scores, which is rank preserving, would make

rank a proxy for underlying ability, because the same absolute achievement measures in

different schools will reflect different levels of human capital. In this case, larger measurement

error would cause test scores to become less reliable, but would leave rank unaffected, which

would lead to rank acting as a proxy for underlying student human capital and generate a

spurious "effect" of rank. Since researchers always have imperfect measures of human capital,

one must include class fixed effect to account for any mean-shifting effects of the school




11 We use third grade test scores as it is the earliest achievement measure available. It is possible to
estimate the impact of later grade ranks on outcomes. However, as we find that future test scores are
increasing in previous rank, it means that later rank itself is an outcome and rank is self-perpetuating.
Hence, it is difficult to determine when a child's ranking has the largest impact. Ideally, we would
rank students based on a before-school measure of achievement. Rank effects likely operate not only
though the score on this particular exam, but more general performance in the class. We are
interested in the effect of rank in academic achievement and use third grade test scores as a
convenient summary measure.
12 Despite the measurement error in treatment being non-standard, as it will be correlated non-

linearly with achievement, in Section 6.2 (and Appendix Figure 6) we show that adding measurement
error to achievement and then recalculating ranks on this measure will lead to a downward bias.

                                                    9
environment such as teachers, resources, peers, etc. 13 We modify equation 2 to account for

potential classroom level shocks as follows

                                 =   +   +  +                                                        (3)

where  is a School-Subject-Cohort (SSC) fixed effect which we refer to as a class fixed

effect. 14

         The concern about measurement error of human capital can be extended to all rank-

preserving school-level impacts that affect test scores. Classrooms contain a bundle of

(potentially) rank-preserving treatments which impact achievement including class size,

teachers, the pre-determined human capital of peers, etc. This will impact the observed

measure of achievement of each student in the class, which can be thought as a form of

measurement error in the observed measure of human capital. All of these factors that

additively impact class level measures of achievement are accounted for with classroom fixed

effects. 15


     2.3. Non-random sorting

         The second deviation from the idealized experiment is that there is substantial sorting

of students to classrooms in the United States. We categorize sorting into two types: active

sorting and passive sorting. We define active sorting when parents (or students) choose their

classroom on the basis of exact rank. Passive sorting occurs when students are sorted to

schools for reasons unrelated to their rank but that may generate a spurious correlation




13 This accounts for any homogenous peer effect, such as `shining-light' (`bad-apple ') effects, in
which all students in the class gain (lose) from having high (low) achieving student in the class
(Hoxby and Weingart, 2006).
14 We do not have data on class records. We refer to school-by-cohort-by-subject as a classrooms

throughout the paper. In small schools with one class per cohort these are the same. We show in
Robustness Section 6.2 that our results apply to small and large schools.
15 The inclusion of classroom fixed effects reduces the amount of unexplained variation there is in test

scores, and makes student achievement a relative to the class mean measure. To illustrate that
variation in rank conditional on relative achievement remains Appendix Figure 1 plots math
achievement de-meaned by school and cohort against class rank. There is a large amount of variation
in rank for a given test scores throughout the achievement distribution. This can be considered to be
an extension to Figure 1, Panel B to all classrooms which have different distributions, de-meaned by
mean achievement.

                                                   10
between rank and other factors. If students are actively or passively sorted to schools then

there is the risk of omitted variables producing a spurious rank effect.

        Active sorting is only possible if parents can predict their child's rank at a school.

However, in practice this would be difficult. Two students with the same achievement, at the

same school, in different cohorts will often have meaningfully different ranks. Figure 2 shows

the distribution of class rank that a student with median statewide achievement would receive

in each of the 13 cohorts, by each school-subject group. Each school-subject is one column on

the horizontal axis which we have scaled from 1 to 100 for ease of interpretation. 16 The school-

subject groups are sorted such that median class rank of the state median student is increasing,

e.g. each school-subject have up to thirteen observations according to the class rank of a

student being at the state median, the median of these are used to sort school-subjects..

        We plot the class rank of the state median student at given percentiles

(10/25/50/75/90th) within the school-subject over the 13 cohorts. There is considerable variation

within a school subject group for students at the statewide median level of achievement. For

example, median state students enrolled in a school at the 50th Elementary School-Subject

group, could have ranks as low as 0.4 (10th percentile) or as high as 0.6 (90th percentile)

depending upon which cohort they enrolled in the school. This variation in rank would make

it very difficult to actively sort on the basis of rank difficult, even if parents had such

preferences, full information about the school environment, and exact measures of student

human capital before choosing a school. Hence, we think that active sorting is unlikely to be
a problem in our setting. 17

        Even though it is difficult to for a parent to actively sort their child into a school to

guarantee that a student's precise rank, the gradient in Figure 2 shows that in some schools a

student at the statewide median will consistently have a high class rank (right hand side) and

in others would have a low rank. If students with certain characteristics systematically attend

schools with a certain test score distribution, then this is what we refer to as passive sorting.




16   We collapse schools-subject values by 100 percentiles, but the conclusions are unchanged when
using finer data.
17 If motivated parents sorted on the basis of the mean attainment of peers, then this would be

negatively correlated with student rank and downward bias the effect.

                                                 11
       Passive sorting could generate a spurious rank effect. Panel A of Figure 3 shows two

types of schools, both with achievement approximately normally distributed with the same

mean, but Type A has high variance in student achievement and Type B has low variance.

There are also two types of students, and their type impacts their future outcomes

independent of rank e.g. disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged. The red line compare

represents two students whose achievement is the same distance below their classroom mean

in both distributions. Students at this point in high variance class will have systematically

higher rankings than students in the low variance class. If students are randomly assigned to

classes, then this rank will be uncorrelated with student characteristics. However, if non-

disadvantaged students more often sort into Type A and disadvantaged students more often

sort into Type B, then rank becomes correlated with student characteristics (in this case

disadvantage) conditional on test scores and class fixed effects. This would generate a

spurious rank effects due to the passive rank-sorting into certain types of schools. In this

hypothetical example, student characteristics are correlated with rank and future outcomes.

This highlights that distributions with different variance can generate a spurious relationship

between rank and student characteristics.

       This is a simple example where only the variance of the class differed. However, the

principal of passive sorting can be applied to schools varying in any higher moment of the

test score distribution. All that needs to occur is for students of a certain type and achievement

to systematically attend schools with distinct distributions from other types of students. If this

is the case, then rank can become correlated with student characteristics conditional on

achievement. Figure 3 Panel B provides another illustration of this, where two students with

the same achievement relative to the classroom mean will have different ranks due to the test

score distribution. As in the Panel A students in school type B will have a higher rank for a

given distance to the class mean. This is a problem if students of a certain type systematically

attend a school with this type of distribution.

       Note that we have discussed passive sorting with regards to student characteristics;

however, any factor that is systematically related to the test score distribution of the school

may cause a spurious relationship between rank and the outcomes. For example, there is

substantial segregation by income in Texas schools and so a low-income student and a high-


                                                  12
income student with the same human capital are likely to have different school environments

and distributions.

        As illustrated above, the inclusion of class fixed effects would not account for this

passive sorting based on higher moments of the distribution. The intuition for this is that by

definition every class has the same amount of high and low ranked students, and so these

fixed effects will be uncorrelated with the average rank in a class. Therefore, conditioning on

something uncorrelated with the treatment, rank, will not resolve this issue. One way to

address this is to control for predetermined characteristics such as gender, race, and income

to alleviate some of these concerns as shown below.

                              =   +   +  +   +                                                        (4)

However, it is unlikely that researchers can control for all relevant characteristics because

many are likely to be unobserved.

        Fortunately, there is a solution to passive sorting--researchers should make

comparisons among classrooms of the same type, i.e. with similar test score distributions. If

distributions are similar, then there is less scope for features of the distribution to be

systematically correlated with rank, and leaving variation in rank to be more likely due to

idiosyncratic variation. 18 To accomplish this, we modify our estimating equation by allowing
( ) to vary by characteristics of the test score distribution, indicated by  ( ).

                             =   +  ( ) +  +   +                                                      (5)

        In doing so, this addresses passive sorting through making comparisons among

similar distributions. If comparisons are among very similar distributions, conditional rank is

unlikely to be correlated with features of the distribution. This is close to our ideal experiment

where students only experience a different rank due to sampling variation in the test score

distribution, rather than systematic differences, because in the ideal experiment, students are

randomly assigned to classes. One way to achieve comparisons among similar distributions

this is to classify distributions of student achievement into groups based on characteristics of

the distribution (for example mean and variance) and interact () with indicators for these


18
  Note, if schools within a type all had exactly identical distributions, there would be no variation in
rank for a given test score, we still require sampling variation to exist within types.

                                                   13
groups of distributions. 19 Because student achievement is measured in percentiles and is

uniformly distributed, school mean achievement will be correlated to the skewness of the

school distribution. Low mean achievement classes will typically have positive skewness, and

high achievement classes typically have negative skewness. The skewness of a distribution

can be important for passive sorting; therefore, allowing for the impact of achievement to vary

by mean achievement could remain important even with SSC effects due to the correlation of
the mean and skewness.

         Interacting achievement with features of the class distribution is our preferred

specification. The identifying assumption is a conditional independence assumption which is
that  |  ,  ,   = 0.


     2.4. Specification Error

        The conditional independence assumption can be restated slightly. Consider the

following equation where  is specification error.

                        =   +  ( ) +  +   +  +                                                   (6)

        If there is any specification error, we must assume that it is unrelated to rank,  

 . 20 One example of a violation of this assumption is if different schools map current

achievement to future outcomes differently. As an example, in a high-achieving classroom

high test scores would lead to more four-year college enrollment and less two-year college

enrollment. In low-achieving classrooms, high test scores might lead to more two-year college

enrollment. If human capital has a different relationship to future outcomes in one school

versus another but it is modelled as having the same relationship, this would introduce error

into the model. If this error is correlated with rank then our estimate of the rank effect would
be biased.

        The solution to specification error is to allow the mapping of current achievement to

future outcomes to be very flexible. Allowing the way current achievement is mapped to

future outcomes to be flexible removes specification error from the relationship between rank


19 Another way would be to estimate equation 5 separately by groups of distributions and aggregate
the resulting coefficients.
20 This assumption is necessary even when students of different abilities are randomly allocated to

classrooms.

                                                 14
and future outcomes. Consequently, papers using this strategy should show robustness

exercises where results are shown for different flexible specifications of achievement. Stability

of estimates for different flexibly specifications of achievement is consistent with    .

        Our preferred specification will address the problems in the estimation of the effect of

rank. First, we include classroom fixed effects to address class level measurement error.

Second, we demonstrate that active sorting on the basis of rank would be impractical, and if

existent would likely downward bias the rank effect. Third, we show that passive sorting can

be addressed by comparing similar distributions. Fourth, we show that misspecification can

be addressed by flexibly controlling for the mapping of current achievement to future

outcomes. While we describe each of these issues separately, in reality they are likely to be

interrelated. For example, students could be passively sorted to schools which have different

mapping functions to future outcomes. Notably addressing passive sorting, will not

necessarily solve misspecification. We return to determining the exact specification of
equation (6) in Section 4.


3. Data

The data we use in this study is the de-identified data from the Texas Education Research

Center (ERC), which contains information from many state level institutions. 21 Data

concerning students' experience during their school years cover the period 1994≠2012,

although the primary estimating sample will focus on 1995≠2008. These data contain

demographic and academic performance information for all students in public K≠12 schools

in Texas provided by the Texas Education Agency (TEA). These records are linked to

individual-level enrollment and graduation from all public institutions of higher education in

the state of Texas using data provided by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board

(THECB). 22 Ultimately, these records are linked to students' labor force outcomes in years

2009-17 using data from the Texas Workforce Commission (TWC). This contains information




21For more information on the ERC see https://research.utexas.edu/erc/
22We do not observe out of state enrollment or enrollment at private institutions in Texas. Hence, if
higher rank causes students to leave the state we will underestimate the effect of rank on college
attendance.

                                                  15
on quarterly earnings, employment, and industry of employment for all workers covered by

Unemployment Insurance (UI). 23


     3.1. Constructing the Sample

The sample used for this analysis consists of students who took their third grade state

examinations for the first time between 1995 and 2008. 24 We focus on students taking their

third grade exam for the first time to alleviate concerns regarding the endogenous relationship

between class rank and previous retention. We focus on students taking their exams in

English, rather than Spanish. During this period, the third grade students took annual reading

and math assessments, although the testing regime changed. 25 Consequently, we percentilize

student achievement by subject and cohort. This ensures that the test score distribution for

each subject is constant and uniform for each cohort. 26 For each student, we generate a rank

within their elementary school cohort for math and reading based on their test scores
including those who had been retained.

        We link students to subsequent outcomes including performance in reading and math

in eighth grade. Because rank may affect grade retention, we estimate the impact on eighth

grade test scores only for students who took the test on time. We also consider classes taken

in high school, including Advanced Placement (AP) courses, and graduation from high

school. We then consider whether students enroll in a public college or university in Texas

(separately by two-year and four-year schools), if they declare a Science Technology




23 Unemployment insurance records include employers who pay at least $1,500 in gross earnings to
employees or have at least one employee during twenty different weeks in a calendar year regardless
of the earnings paid. Federal employees are not covered. We do not observe out of state employment.
Hence, if higher rank causes students to leave the state we will underestimate the effect of rank on
earnings.
24 Students are defined as taking their third grade exam for the first time if the student was observed

not being in the third grade in the previous year.
25 Until 2002, the Texas Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS) was used. Starting in 2003, the Texas

Assessment of Knowledge and Skills (TAKS) was used. The primary differences had to do with which
grades offered which subject tests. This does not affect this study substantively as all students took
exams in math and reading for 3rd and 8th grade.
26 Murphy & Weinhardt (forthcoming) show that when estimating rank effects, conditional baseline

achievement should be uniformly distributed to prevent the possibility of a certain type of
measurement error (that increases multiplicatively further from the mean), generating a spurious
rank effect.

                                                  16
Engineering or Mathematics (STEM) major, and whether they graduate from college. Lastly,

we examine earnings and the probability of having positive UI earnings.

        For binary outcomes, such as AP course taking, high school graduation, and college

enrollment, we define the variable as 1 for the event occurring in a school covered by our data

and 0 otherwise. 27 For earnings, we consider both average earnings including zeroes as well
as excluding zeroes.

     To maximize the sample, we consider as many cohorts as possible for each outcome. This

means that we have more cohorts for outcomes closer to third grade and fewer cohorts for

later outcomes. 28 For K-12 and initial college attended outcomes, we have 13 cohorts of

students who took their third grade tests between 1994 and 2006, giving 6,117,690 student

subject observations. For graduating college in four years we have 10 cohorts (1994-2003),

totaling 4,573,672 student-subject observations. For graduating in 6 years and post college

outcomes, for individuals aged 23-27 we have 8 cohorts (1994-2001), or 3,597,340 student-

subject observations, and 6 cohorts, or 2,647,240 students, for graduating with a BA within
eight years. This explains the discrepancy in sample size across different outcomes.

     Table 1 presents summary statistics. The sample is 47 percent White, 35 percent Hispanic,

and 15 percent Black. 70 percent of students in the sample eventually graduate from a Texas

public high school. 46 percent of students attend a public university or college in the year after

"on time" high school graduation. 29 Within three years of on time high school graduation, 23

percent attend a public four-year institution in Texas, and 31 percent attend a Texas

community college. When students are 23-27 years old, 65 percent have non-zero earnings,

where the average non-zero earnings is $24,818 in 2016 dollars.


     3.2. Rank Measurement

We rank each student among their peers within their grade at their school according to their

state percentile in standardized tests in each tested subject. Simply, a student with the highest

test score in their grade will have the highest rank. However, a simple absolute rank measure


27 As an example, for college enrollment a student who does not attend any college, or attends a
college out of Texas will be coded as a zero.
28 Results are similar when considering a consistent set of cohorts, see Appendix Figure 4.

29 On time graduation is defined as graduation if a student did not repeat or skip any grades after third

grade.

                                                   17
would be problematic, because it is not comparable across schools of different sizes. Therefore,

like state test scores we will percentilize the rank score individual i with the following

transformation:

                                         -1
                                =        -1
                                               ,     = [0,1]


where Njsc is the cohort size of school j in cohort c of subject s. An individual i's ordinal rank

position within this group is nijsc,, which is increasing in test score. Here, Rijsc is the

standardized rank of the student that we will use for our analysis and is the percentile rank

in their class (SSC cells). For example, a student who had the second best score in math from

a cohort of twenty-one students (nijsc=20, Njsc=21) will have Rijsc=0.95. This rank measure will

be approximately uniformly distributed, and bounded between 0 and 1, with the lowest rank

student in each school cohort having R=0. In the case of ties in test scores, each of the students

with the same score is given the mean rank of all the students with that test score in that

school-subject-cohort. 30 We will calculate this rank measure for each student within a test
administration.

     Note that this is our measure of the academic rank of a student within their class. Students

will not necessarily be told their class rank in these exams by their teachers, nor do we believe

that students care particularly about their ranking in these low-stakes examinations. Rather,

we interpret our test score rank measure as a proxy for their day-to-day academic ranking in

their class. Students learn about their rank through repeated interactions throughout

elementary school with their class peers (e.g., by observing who answers the most questions

or gets the best grades in assignments). 31 Similar arguments can be made for teachers or

parents learning about the rank of students.




30 Our main analysis limits the sample to students who took their third grade test on time. However,
their actual classroom consists of students who are on time and students who are not. In Appendix
Table 1 we show that our results are very similar when we calculate rank using all students and using
different methods to break ties.
31 We use rank in third grade as it is the earliest measure of ranking available. It is possible to estimate

the impact of later grade ranks on outcomes. However, as we find that future test scores are increasing
in previous rank, it means that later rank itself is an outcome and rank is self-perpetuating. Hence, it is
difficult to determine when a child's ranking has the largest impact. Ideally, we would rank students
based on a before school measure of achievement.

                                                    18
4. Model specification

        As described in Section 2, it is imperative that the correct functional form is used to

prevent specification error or passive sorting from causing a spurious rank effect. Therefore,

a key choice is the proper way to model (). There are two features that this function should

meet; 1) make comparisons among similar classrooms to avoid passive sorting; and 2) model

the relationship flexibly between current achievement and future outcomes flexibly to avoid

specification error. Put another way, what specification satisfies the conditional

independence assumption and yields rank that is conditionally as good as random?

        A natural way to test for passive sorting similar to a balance test in a randomized

controlled trial by replacing  in our specification with a predetermined characteristic. If

the conditional independence assumption is satisfied, predetermined characteristics should

not be correlated with rank. If observable, predetermined characteristics are not correlated

with rank, then it plausible that unobserved predetermined characteristics are also not

correlated with rank.

        We first start with a specification akin to equation (4), omitting student
characteristics, with a flexible function of achievement,   which does not vary by

school. Specifically, we include nineteen indicators for all-but-one (tenth) ventiles of student

achievement. This allows for non-linear relationships between prior test scores and future

outcomes. 32 To allow for the comparison across classes with similar distributions we then

interact student achievement with indicators for the schools location within the distribution

of schools according to mean and variance in achievement, akin to equation (5).

        Table 2 shows the correlations between student rank and the following student

characteristics; Male, Free and Reduced Price Lunch, English as a Second Language, and Non-

White. Each panel shows the correlations for a different specification; Panel A ≠ constant

impacts of ventiles of achievement; which then we allow to vary by; quartiles of mean school

achievement (Panel B); deciles of school mean achievement (Panel C), quartiles of school

variance in achievement (Panel D), deciles of school variance in achievement (Panel E), and


32In Figure 11 we show our results are robust to alternate functional forms. We chose ventiles as our
main specification as we did not want to allow the rank function to have more flexibility than that of
baseline achievement.

                                                  19
the interactions of the quartiles of school mean and variance in achievement (Panel F).33

Panels A-E show that rank is correlated with predetermined student characteristics. This

suggests that these specifications have issues with passive sorting. However, Panel F shows

that interacting 16 indicators for school variance and mean quartiles eliminates any imbalance
we have. Therefore, our preferred specification is

                20                         16    20

      =                (  = )  +                          =   ( =  ) + jsc +  
             =1,10                        =1 =1,10

                     +          (7)

Where  (  = ) denotes an indicator function, which takes a value of one when the ventile

of class rank  matches . This allows for potential non-linearities in the effect of rank on

later outcomes by estimating parameters ( ) for each ventile in rank omitting the tenth

ventile. We have defined  (. ) in a similar matter, by allowing for separate impact for each of

the ventiles of baseline achievement  , which can vary at the school distribution level,  .

Schools are characterized by their quartile in the mean achievement distribution, and quartile

of the variance achievement distribution, providing 16 school distribution groups, .

     Appendix Figure 2 shows the remaining variation in class rank for a given test score within

each of these distributions. This figure plots the class rank of students against their

achievement de-meaned by school within a subject, for each of these 16 types. The relationship

between rank and achievement resembles that presented in Appendix Figure 1, but we now

see that as the mean and the variance of classes change, the expected rank for a given test

score changes. For example, distributions in the top row (with the smallest class variance)

have a shallower gradient than those in the fourth row. Regardless, there still exists sufficient

variation in rank conditional on achievement even within these distribution types.

     In summary, using this specification (equation 7) we do not observe imbalance in

observable characteristics, and so assume the remaining variation in rank to be orthogonal to




33Using school mean has two advantages. First, it allows a different mapping from achievement to
future outcomes in different settings which deals with the issues of misspecification. Second, due to
the bounded nature of test scores, mean is generally correlated the skewness of a distribution.

                                                  20
unobservable factors that determine our outcomes. We show that our main findings are robust

to these choices in Section 6.1 below. We now present our main findings using equation 7. 34


5. Results

We will primarily present results of equation 7 by plotting the estimate coefficients,  ,

along with the 95 percent confidence intervals. All estimates will be relative to the tenth

ventile that includes students ranked from 45-50 in their class. Because there are many

estimates for each outcome, we present the results visually. 35


     5.1. K-12 Outcomes

We first consider the probability of repeating third grade. Panel A of Figure 4 shows that lower

ranked students are more likely to repeat third grade even after conditioning on achievement.

The impact of rank on retention decreases as the rank of the student increases. For those in the

lowest ventile of the rank distribution, they are six percentage points more likely to be

retained, which is double that of the next highest ventile. Moving a student from being ranked

last to being ranked in the lower 25th percentile reduces the probability for retention by

roughly 5 percentage points. Given the mean retention rate of 1.6 percent, this represents a

sizable shift how students are treated by their schools, independent of their human capital.

Once students reach the 40th class percentile rank has no significant impact on retention. This

suggests that at least some of the rank effect is likely coming from the way the school treats

low ranked students.

        We next examine the effect of third grade rank on achievement in eighth grade where

achievement in eighth grade is measured in state percentiles. Figure 4 Panel B shows an

approximately linear effect of rank in third grade on academic performance. Moving from the

25th percentile to the 50th percentile in rank (or from the 50th to the 75th) improves performance

by approximately 2.5 percentiles. This is similar to the estimates in Murphy and Weinhardt

(2014) that considers outcomes at comparable ages in England, finding the same change in


34
   Note that we observe two test scores for students' math and reading. For most outcomes we stack
observations so that each student has two observations. For outcomes that are subject specific we
estimate specifications that have both math and reading rank and achievement entered separately to
investigate if rank in math and reading have different effects.
35 The corresponding estimates and standard errors are available in table form upon request.



                                                21
rank at the end of primary school (age 10/11) improves performance national test scores at age

13/14 by 1.9 percentiles. This is estimated on students who took the test in 8th grade "on time."

However, as we have seen rank causes some students to be retained, it will also determine if

students are in this estimating sample. 36 Hence, when interpreting the estimates of the effect

on 8th grade test scores, one should bear in mind that the sample is selected on the basis of the

treatment. 37

        The results on eighth grade test scores are not novel, but they do corroborate that

similar rank effects occur in different educational systems, establishing the external validity

of each estimate. Moreover, they provide a mechanism for the later outcomes we observe. In

particular, student achievement in eighth grade is correlated with many outcomes including

high school achievement, class taking, college enrollment and success, and labor market
outcomes.

        Our first high-school outcome we consider is whether a student takes Advanced

Placement courses.      In the first two panels of Figure 5 (A & B), we use our standard

specification where the two observations for math and reading for each student are stacked,

such that we are estimating the mean rank coefficients across subjects. We see that elementary

school achievement rank positively impacts the probability of taking AP Calculus and AP

English. In both cases, these effects are driven by being highly ranked among classmates

during elementary school. The pattern and magnitude of the estimates are similar for taking

both AP subjects, with students around the 75th percentile being around 2 percentage points

more likely to take AP compared with the median student. Note, that the baseline rate for

taking AP Calculus and AP English for our sample is 8.4 percent and 19.0 percent respectively.

The exception that there is a discontinuous jump in the probability of taking AP Calculus if

the student is in the top ventile of their elementary school. Students in the top ventile are 6

percentage points more likely to enroll in AP calculus compared to the median ranked

student.




36Appendix Figure 3 that rank affects the probability of taking the eighth grade tests on time.
37To bound the estimates, one could consider that not taking the test on time as a the lowest possible
score, then our estimates would be a lower bound of the effect of third grade rank on eight grade test
scores.

                                                  22
       The second two panels of Figure 5 (C & D) consider the effect of elementary school

rank in each subject. To do so we control for achievement and rank in third grade math and

reading separately and simultaneously. Panel C shows the impact on taking AP Calculus. A

higher rank in math causes more students to take AP Calculus. Most of this effect occurs for

students above the median in rank; whereas, below the median there are only small difference

in the probability of taking AP Calculus. In contrast, a student's rank in reading has very little

effect on taking AP Calculus for students with rank above or below the median. The final

panel (Panel D) shows the impact of rank on taking AP English courses. As before, rank in

Math has a stronger effect than rank in reading. However, here having a high rank in reading

does positively impact the probability of taking AP English Courses. This is evidence that

some rank effects are subject specific and some rank effects have spillover effects onto other

subjects.

       The final set of K-12 outcomes we consider is whether a student graduated from high

school. The time frame we consider is within three years of "on time" high school graduation

which is defined by nine years after their third grade to avoid issues of grade retention. In our

sample, 70 percent graduate from high school by this definition. The impact of third grade

rank on high school graduation can be seen in Figure 6 Panel A. A higher rank makes students

more likely to graduate from high school. The effect is approximately linear, with impact of

rank gradually declining as rank increases. Moving from the 25th to 75th percentile in rank
increases the probability of graduating from a public Texas high school by 4 percentage points.

   In summary, a student's rank in third grade independently affects grade retention, testing

performance 5 years later, class selection, and ultimately graduation. As we examine longer

term outcomes, these changes throughout schooling will be some of the channels that affect

things such as college education and earnings.


   5.2. College Outcomes

After high school students face the choice of entering post-secondary education. Figure 6

Panel B presents enrollment in any public college in Texas. Rank has a largely linear effect on

the probability of enrolling in college in Texas. Moving from the 25th to 75th percentile in rank

leads to an approximately 4 percentage point increase in college going. However, there is a



                                               23
discontinuous fall in the likelihood of attending college if students were in the lowest ventile,

compared to the penultimate ventile of 1.5 percentage points.

     To understand this pattern better, we consider enrollment in two-year and four-year

schools separately in Figure 6 Panels C and D. Figure 6 Panel C considers enrollment in two-

year institutions. Having a low rank reduces the probability of going to community college;

whereas high rank is not strongly correlated with attending community college. Again, there

is a discontinuous fall in the likelihood of attending college if students were in the lowest

ventile. Those in the bottom ventile are 4 percentage points less likely to enroll in community

college compared the baseline enrollment rate of 31 percent. Figure 6 Panel D shows the

impact on enrollment in a four-year institution. Enrollment is increasing in rank, and this is

driven by primarily by students ranked above the median with the effect of rank increasing

in rank. The contrast of the effects of enrollment by school type is likely driven by who is at

the margin of attending a community college versus a four-year institution.

     Once at college, students can declare a major. Given the significant returns to STEM majors

we now estimate the ultimate impact of third grade rank on the probability of a student

declaring a STEM as their first major. Figure 7 Panel A shows that there is a comparatively

small positive relationship between students' rank in elementary school and their likelihood

of choosing a STEM major which is driven largely by top ranked students. 38 Like AP choice in

high school, major choice is likely to be impacted by students' rankings in particular subjects,

and this previous estimate is the average effect of both reading and math ranks. To explore

this, Panel B of Figure 7 presents the impacts of third grade math and reading rank on

declaring a STEM major. Here we find that the relationship is entirely driven by math rank,

with top ranked math students over 2 percent more likely to choose STEM, with the mean

STEM uptake rate of 4 percent. In contrast, neither top or bottom reading rank impacts the

probability of declaring a STEM major.

     Continuing with post-secondary outcomes, the panels in Figure 8 considers graduation

with a bachelor's degree within various time frames--4 years (Panel A), 6 years (Panel B), and



38We code students who declare a STEM major as 1 and students who do not (including students
who do not enroll in college) as 0. Hence, estimates will conflate the effect of rank college enrollment
and declaring a STEM major.

                                                   24
8 years (Panel C) after "on-time" graduation from high school We find that students with

higher rank in elementary school are more likely to graduate with a bachelor's degree.

Consistent with the effects on enrollment, the effect of rank is largely driven by rank above

the median. The impact of being top of class in terms of percentage points is smallest for

graduating within 4 years at 2.4 percentage points relative to the median ranked student,

compared to 3.4 and 3.3 percent for six and eight years respectively.


     5.3. Labor Market Outcomes

We consider the effects of rank on a range of labor market outcomes. First, we examine

employment outcomes for students ages 23-27 (or 15-18 years after third grade). We consider

average annual earnings between the ages for eight cohorts of students who took their third

grade examinations between 1994-2001 (employment years 2009-2016). 39 The first panel in

Figure 9 considers the probability of having positive earnings from age 23-27. A value of 1

would mean having positive recorded in each of these years, a value of 0 would mean having

no recorded earnings between ages 23 and 27. The pattern in Panel A suggests there is little

effect of rank on the probability of having positive earnings except for the lowest ranked

students who are 1 percentage points less likely to record positive earnings than the median
ranked student. 40

The remaining panels of Figure 9 refer to the effect of rank on earnings. Panel B shows that

increasing rank increases average annual earnings between the ages of 23-27. Low ranked

students have meaningful earnings penalties, earning $1,850 per year less than the median

ranked student. High ranked students see increases in earnings as well with the highest

ranked students earning $1,200 more per year than the median student. The lower two panels

show the effect on non-zero earnings and log earnings (Panels C and D respectively).

Conditional on having positive earnings, we find the negative impact of having a low rank is

exacerbated. Students at the bottom now earn $1,250 less per year, compared to students in

the middle of the rank distribution. Taking the log of average annual earnings shows that rank



39 Note, not all individuals have four years over which to average employment. Those from the most
recent cohort only have one year of labor outcomes, for instance. We average over all years from age
23 to 27 for which we have earnings. Appendix Figure 4 Panel D, shows the impact on log earnings for
the 8 cohorts of student for which we have all five years of earnings (who took third grade 1994-2001).
40 This shows rank does not cause differential attrition from our earnings sample.



                                                  25
affects the log of average earnings throughout the distribution of rank. Taken together, a

student's rank in third grade affects labor market outcomes. Moving from the 25th percentile

to the 75th percentile in rank causes log earnings to increase by approximately 7 log points.




6. Robustness

In Section 2 we discussed the concerns relating to correctly specifying the functional so that

omitted factors are not driving the results. In section 4 we used balancing regressions to

empirically inform the choice of functional form for our regressions. In this section we show

that our results are robust to several alternative specifications, as well as to different samples,

rank definitions and measurement error in baseline ability.


     6.1. Functional form choices

        First, we model the relationship between achievement and outcomes using various

functional forms. Figure 10 presents results for four main outcomes, eighth grade test scores,

graduation from high school, the probability of attending any college, and log earnings. The

point estimates are displayed for various functional forms of student achievement, interacted

with sixteen indicators for school mean and variance quartiles. In addition to our main

specification (which controls for achievement using ventiles in student achievement

interacted with indicators for classroom distribution type), we model student achievement

using various polynomials from first order to a sixth order interacted with indicators for

classroom distribution type. The results are substantively similar once achievement is

controlled for with a quadratic--the magnitude does vary somewhat across specifications, but

the direction of the relationship is consistent. 41 Hence, our results that rank has a lasting

impact on student outcomes are not dependent on the exact functional form chosen to model

achievement.

        In addition to choices of non linearity in  (), we also allow of the impact of prior

achievement to vary by the school achievement distribution. We have shown in Section 4 and



41The fact that only allowing for a linear impact of percentile rank leads to different estimates may be
reflective of the pre-determined human capital distribution being normally distributed, which we have
transformed into a uniform distribution through percentalization.

                                                  26
Table 2 that the interaction of achievement with 16 indicators for school mean and variance,

results in observable covariate balance. As a result, we use this as our main specification.

However, we show that our results are not dependent on this specific functional form  () for

most outocmes.

       Appendix Table 2 repeats the six interactions of achievement with ways of classifying

school distributions and shows how these impact the estimates on outcomes. Looking at either

end of our outcomes chronologically, we can see that the positive impact of rank on repeating

3rd grade, 8th grade test scores, high school graduation and log wages remains regardless of

exact specification. The coefficients tend to increase in magnitude as we allow for more flexible

interactions with achievement. This is consistent with the imbalance in rank found in Table 2,

where more disadvantaged students appeared to have higher rank conditional on

achievement, and this imbalance decreased once we allowed for more flexible functional form.

Despite these slight differences between specifications the estimates are largely consistent.

       Two outcomes are different when comparing our preferred specification to the other

specifications, any college and graduation with a bachelor's degree. In both cases, the

coefficient on rank becomes negative if we do not allow the impact of achievement to vary by

test score distribution. We investigate the sources of this bias in Appendix Figure 5. For the

uninteracted specification where there is imbalance, estimates of the effect of rank are very

similar when controlling for predetermined characteristics relative to not controlling for them.

This suggests that imbalance in predetermined covariates is not generating this bias in the

estimates: This highlights the importance of functional form, because the bias in these

estimates likely arises due to misspecification of the  () function, where there are different

mappings of achievement to outcomes across schools. While the imbalance in student

characteristics is not driving the bias we observe, imbalance may be correlated to school

unobservables which impact the mapping into future outcomes. Therefore, while

misspecification and balance are independent concerns, they may often be linked.


   6.2. Miscellaneous robustness checks: school size, breaking ties, measurement error

       One data limitation is that we do not observe which classroom students are taught in

for third-grade students. Hence, our main results use fixed effects for school-subject-cohort

(SSC), which we have been referring to as a class. Moreover, given that we are using the

                                               27
sampling variation in the test score distribution one may be concerned that the results are

driven by schools with smaller cohorts as they would experience more sampling variation.

Therefore, as a robustness check, we estimate the effects separately by the number of students

in the third-grade school-subject-cohort. Figure 11 presents the point estimates for under 30,

under 50, 50-75 students, 75-100 students, and 100+ students in an SSC. While the effects tend

to be larger for the larger schools, the pattern of results remain regardless of school size.

Moreover, the students in schools with fewer than 30 students per school-subject-cohort are

likely to all be in the same class during third grade, and the results hold.

        In our main specification, we handle ties in rank by assigning students the mean of the

rank. We consider other methods including breaking ties including assigning the lowest rank,

randomly breaking ties, and a rank only among students who are "on-time" in third grade.

Our results are qualitatively similar regardless of our method of dealing with ties. The results

tend to be slightly smaller when we break ties randomly, which we attribute to the
introduction of noise into our measure of rank (See Appendix Table 1).

        We use third-grade student achievement on externally graded state examinations as

a measure of human capital of each student. The rank of each student within their class is

derived from their test score and all the test scores of their class peers. This means that any

individual non-systematic measurement error in student test scores has impacts on the two

key explanatory variables rank and achievement. 42 Moreover this measurement error will be

correlated. For example, if a student `got lucky' in an examination, we would record them as

having a higher level of human capital and potentially a higher rank than they actually have.

Note that measurement error in a test scores does not necessarily mean there will be

measurement error in rank, because it may not cause the rank of the student to change if they

are sufficiently far (in achievement) from other students. The concern therefore in this

situation is that again our rank measurement is simply acting as a less noisy measure of

human capital. In addition to this situation, any measurement error in peers test scores will

generate additional measurement error in the rank measurement. The combination of these

factors makes this a non-standard measurement error problem.



42We address any systematic measurement error at the class level, due to class level shocks, with the
inclusion of class fixed effects. This is critical as such shocks would be rank preserving.

                                                  28
       Murphy and Weinhardt (forthcoming) address the same problem and show that

additive random noise would non-linearly downward bias the effect of class rank

depending on the extent of the measurement error. To reaffirm this result, we follow their

approach and add normally distributed random noise to our baseline measure, re-compute

the student ranks based on this (more) noisy measure and estimate our main results.

Appendix Figure 6 shows the resulting estimates for our main outcomes, where we have

added normally distributed noise with zero mean and a standard deviation equivalent to

10%, 20% and 30% of the standard deviation in the 3rd-grade achievement. We find

comparable reductions in effect sizes with increased measurement error. The intuition for

such a downward bias is that the `lucky student' will have higher baseline achievement and

rank than they should have, we will therefore observe these students (who are artificially

highly ranked) having a lower growth in test scores than expected.


   6.3. Heterogeneity

In this section we explore the heterogeneity of the rank effects the four main outcomes; (1)

eighth grade test scores; (2) graduating high school; (3) enrolling in college; and (4) log average

earnings ages 23-27. We explore this for three pre-defined variables; race (white/non-white),

gender (male/female), and free and reduce price lunch eligibility in third grade (eligible/non-

eligible). We present the estimates for each of these categories in Figures 12, 13, and 14,
respectively.

   First, is the impact of third grade rank different for white and non-white students? Figure

12 shows that the effects of rank on eighth grade test scores are similar by race. In contrast,

the effects of rank on high school graduation are more pronounced for non-white students,

for both low and high ranks. There is a more distinct difference when considering the impact

on college attendance by race. Having a low rank in elementary school has a considerably

larger negative effect on college attendance for non-white students compared to white

students. For the lowest ranked non-white student they are 7.5 percentage points less likely

to attend college than the median ranked student, in contrast the lowest ranked white students

are only 1 percentage point less likely to attend. Once above the median rank, white and non-

white students react in in a similar manner to their rank. We find that the effects of rank for




                                                29
low and high ranks, are larger for non-white students, similar in pattern to high school

graduation.

    In contrast to the large differences by race, there is no evidence for heterogeneity with

respect to gender for test scores, high school graduation, and college attendance. (Figure 13).

This is different than Murphy and Weinhardt (forthcoming), who show that boys' high school

test scores have a more positive reaction to high elementary rank, and a less negative reaction

to having a low rank. However, we find that males experiencing a low rank does have a less
negative impact on earnings as compared to females.

    Finally, the heterogeneity of estimates with regards to FRPL students mirror those of

white/non-white students, with the more disadvantaged group being more effected by rank

than their counterparts (Figure 14). This is true for test scores, graduation, college enrollment

and earnings. This is similar to with Murphy and Weinhardt (forthcoming) who find that Free

School Lunch students gain more form being highly ranked in England. One explanation is

that these sets of students have low academic confidence or a different information set about

the achievement and weight their school experience more heavily than non-disadvantaged

students. This has important consequences for optimal classroom composition, which we
discuss below.


7. Implications on School Choice

We estimate the effects of rank net of SSC fixed effects. Traditional peer effects suggest that

better peers should help performance. However, we show that having more better peers also

has a negative effect by lowering rank. In this section we quantify the effects of rank as

compared to the benefits of having better peers and school environments, and how these

effects relate to other findings in the literature.

        Consider the following thought experiment. A parent may move their child to a

"better" school. This would come with a decrease in their child's rank and a likely increase in

the quality of their child's peers. What would be the net gain in test scores from such a move?

        To operationalize this, we categorize elementary schools into "good", "bad", and

"average" with two different measures of quality, mean achievement and value-added. First,

mean third grade achievement is simply third grade achievement on indicators for a student's

                                                 30
third grade school (Columns 1-4 Table 3). Each fixed effect captures many things including,

student's own human capital, peer effects, resource differences, and parental investments.

Each of these will reflect the average difference in third grade test scores between primary

schools and should not be considered causal, although they may reflect what parents consider

when choosing an elementary school, as they are relatively easy to observe. For our second

quality measure, we calculate elementary schools' third to eighth grade unconditional value

added by controlling for students' third grade achievement (Columns 5-8 Table 3). The

standard deviation of these school value-added measures is .055. So, if a student moves to a
one standard deviation better school, she receives a bump of .055 in eighth grade test scores.

       To gauge the benefit of attending an elementary school with better attainment, we also

record the mean value added of "good", "bad", and "average" schools in terms of attainment.

It appears that schools with higher mean achievement also have higher third-to-eighth grade

value added, although these gains are only half the size compared to if parents were selecting
schools on the basis of value added: 0.026 versus 0.055 (final row of Table 3).

       To ascertain the net benefits of attending these schools net of rank effects, we need to

consider how a student's rank would change. The values in the columns of Table 3 are the

mean rank of students in each state achievement ventile in each school type. For example,

consider the median student at the tenth achievement ventile. If they attended an average

elementary school in terms of third grade achievement, their expected class rank would be

0.479. Whereas if they attended a "bad" school, they would have an expected rank of 0.613

and 0.346 if they had attended a "good" school. We can see that there is a clear trade off in

terms of rank and the quality of school when measured in absolute achievement. As may be

expected, this rank-quality tradeoff is higher when elementary school quality is measured in

mean achievement compared to value added. When parents move their child from a "bad"

value added school to a "good" value added school, the loss in rank is only -0.155. If they

instead use mean achievement the change in rank is larger at -0.267 (Table 3 row 10).

       We can see that students from higher-up in the state achievement distribution also

have higher ranks in their classes. There is not much difference in terms of expected rank at

an average school, independent of whether school quality is measured in terms of value added

or absolute attainment throughout the achievement distribution. However, this thought


                                              31
experiment clearly shows that the decrease in rank from moving from a bad to good school is

always smaller when considering schools in terms of their value added. Moreover, the loss of

rank from attending a `better' school is largest for the students near the middle of the

distribution.

       How would these changes in ranks and school environments impact a student's

overall attainment? For this, we require one last piece of information,  from Equation 1, the

relationship between rank and eighth grade test score, which is 0.09. We can now calculate
the impact on test scores.

       Let us consider the case of parents of a median student (tenth ventile) considering

good or bad schools in terms of mean third grade achievement. Sending the child to the better

school, would lead to an increase of eighth grade test scores by 6.1 percentiles (using the

associated value added scores from the bottom of Table 3 (0.026-(-0.035)). However, sending

the child to the better school would reduce the students expected rank by 0.267. This would

reduce the student's eighth grade test score by 2.4 percentiles (0.09*0.267). Therefore, the rank

effect has reduced the gains from attending a school two standard deviations better by 39

percent, resulting in a net gain would be 3.7 percentiles.

       Alternatively, if parents were better informed and selected elementary schools on the

basis of value added then there would be a smaller trade off in class rank (0.15) and larger

increases in future test scores (0.11=0.055-(-0.055)). In this case, a median student attending a

good school rather than a bad school would gain 11 percentile points in the eighth grade test

score distribution. In contrast, the student would lose 1.4 percentiles due to their lower rank

(-0.014=-0.15*0.09). Hence, if parents were to choose on the basis of value added, there would
be a net gain of 9.6 percentiles.

       In the case parents choosing on the basis of value added, the effect of school quality is

roughly eight times the size of the rank effect. Note, while this rank effect is relatively small,

this school quality measure encapsulates all observable and unobservable factors that

contribute to student value added.

       Ideally, we could describe the contribution of rank relative to all other peer effects;

however, estimating all other types of peer effects is implausible in our setting. Moreover,


                                               32
while choosing the best school for their child in value-added is what most parents try to

achieve, value-added is difficult to observe. Basing school choice on the basis of mean

achievement, we see that the importance of class rank is substantial, reducing any perceived

benefits by up to 39 percent. The main message for parents weighing the tradeoff of rank is

that choosing schools based on value-added is the best strategy.

        Finally, what does the presence of rank effects mean for optimal classroom

composition given the heterogeneity of the effects? We find that disadvantaged groups such

as non-white students or students eligible for FRPL are more affected by rank. Therefore,

unlike linear in means peer effects, where moving students between groups would have no

net impact, rearranging students with rank in mind could improve overall outcomes. This

would involve creating groups of students such that disadvantaged students predominantly

have higher ranks than non-disadvantaged students. Given the heterogeneity of the results

the disadvantaged students would gain more from the higher rank, than the non-

disadvantaged students would lose from having a lower rank. However, this sort of exercise

warrants caution because the changes in classroom distribution may be out of sample for the
estimates in this paper (Carrell, et al., 2013).

    This finding illustrates a tradeoff for programs that move disadvantaged third grade

students into situations where they will be the lowest ranked student. The extensive literature

on selective schools and school integration has shown mixed results from students attending

selective or predominantly non-minority schools. There are generally two quasi experimental

approaches used for the impact of getting into a "high-quality" school, lottery admissions and

regression discontinuities around admission thresholds. With respect to our paper the key

difference between these approaches is that only in regression discontinuities does attending

a "higher quality" school necessarily come at the at the cost of a lower rank. Being admitted

to a high value-added school via lottery would not necessarily cause a decrease in rank, but

going to a selective school would be. In light of this we now discuss our findings with relation

to the existing literature on school quality.

    The use of regression discontinuities in estimating the impact of attending an academic

selective school ensuring students are similar across the boundary. The preponderance of

evidence is that there are no benefits in terms of academic achievement, despite large


                                                   33
improvements in peer quality (Angrist & Lang, 2004; Clark, 2010; Kling et al., 2007; Dobbie &

Fryer, 2014 , Abdulkadirolu 2014) 43. In crossing the threshold, in addition to other school

factors, at least two types of peer effects would at play. Students have better peers on average,

but will have a lower rank. One can think of this as attending a `better school' as defined by

mean achievement in our policy example, but more extreme. In this case the marginal would

mechanically go from highest ranked in one school to the lowest ranked in another.

      The effectiveness of schools has also been estimated through lottery admissions to

oversubscribed charter schools and voucher programs. In contrast to studies that use

academic cutoffs, lottery admissions to charter schools do not necessarily pose a rank/school

quality trade off, in fact in some cases students may gain in rank and quality. We can think of

this as a more extreme version of attending a better school, as defined by value added.

      Entry to an oversubscribed charter school often improves student performance (Angrist

et al 2012, Angrist et al 2013, Abdulkadiroglu, 2011). Critically, attendance at these high-

quality schools may not come at the expense of rank if they are recruiting low attaining

students. This can be seen in the heterogeneity of charter school effects for low achievement

students, they are positive in lower achieving districts (Angrist et al 2013), and are decreasing

in the achievement of peers (Abdulkadiroglu 2011, Cullen et al. 2006). In summary, our results

on class rank can help reconcile the different measured effects of high-quality schools across

studies. Essentially, rank may "undo" the benefits of attending a high-quality school for

students who admitted students who will be the lowest ranked students in their class.


8. Conclusions

          We make two contributions in this paper. First, we discuss identification of the effects

of class rank. In particular, we discuss active sorting, passive sorting, and misspecification of

the achievement mapping as potential sources of bias in this literature. We provide guidance

on how to address these issues and reinforce the utility of balance and specification checks.

Notably, the issues of misspecification and measurement error also apply to the literature that




43   There are improvements in non-academic outcomes or college attendance

                                                 34
estimates effects of rank using experiments that randomly allocate students of different

abilities into classrooms.

        Second, we demonstrate that a students' rank among their peers at a young age has

long lasting impacts. This affects a student's performance in school including tests, courses

taken, progress through toward graduation. Ultimately, it also affects student graduation

from high school. Relative position affects the decision to enroll in post-secondary education.

Most strikingly, it affects a student's real earnings in their mid-twenties. We find that a student

enrolling in a class where they are at the 75th percentile rather than 25th in third grade

increases their real wages between ages 23 and 27 by $1500 per annum, or approximately 7

percent. 44 For comparison, Carrell et al. (2018) look at the long run impact of peers at the same

ages, and find that being in a class of 25 with a student who was exposed to domestic violence

reduces an individual's earnings by 3 percent.

        Our findings add to a growing list of papers that demonstrate conditions for young

children have long lasting consequences. In contrast to other papers that focus on policy

differences that students face, we document the effect of an unavoidable phenomenon in

groups: relative rank. Some of the effect of rank may be coming via teachers and administrator

interactions with students. We document that students are more likely to be retained in third

grade which is a decision made not by the student but by teachers, administrators, and
families.

        Moreover, we find that disadvantaged groups gain more from being highly ranked

and lose more from being lowly ranked among their peers. Therefore, unlike linear in means

peer effects, where moving students between groups would have no net impact, grouping

students with rank and these heterogeneous effects in mind could improve overall outcomes.

Schools may also influence student performance by manipulating the salience of rank.

        Finally, we examine if and to what extent parents should consider rank effects when

choosing the best school for their children. Critically, we document a trade off from attending


44Using the present discounted value of earnings of $522,000 as in Chetty et al. (2014), which follow
Krueger (1999) in discounting earnings gains at a 3 percent real annual rate, we calculate that these rank
differences would increases life time earnings by $36,540 in net present value. This figure is based on
the point estimates from Chetty et al. (2014) Figure 10 Panel 5. The 5th ventile has a coefficient of -0.032
and the 15th ventile has an estimate of 0.035.

                                                    35
a school with high achieving peers: this mechanically lowers the rank of your own child. We

examine this trade off in detail based on the observed student and school allocations in Texas.

We find that rank offsets about 40 percent of the benefits of school value added for the median

performing student, if parents choose schools based on mean peer achievement. Instead, if

parents choose schools based on value-added, the offsetting effects of rank from attending a

better school are much smaller.

       Future research on rank should focus on the interaction between rank and policies that

exaggerate or mediate the effects of rank. Future research should also consider the effect of

rank in groups outside of school settings.




                                              36
References

Andrews, R. J., Li, J., & Lovenheim, M. F. (2016). Quantile treatment effects of college quality
on earnings. Journal of Human Resources, 51(1), 200-238.

Abdulkadirolu, A., Angrist, J., & Pathak, P. (2014). The elite illusion: Achievement effects at
Boston and New York exam schools. Econometrica, 82(1), 137-196.

Angrist, J. D. & Lang, K. (2004). "Does School Integration Generate Peer Effects? Evidence
from Boston's Metco Program" American Economic Review, 94(5), p. 1613≠1634.

Azmat, G., Bagues, M., Cabrales, A. & Iriberri, N. (2019). "What You Know Can't Hurt You,
For Long: A Field Experiment on Relative Performance Feedback" Management Science,
Vol. 65, No. 8, p. 3714-3736.

Azmat, G. & Iriberri, N. (2010). "The importance of relative performance feedback
information: Evidence from a natural experiment using high school students" Journal of
Public Economics, 94(7-8), p. 435≠452.

Bergman P. (2018). "The Risks and Benefits of School Integration for Participating Students:
Evidence from a Randomized Desegregation Program" IZA DP No. 11602.

Bietenbeck, J. (2020). "The Long-Term Impacts of Low-Achieving Childhood Peers: Evidence
from Project STAR" Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 18, No. 1 (February
2020), p. 392-426.

Black, S., Devereux, P. & Salvanes K. (2013). "Under Pressure? The Effect of Peers on
Outcomes of Young Adults" Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 31, No. 1 (January 2013), p.
119-153.

Black, S., Devereux, P., & Salvanes K. (2011). "Too young to leave the nest? The effects of
school starting age" Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(2), p. 455--467.

Booij, A., Leuven, E. & Oosterbeek, H. (2017). "Ability peer effects in university: Evidence
from a randomized experiment" Review of Economic Studies, 84(2), p. 547-587.

Brown, G., Gardiner, J., Oswald, A. & Qian, J. (2008). "Does wage rank affect employees
wellbeing?" Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 47(3), p. 355≠389.

Bursztyn, L. & Jensen, R. (2015). "How Does Peer Pressure Affect Educational Investments?"
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(3), p. 1329≠1367.

Card, D., Mas, A., Moretti, E., & Saez, E. (2012). "Inequality at work: The effect of peer
salaries on job satisfaction" American Economic Review, 102(6), p. 2981-3003.

Carlson, N.R., Enzie, M. E., Buskist, W. & C. D. Heth, (2005). "Psychology: the science of
behavior" (3rd Canadian ed) Pearson Canada.

                                               37
Carrell, Scott and Fullerton, Richard L. & West, James, (2009). "Does Your Cohort Matter?
Measuring Peer Effects in College Achievement" Journal of Labor Economics 27(3), p. 439-
464.

Carrell, S. E., & Hoekstra, M. L. (2010). "Externalities in the classroom: How children
exposed to domestic violence affect everyone's kids." American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, 2(1), p. 211-28.

Carrell, S. E., Hoekstra, M., & Kuka, E. (2018). "The long-run effects of disruptive peers"
American Economic Review, 108(11), p.3377-3415

Carrell, S. E., Sacerdote, B. I., & West, J. E. (2013). "From natural variation to optimal policy?
The importance of endogenous peer group formation" Econometrica, 81(3), p. 855-882.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D.W. & Yagan, D (2011). "How
does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR" The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4), p. 1593-1660.

Chetty, R., Friedman, J., & Rockoff, J. (2014). "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher
Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood" American Economic Review, 104(9), p.
2633-79.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., & Katz, L. (2016). "The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods
on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment" American
Economic Review, 106(4), p. 855-902.

Clark, D. (2010). "Selective schools and academic achievement" The B.E. Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy, 10(1), p. 1≠40.

Cullen, J. B., Jacob, B. A., & Levitt, S. (2006). "The Effect of School Choice on Participants:
Evidence from Randomized Lotteries" Econometrica, 74(5), p. 1191≠1230.

Cullen, J. B., Long, M. C., & Reback, R. (2013). "Jockeying for position: Strategic high school
choice under Texas' top ten percent plan" Journal of Public Economics, 97, p. 32-48.

Delaney, J., & Devereux, P. J. (2019). The Effect of High School Rank in English and Math on
College Major Choice.

Dobbie, W. & Fryer, R. (2014). "The impact of attending a school with high-achieving peers:
Evidence from the new york city exam schools" American Economic Review, 6(3), p. 58≠75.

Elsner B. & Isphording, I. (2017a). "A Big Fish in a Small Pond: Ability Rank and Human
Capital Investment" Journal of Labor Economics, 35(3).

Elsner, B., & Isphording, I. E. (2017b). "Rank, Sex, Drugs and Crime" Journal of Human
Resources, 0716-8080R.

                                                38
Elsner, B., Isphording, I.E. & Zˆlitz, U. (2018). "Achievement Rank Affects Performance and
Major Choices in College" SSRN working paper.

Genakos, C. & Pagliero, M. (2012). "Interim Rank, Risk Taking, and Performance in Dynamic
Tournaments" Journal of Political Economy, 120(4), p. 782 ≠ 813.

Greenwood, Michael J. (1997). "Internal migration in developed countries." Handbook of
population and family economics 1, p. 647-720.

Hastings, J., Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2009). "Heterogeneous preferences and the efficacy
of public school choice" NBER Working Paper 2145, p. 1-46.

Hoxby, C. (2000). Peer effects in the classroom: Learning from gender and race variation (No.
w7867). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hoxby, C. and Weingarth G. (2006). "Taking race out of the equation: School reassignment
and the structure of peer effects" Working paper, Harvard University.

I Vidal, J. B. and Nossol, M. (2011). "Tournaments without prizes: Evidence from personnel
records" Management Science, 57(10), p. 1721≠1736.

Kendler, S. K,, Turkheimer, E., Ohlsson, H., Sunquist, J. and K. Sunquist (2015). "Family
environment and the malleability of cognitive ability: A Swedish national home-reared and
adopted-away cosibling control study" Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
112(15), p. 4612-4617.

Kling, J. R., Liebman, J. B., and Katz, L. F. (2007). "Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
Effects" Econometrica, 75(1), p. 83≠119.

Levy, D. (2008). "Peer effects and alcohol use among college student" The Journal of
Economic Perspectives 22(3), p. 189-206.

Lavy, V., Silva, O., and Weinhardt, F. (2012). "The Good, the Bad, and the Average: Evidence
on Ability Peer Effects in Schools" Journal of Labor Economics, 30(2), p. 367≠414.

Luttmer, E. F. P. (2005). "Neighbors as negatives: Relative earnings and well-being" The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), p. 963≠1002.

Marsh, H., Seaton, M., Trautwein, U., Ludtke, O., Hau, O'Mara, A., & Craven, R. (2008).
"The Big Fish Little Pond Effect Stands Up to Critical Scrutiny: Implications for Theory,
Methodology, and Future Research" Educational Psychology Review, 20(3), p. 319≠350.

Murphy R. & Weinhardt F. (2014). "Top of the Class: The Importance of Ordinal Rank"
CESIFO Working Paper NO. 4815.



                                                39
Murphy R. & Weinhardt F. (forthcoming). "Top of the Class: The Importance of Ordinal
Rank" The Review of Economic Studies, https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdaa020.

Oreopoulos, P., Stabile, M., Walld, R., & Roos, L. L. (2008). "Short-, medium-, and long-term
consequences of poor infant health an analysis using siblings and twins" Journal of Human
Resources, 43(1), p. 88-138.

Payne, A. & Smith, J. (2018). "Big Fish, Small Pond: The Effect of Rank at Entry on Post-
Secondary Outcomes" Mimeo.

Ribas, R. P., Sampaio, B., & Trevisan, G. (2020). "Short-and Long-term Effects of Class
Assignment: Evidence from a Flagship University in Brazil" Labour Economics, 101835.

Ribas, R.P., Breno, S., and Giuseppe, T. (2018). "Can Better Peers Signal Less Success? The
Disruptive Effect of Perceived Rank on Career Investment" SSRN working
paper, http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3135824.

Sacerdote, B. (2001). "Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommate" The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2), p. 681-704.

Tincani, M. M. (2017). "Heterogeneous peer effects and rank concerns: Theory and
evidence." CESifo Working Paper Series 6331.

Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1974). "Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases"
Science, 185(4157), p. 1124≠1131.

Whitmore, D. (2005). "Resource and peer impacts on girls' academic achievement: Evidence
from a randomized experiment" American Economic Review P & P, p. 199-203.

Zax, J. S., and Rees, D. I. (2002). IQ, academic performance, environment, and earnings.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(4), 600-616.




                                              40
                            Figure 1: Class Test Score Distributions




                                    8
                                    6
                             Example School
                                   42
                                    0




                                              20   25               30                35   40
                                                        Raw Grade 3 Math Test Score




Note: These figures are based on hypothetical data, based on schools in Texas. This example shows classrooms
with the same min, max, and mean scores, presenting seven with the same mean, max, with students who have
the same achievement having different rank.




                  Figure 2: Variation of Local Rank of Median Student
                             Within School-Subject Groups




Note: This figure plots the distribution of rank for students at the 50th percentile of the statewide achievement
distribution at different schools-subject groups. The horizontal axis plots elementary school-subjects as
percentiles so that the school with the lowest rank for the statewide median student has a value of 1 and the
school with the highest rank for the statewide median student has a value of 100. The variation in class rank
for the state median student comes from the 13 cohorts. For each school-subject percentile, we plot the class
rank of 10th percentile of students with state median achievement. The equivalent lines are drawn for the 25th,
50th, 75th, 90th percentiles.




                                                                41
                                Figure 3: Passive Sorting and Rank

                                            A. High/Low Variance




                                       B.    Non-Standard Distribution




Note: This figure displays several hypothetical test score distributions to illustrate the issue of passive sorting.
Each panel shows the test score distribution of two types of schools, Type A and Type B, that have been
transformed such that they have the same mean. The red line indicates an arbitrary test score of students a set
distance from the type average. In both panels, due to the shape of the test score distributions students with
the same relative to the mean test score the student would have a higher rank in in Type B compared to Type
A. Passive sorting can occur if students with different characteristics systematically attended schools with
different distribution types. Passive sorting would then cause a bias if the characteristics directly impact future
outcomes.




                                                        42
                     Figure 4 ≠ Third Grade Rank on K-12 Outcomes, 1

                                           A. Repeat Third Grade




                                        B. Eighth Grade Test Scores




Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come
from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student
achievement interacted with type of elementary school test-score distribution. The mean retention rate is 1.6.




                                                       43
                     Figure 5 ≠ Third Grade Rank on K-12 Outcomes, 2



                A. AP Calculus                                          B. AP English




       C. AP Calculus, subject-specific rank                   D. AP English, subject-specific rank




Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come
from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student
achievement interacted with type of elementary school test-score distribution. Panels C and D come from a
specification which controls for achievement and rank in third grade in both subjects simultaneously.




                                                       44
Figure 6 ≠ Third Grade Rank on High School Graduation and College Enrollment



                A. High School Graduation                               B. College Enrollment




       C. Community College Enrollment                                  D. 4 year college enrollment




Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come
from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student
achievement interacted with type of elementary school test-score distribution. The mean high school
graduation rate of 71 percent and a college enrollment rate of 47 percent. The mean two-year college enrollment
rate is 31 percent, and the mean four-year college enrollment rate is 23 percent.




                                                       45
                       Figure 7 ≠ Third Grade Rank on Major Choice

                                        A. Declaring a STEM Major




                            B. Declaring a STEM by subject specific rank




Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come
from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student
achievement interacted with type of elementary school test-score distribution. Panel B from a specification
which controls for achievement and rank in third grade in both subjects simultaneously. Mean STEM
enrolment is 0.04.




                                                       46
              Figure 8 ≠ Third Grade Rank on Bachelor's Degree Receipt

                                A. Graduate 4 Year College in 4 years




                                   B. Grad 4 Year College in 6 years




                                   C. Grad 4 Year College in 8 years




Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come
from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student
achievement interacted with type of elementary school test-score distribution. Mean graduation rate in 4/6/8
years is 4/14/16 percent.

                                                       47
       Figure 9 ≠ Third Grade Rank on Labor Market Outcomes (Age 23-27)

                A. Positive Earnings                                    B. Average Earnings




          C. Average Non-Zero Earnings                                D. Log Average Earnings




Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come
from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student
achievement interacted with type of elementary school test-score distribution. The mean positive earnings
between 23-27 are $24,912. Mean earnings are $17,365.




                                                       48
                         Figure 10 ≠ Flexible controls for Achievement



                          A. Eighth Grade Test                                        B. Ever Graduate HS




                 C. Any College                                          D. Log Earnings Age 23-27




 Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category.
Estimates come from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles
of student achievement.




                                                         49
                                 Figure 11 ≠ Results by Class Size



                A. Eighth Grade Test                                    B. Ever Graduate HS




                C. Any College                                    D. Log Earnings Age 23-27




 Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class ran with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level k. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come
from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student
achievement.




                                                       50
                                Figure 12 ≠ Heterogeneity by Race

             A. Eighth Grade Test                                         B. Ever Graduate HS




                C. Any College                                          D. Log Earnings Age 23-27




Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come
from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student
achievement.




                                                       51
                                Figure 13 ≠ Heterogeneity by Gender

                  A. Eighth Grade Test                                     B. Ever Graduate HS




                  C. Any College                                          D. Log Earnings Age 23-27




 Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category
with 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the school level. Estimates come from
Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student achievement.




                                                         52
                Figure 14 ≠ Heterogeneity by Free and Reduced-Price Lunch

                  A. Eighth Grade Test                                     B. Ever Graduate HS




                  C. Any College                                          D. Log Earnings Age 23-27




 Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category
with 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors clustered at the school level. Estimates come from
Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student achievement.




                                                         53
                          Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                              Standard
                                                   Mean       Deviation     Observations
Demographics ≠ 13 Cohorts
Male                                                0.50         0.50         6,117,690
Economic Disadvantage                               0.49         0.50         6,117,690
English as a Second Language                        0.12         0.32         6,117,690
White                                               0.47         0.50         6,117,690
Asian                                               0.03         0.17         6,117,690
Black                                               0.15         0.36         6,117,690
Hispanic                                            0.35         0.48         6,117,690
Size of Third Grade SSC                             93.7         46.6         6,117,690
Repeat Third Grade                                  0.02         0.13         6,117,690

K-12 Outcomes ≠ 13 Cohorts
State Test Percentile, eighth grade                 0.55         0.28         4,919,673
Ever Graduate High School                           0.70         0.46         6,117,690
AP Calculus                                         0.08         0.28         6,117,690
AP English                                          0.18         0.39         6,117,690
Any College                                         0.46         0.50         6,117,690
Enroll, 4 yr college                                0.23         0.42         6,117,690
Enroll, 2 year college                              0.31         0.46         6,117,690

College Outcomes ≠ 10/8/6 Cohorts
Declare STEM Major                                 0.041         0.198        6,117,690
BA in 4 years                                       0.06          0.24        4,573,672
BA in 6 years                                       0.14          0.34        3,597,340
BA in 8 years                                       0.16          0.37        2,647,240

Age 23-27 Labor Outcomes ≠ 8 Cohorts
Non Zero Wages                                      0.65         0.43         3,597,340
Real Wages                                         17,300       24,093        3,597,340
Real Non-Zero Wages                                24,818       25,372        2,652,284
  Note: This table contains summary statistics for the main estimating sample of third
graders from 1995-2008. Some outcomes are only available for early cohorts which
generates the differences in sample size. Enroll, 4yr college means enrollment within 3 years
of "on-time" high school graduation and is similarly defined for two-year colleges.




                                            54
                                         Table 2 ≠ Balance Test

               Low
             Income          Male           ESL          White          Asian         Black       Hispanic

                                                     A. Un-interacted
Rank         0.097***      -0.011**       0.030***      -0.085***      -0.001*       0.047***      0.037***
              (0.005)       (0.004)       (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.000)       (0.004)        (0.004)

                                              B. School Mean Quartiles
Rank         0.030***       -0.004        0.010*        -0.028***      -0.001        0.024***        0.006
              (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.006)       (0.002)        (0.005)       (0.005)

                                                C. School Mean Deciles
Rank         0.025***       -0.001         0.006        -0.024***      -0.004        0.023***        0.006
              (0.006)       (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.006)       (0.002)        (0.005)       (0.005)

                                            D. School Variance Quartiles
Rank         0.039***      -0.015***      0.020***      -0.039***       0.000        0.021***      0.018***
              (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.001)        (0.004)       (0.004)

                                              E. School Variance Deciles
Rank         0.030***      -0.014***      0.020***      -0.031***      -0.001        0.016***      0.015***
              (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.003)       (0.004)       (0.001)        (0.004)       (0.004)

                            F. School Quartiles of Mean and Quartiles of Variance
Rank          -0.006        -0.006         0.002          0.008        0.003*        -0.003         -0.009*
              (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.005)       (0.002)       (0.004)        (0.004)

N           6,117,651 6,117,651 6,117,651 6,117,651 6,117,651 6,117,651 6,117,651
  Notes: This table regresses predetermined characteristics on a linear effect of rank, SSC fixed effects, and
achievement controls. Panel A does not interact ventiles of achievement with anything. Panel B interacts
ventiles of achievement with indicators for quartiles of school mean achievement. Panel C interacts
achievement with deciles of school mean. Panel D interacts achievement with quartiles of school variance.
Panel E interacts achievement with deciles of school variance. Panel F is our preferred specification and
interacts achievement with 16 indicators for school mean and variance (quartiles of mean X quartiles of
variance). Standard errors are clustered at the school level.




                                                        55
Table 3: The Distribution of Rank by Elementary School Effectiveness Measures

                      Third Grade Attainment                     Third to Eighth Grade Value Added
 State         Average      Bad    Good    Rank                  Average     Bad    Good      Rank
Ventile         School School School Change                       School School School Change
                  (1)       (2)     (3)      (4)                    (5)      (6)     (7)       (8)
  1              0.028     0.054   0.014   -0.040                  0.049    0.075   0.035    -0.040
  2              0.074     0.137   0.039   -0.098                  0.106    0.145   0.075    -0.070
  3              0.123     0.211   0.068   -0.143                  0.160    0.203   0.113    -0.090
  4              0.172     0.279   0.100   -0.179                  0.213    0.257   0.153    -0.104
  5              0.222     0.341   0.133   -0.208                  0.261    0.309   0.188    -0.121
  6              0.272     0.401   0.170   -0.231                  0.310    0.354   0.227    -0.127
  7              0.323     0.458   0.210   -0.248                  0.358    0.399   0.264    -0.135
  8              0.374     0.509   0.250   -0.259                  0.403    0.447   0.304    -0.143
  9              0.426     0.565   0.294   -0.271                  0.449    0.493   0.349    -0.144
 10              0.479     0.613   0.346   -0.267                  0.497    0.542   0.387    -0.155
 11              0.527     0.650   0.390   -0.260                  0.541    0.581   0.435    -0.146
 12              0.577     0.703   0.452   -0.251                  0.590    0.624   0.485    -0.139
 13              0.627     0.737   0.495   -0.242                  0.630    0.667   0.527     -0.14
 14              0.685     0.787   0.561   -0.226                  0.684    0.718   0.587    -0.131
 15              0.726     0.810   0.613   -0.197                  0.724    0.749   0.634    -0.115
 16              0.784     0.858   0.685   -0.173                  0.778    0.799   0.693    -0.106
 17              0.828     0.889   0.745   -0.144                  0.821    0.841   0.752    -0.089
 18              0.876     0.916   0.808   -0.108                  0.870    0.881   0.819    -0.062
 19              0.930     0.995   0.889   -0.106                  0.924    0.930   0.890    -0.040
 20              0.962     0.973   0.934   -0.039                  0.959    0.961   0.940    -0.021
Value
Added           -0.001      -0.035      0.026      0.061           0.000      -0.055      0.055        0.11
  Notes: This table categorizes elementary schools into good, bad and average in terms of average third grade
attainment, and third to eighth grade value added. Good/bad are defined as being one standard deviation
above/below the average (with tolerance of 0.0045). Each row the average class rank of students in this type of
school for that ventile. The Rank Change column is the average rank change of students in that ventile from
moving from a bad to a good school. The final row presents the third to eighth grade school level value added
for this type of school. Value added calculated conditional on a cubic of third grade percentile.




                                                     56
                                           For Online Publication

Appendix Figures and Tables

                  Appendix Figure 1: Common Support of Class Test Score




  Notes: This shows the rank for a student for a given test score relative to the mean. We show the differences in
rank across SSCs. Each line represents a percentile of students with that test score relative to the mean. (e.g. 10th
percentile). The vertical thickness shows the different rank values students with the same relative position within
their classes have. The red line represents where the students from Figure 1, who are five points above their class
mean would reside.




                                                         57
         Appendix Figure 2 ≠ Variation of Local Rank of Median Student Rank
                           Within School-Subject Groups




  Notes: This shows the rank for a student for a given test score relative to the mean in each school distribution
type  ( ). We show the differences in rank across SSCs. Each line represents a percentile of students with that
test score relative to the mean. (e.g. 10th percentile). The vertical thickness shows the different rank values students
with the same relative position within their classes have.




                                                          58
                          Appendix Figure 3 ≠ Testing for Missingness

                                          A. Missing 8th Grade Test




  Note: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come from
Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student achievement.
The mean retention rate is 1.6.




                                                         59
Appendix Figure 4 - Balanced Sample for Full Set of Outcomes

                  A. Eighth Grade Test                                     B. Ever Graduate HS




                  C. Any College                                          D. Log Real Earnings Age 23-27




  Notes: These figures are on the reduced balanced Sample for Full Set of Outcomes 8 cohorts Third Grade 1994-
2001. These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category.
Estimates come from Equation 7, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles
of student achievement.




                                                         60
               Appendix Figure 5 - Conditional/unconditional estimates.

                A. Eighth Grade Test                                     B. Ever Graduate HS




                C. Any College                                          D. Log Real Earnings Age 23-27




Notes: These figures plot the coefficient for ventiles of class rank with 95% confidence intervals calculated using
standard errors clustered at the school level. The 45th-50th percentile is the omitted category. Estimates come
from Equation 4, which includes controls for race, gender, ESL status, and indicators for ventiles of student
achievement, not interacted by school test score distribution. We show how the estimates change when
including controls for predetermined characteristics including race, gender, and ESL status (our preferred
specification) and when we do not.




                                                       61
 Appendix Figure 6 ≠ Measurement Error Simulations

                  A. Eighth Grade Test                                  B. Ever Graduate HS




                  C. Any College                                       D. Log Real Earnings Age 23-27




  Notes: This figure shows estimates for our main specification where we added normally distributed noise with
zero mean and a standard deviation equivalent to 10%, 20% and 30% of the standard deviation in the 3rd-grade
achievement before calculating ranks. The resulting non-linear and correlated measurement error in 3rd-grade
achievement and the rank-measure results in a non-linear downward-bias in the rank estimate. This replicates a
result by Murphy and Weinhardt (forthcoming), who discuss this non-traditional noise for other types of noise that
are not normally distributed, which also lead to downward- bias.




                                                       62
Appendix Table 1 ≠ Alternate Measures of Rank on Main Outcomes

                                      Method for Calculating Rank
                               Mean       Bottom Random On Time
                               Rank        Rank        Rank      Students
                                (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)
      Outcome
      Test Scores            0.149***       0.155***       0.100***      0.147***
                             (0.003)         (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.003)

      Grad High
      School                  0.085***      0.078***      0.059***       0.083***
                              (0.004)        (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.004)

      Any College            0.088***       0.090***      0.060***       0.086***
                             (0.005)         (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)



      Real Earnings          1853.1***      1983.5*** 1482.3*** 1785.8***
                              (251.1)        (244.6)   (213.7)   (247.7)
        Notes: This table presents the rank estimates from 16 different regressions,
      using four different rank measures on four outcomes. Mean Rank ≠ assigns
      the average rank to all students tied with the same score (this is the measure
      we use in the paper). Bottom Rank ≠ assigns the bottom rank to all students
      tied with the same score. Random Rank ≠ assigns a random rank to all
      students with tied with the same score. On time students ≠ Assigns rank on
      a mean rank basis only among students who took their third grade exam on
      time, rather than all students in their class who took the exam. Standard
      errors are clustered at the school level.




                                           63
      Appendix Table 2 ≠ Outcomes by Function of Distribution

             Repeat        Grade 8                       Any          Grad BA         Log
              3rd           Test         Grad HS        College       in 8 yrs        Wage


                                             A. Un-interacted
Rank        -0.037***      0.089***       0.061***       -0.007        -0.013**      0.121***
              (0.005)       (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.017)

                                       B. School Mean Quartiles
Rank        -0.038***      0.141***       0.084***      0.084***       0.019***      0.171***
             (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.020)

                                         C. School Mean Deciles
Rank        -0.040***      0.152***       0.088***      0.092***       0.027***      0.185***
             (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.021)

                                      D. School Variance Quartiles
Rank        -0.039***      0.106***       0.083***        0.041        -0.002        0.144***
             (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.017)

                                       E. School Variance Deciles
Rank        -0.040***      0.113***       0.089***      0.050***        0.005        0.152***
             (0.003)        (0.002)        (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.018)

                     F. School Quartiles of Mean and Quartiles of Variance
Rank        -0.036***      0.147***       0.087***      0.088***       0.029***      0.173***
             (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.005)       (0.020)

N           6,117,651 4,919,628 6,117,651 6,117,651 2,647,234 2,652,264
  Notes: This table considers the linear effect of rank for different specification of  (). Panel
A, is controls for student prior achievement with ventiles for third-grade achievement. Panel
B interacts achievement with quartile of school mean achievement. Panel C interacts
achievement with deciles of school variance. Panel D interacts achievement with quartile of
school achievement variance. Panel E interacts achievement with deciles of school
achievement variance. Panel C. Panel F is our preferred specification and interacts
achievement with 16 indicators for school mean and variance (quartiles of mean X quartiles
of variance). Standard errors are clustered at the school level.




                                              64
