                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          HOME PRICES, FERTILITY, AND EARLY-LIFE HEALTH OUTCOMES

                                      N. Meltem Daysal
                                     Michael F. Lovenheim
                                       Nikolaj Siersbæk
                                       David N. Wasser

                                      Working Paper 27469
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27469


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We thank seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute Children's Workshop and the
Alpine Population Association Annual Conference. No external funding was received for this
project. All results, conclusions and errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by N. Meltem Daysal, Michael F. Lovenheim, Nikolaj Siersbæk, and David N. Wasser.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Home Prices, Fertility, and Early-Life Health Outcomes
N. Meltem Daysal, Michael F. Lovenheim, Nikolaj Siersbæk, and David N. Wasser
NBER Working Paper No. 27469
July 2020
JEL No. I12,J13,R21

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate the effect of housing price changes on fertility and early-life child health in
Denmark. Using rich population register data among women aged 20-44 who own a home, we
find that for each 100,000 DKK increase in home prices (equivalent to $12,000), the likelihood of
giving birth increases by 0.27 percentage points or 2.32%. These estimates are similar to findings
from the US per dollar of home price change, which is surprising given the strong pro-natalist
policies and generous government programs in Denmark. We also present the first estimates of
the effect of home prices on infant health. Our findings indicate that housing price increases lead
to better child health at birth in terms of low birth weight and prematurity, however most of these
effects reflect changes in the composition of births. There is no evidence of an effect on health
during the first five years of life. These findings are consistent with a lack of credit constraints
among homeowner families and with both children and child health being normal goods that are
similarly-valued in the US and Denmark.

N. Meltem Daysal                                 Nikolaj Siersbæk
Department of Business and Economics             Copenhagen Economics
University of Southern Denmark                   Langebrogade 1
Campusvej 55                                     1411 Copenhagen K
5230 Odense M                                    Denmark
Denmark                                          nikolaj_siers@hotmail.com
meltem.daysal@sam.sdu.dk
                                                 David N. Wasser
Michael F. Lovenheim                             Cornell University
Department of Policy Analysis                    447 Uris Hall
and Management                                   Ithaca, NY 14853
ILR School, and Department of Economics          d.wasser2@gmail.com
Cornell University
264 Ives Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
mfl55@cornell.edu
1    Introduction

The past several decades have witnessed an historical amount of volatility in housing markets
around the globe, driven by the run-up to and aftermath of the Great Recession. In most
developed countries, housing wealth is the single most important component of wealth for
all but highest-resource households (Saez and Zucman 2016). As such, understanding how
this volatility affects household decisions and outcomes is of high importance. In this paper,
we examine the effects of home prices on fertility and child health using rich register data
from Denmark for the period 1992 to 2011. Fertility decisions are among the most important
made by a household. Children affect every dimension of household behavior and outcomes,
and decisions about whether and when to have children have long-run implications for the
individuals making these decisions as well as for society more broadly. Investigating effects on
child health is equally important given the large body of research linking early-childhood health
to long-term socio-economic outcomes (Currie 2009; Currie and Rossin-Slater 2015).
    While several prior studies have examined the effect of housing wealth on fertility, none has
studied a country like Denmark that has an extensive social welfare system. Denmark has
one of the most generous social safety nets in the world and has a wide range of strongly pro-
natalist policies, such as 52 weeks of combined parental leave, sizable cash payments to families
with children, heavily subsidized child care, and free and universal health care. Comparing
the housing wealth effect on fertility across settings allows us to provide new insight into
the underlying mechanisms driving the fertility response. These mechanisms have not been
a focus of prior research, and they are important to articulate in order to understand the
interplay between government policy and how households respond to home price variation.
Our theoretical framework highlights that in the absence of credit constraints, home price
changes affect fertility and infant health only through an income effect and thus reflect household
preferences. In the presence of credit constraints, in contrast, there should be a larger fertility
responses in countries with less generous child-related government supports (i.e., a higher net
price of children). Hence, our theoretical framework provides a more systematic way to interpret
variation in wealth effects of fertility across countries that allows us to provide insight into why
home price increases do or do not vary across countries and the roles played by government


                                                 1
policies, household preferences, and credit constraints.
   Denmark also is an informative setting in which to examine the effects of housing market
variation on households because of the existence of rich register data. These data allow us
to probe the validity of the approach used by prior research by including a somewhat more
expansive control set. In addition, we are able to examine the sensitivity of the estimates to
controlling for a larger array of fixed effects that prior researchers could not include because of
data constraints and small sample sizes. Register data further permits a thorough analysis of
how short-run home price changes impact health outcomes of babies and young children, which
prior research has not addressed. We present the first estimates in the literature on how home
price variation affects several measures of fetal and early childhood health: birth weight, low
birth weight, very low birth weight, prematurity, number of days hospitalized, whether there
are any hospitalizations, number of emergency room (ER) visits, and whether there are any
ER visits.
   Investigating the effects of housing wealth on fertility and child health is complicated by
the endogenous choice of home ownership, fertility and child investment decisions. In order to
account for such endogeneity, we follow Lovenheim and Mumford (2013) and relate short-run
home price changes to fertility and child health outcomes.1 In particular, we focus on women
who were not home owners at the beginning of 1992-1993 and who became a homeowner during
the period 1993 to 2004 when they were between the ages of 18 and 42.2 For each homeowner,
we calculate the one-year change in home value and estimate how this one-year change affects
the likelihood of giving birth in the subsequent year as well as health outcomes at birth and in
the first five years of life.3
   Our findings suggest that there is a positive effect of home price increases on fertility: a
100,000 DK (approximately $12,000 in 2006, adjusting for purchasing power parity) increase
in home prices in the prior year increases the likelihood of giving birth by 0.27 percentage
points, or 2.32% relative to the mean. Effects are largest among 35-39 year olds and among
first-time mothers, but effect sizes relative to the mean are relatively consistent across ages and
  1 Throughout     this paper, we use the terms "home values," "home prices," and "housing wealth" interchangeably.
  2 We  do not require that a woman has to own the home herself. We refer throughout the paper to women who own a home, but
we define this as the woman, her partner, or both being a home owner.
   3 Due to the use of a once-lagged one-year change independent variable, this leads to an age range of 20 to 44 years when we

investigate fertility effects.




                                                              2
birth parity groups. We also show that women in the middle of the income distribution are
most responsive to home price changes in their fertility decisions, but there is little evidence of
heterogeneity by completed education. These results are in line with former studies using micro
data from the United States, Australia, and Japan (Lovenheim and Mumford 2013; Mizutani
2015; Atalay, Li, and Whelan 2017).4 Our paper is methodologically closest to Lovenheim and
Mumford (2013), who use a similar empirical strategy and data from a similar period from the
US. They find an effect of 2.11% for each $12,000 of home price increase, which is very close to
the 2.32% effect we document in Denmark. The heterogeneous treatment effects we document
in Denmark also broadly align with the findings from Lovenheim and Mumford (2013) in the
US.
   The similarity of fertility responses between Denmark and countries with less generous wel-
fare systems such as the US is surprising. Our theoretical discussion indicates that if households
are not credit constrained and if households in the two countries have similar preferences for
children, then we would expect housing wealth effects to be similar across the two settings.
We therefore turn to the extent of credit constraints. We first present evidence using US data
from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) that suggests US homeowners are not credit
constrained surrounding the birth of a child. Homeowners with children under two spend more
overall than observationally-similar childless households, which is due to higher expenditures
on housing and health. Other expenditure categories are extremely similar across groups. That
US homeowners do not appear to be credit constrained suggests that Danish homeowners are
not constrained either given the lower net cost of children in Denmark. We provide sugges-
tive evidence to support this assertion in Denmark using the consumption imputation method
from Danish income and wealth flows developed by Browning and Leth-Peterson (2003). In
the absence of credit constraints, our results most likely reflect household preferences through
an income effect. A core conclusion is that US and Danish households have similar fertility
responses to home price changes because they have similar preferences.
   In a setting with credit access and very low cost health care in terms of out-of-pocket
expenditures, we also expect there to be little effect on health. We turn to this question in the
  4 These estimates range from a 1.28% to 2.11% fertility increase per $12,000 of housing wealth. Dettling and Kearney (2014)

employ a similar strategy to these micro-data studies using city-by-year aggregate data from the US for the period 1990 to 2007
and find an effect of 6.0% per $12,000 of home price increase.



                                                              3
second part of the paper. Our results suggest that home price increases lead to small positive
effects on health at birth. There is a statistically significant reduction in the likelihood of
being born premature of 3.31% per 100,000 DKK of home price increase and a non-statistically
significant reduction in low-birth weight of 1.73%. However, we show that home price increases
lead more-advantaged women to give birth, and these composition effects can explain most of
the health impacts we document. We do not find any evidence that health in the first five years
of life is affected by home price variation. Taken together, these results indicate that any health
benefits of home price increases at birth are modest and do not translate into better health in
the longer run.
    Our paper makes several contributions to the literature. First, we provide additional evidence
on the effect of family resource shocks on fertility. Whether children are normal goods is an
old question in economics, dating back at least to Malthus (1798). A long literature has
demonstrated a strong negative cross-sectional relationship between income and fertility, which
exists both across countries and across individuals within a country (Jones and Tertilt 2008;
Jones, Schoonbroodt, and Tertilt 2010). Recent evidence using plausibly-exogenous changes to
family resources has highlighted that these negative cross-sectional correlations are not causal.
Black et al. (2013) show positive fertility effects from the substantial income increases that
accompanied the West Virginia coal boom of the 1970s, while Lindo (2010) shows that income
reductions associated with job displacement reduce total fertility.5 Brueckner and Schwandt
(2015) use plausibly exogenous oil shocks and show that oil-induced country-level income growth
leads to higher fertility. Similarly, Kearney and Wilson (2018) show that male wage increases
driven by the fracking boom led to higher marital and non-marital fertility. There also is
evidence that fertility is pro-cyclical (Chatterjee and Vogl 2018; Currie and Schwandt 2014),
which is consistent with a positive income effect.6 We contribute to this body of work by
presenting new estimates using rich register data from a high-income country with strong social
welfare programs.
    Second, we contribute to the growing body of research examining household responses to
   5 Huttunen and Kellokumpu (2016) re-examine the job displacement effects of fertility and find that female job displacement

has a larger negative effect on fertility than does male job displacement, even though male job displacement has a larger effect on
family resources. This finding suggests that the negative effect of job displacement on fertility may not be driven by income shocks.
   6 A related literature examines price effects, finding that fertility is declining in female wages (Butz and Ward 1979; Schultz

1985; Heckman and Walker 1990) but increases due to government child-based subsidies (Cohen, Dehejia, and Romanov 2013).




                                                                 4
home price variation. Previous studies show that housing wealth affects educational investment
(Lovenheim 2011; Lovenheim and Reynolds 2013; Charles, Hurst and Notowidigdo 2018; Hotz
et al. 2018), adult health (Fichera and Gathergood 2016), retirement behavior (Zhao and Burge
2017), and consumer debt (Brown, Stein and Zafar 2015). Most relevant for our paper are the
studies linking housing wealth to fertility (Lovenheim and Mumford 2013, Dettling and Kearney
2014, Mizutani 2015, Atalay, Li, and Whelan 2017). We contribute to this prior work in three
ways. First, we show that the fertility responses documented in previous studies extend to a
country with a very generous social safety net. Second, we probe the sensitivity of the results
to an expanded set of fixed effects and shed light on the validity of prior research. Finally, we
present the first analysis of how housing market variation affects child health outcomes.
    Third, we provide a theoretical framework that allows us to interpret why home price effects
on fertility do or do not vary across settings. This framework allows us to perform a cross-
country comparison that provides new insight into the mechanisms that underlie the home
price effects the prior literature and we document. In particular, we highlight the role of credit
constraints, household preferences, and government policies in understanding why home prices
have similar effects on fertility across countries. Our analysis hence allows us to reconcile many
of the different findings in the literature.



2     Background

2.1    Danish Institutional Setting

Denmark is country where social safety net programs substantially reduce the monetary burden
of having a child (see Appendix Table 7). To begin with, the majority of Danish health care
services, including prenatal care and all birth related procedures, are free of charge and all
residents have equal access (Danish Ministry of Health and Prevention, 2008). Second, Denmark
has a generous paid parental leave program. Mothers are entitled to 4 weeks of leave before the
due date and 14 weeks of leave after birth. Fathers can take 2 weeks of leave during the first
fourteen weeks after the birth of the child. Furthermore, parents can take an additional 32 weeks
of paid leave, which can be divided freely between the mother and the father. Parents receive full
or partial compensation during leave, depending on their employment contract and collective

                                                5
bargaining agreement.7 Families in Denmark also have access to highly subsidized child care.
The responsibility of the organization of child care institutions falls on the municipalities, and
parents are entitled to a place in the public child care system when their child turns 6 months
old. The out of pocket costs of child care is at most 30 percent of the actual cost. Low-income
households are eligible for additional subsidies. Parents are also paid a lump sum transfer to
assist with costs; the exact amount varies with the child's age.
   Several aspects of the Danish housing market also are worth noting. Like the US, Denmark
has a mortgage credit system that allows borrowers access to relatively cheap and flexible
financing of housing.8 Mortgages are financed through covered bonds (i.e., bonds using a pool
of mortgages as collateral) issued by a small number of specialized mortgage banks. Individuals
can apply to these institutions for a loan of up to 80% of the home's value. The remaining 20%
is a down payment that is either paid out-of-pocket or by using a (partial) bank loan. Due to
Danish regulation, there is a strict matching of cash flows from loans to funding known as the
"balance principle," meaning that payments by mortgage borrowers are passed through directly
to the covered bond investors. Therefore, the investors rather than the mortgage bank bear
the interest rate risk and prepayment risk. At the same time, the mortgage bank retains the
ownership of the mortgages and bears any credit losses. This is quite similar to the structure
of the mortgage-backed securities market in the US.
   Fixed-rate mortgages are widely available to mortgage borrowers both in Denmark and the
US. Unlike the US system, however, the Danish system allows mortgage borrowers to repurchase
their own mortgages from the covered bond pool at the current market price, to transfer the
mortgage to a buyer during a property sale, or to refinance at par with the same mortgage bank
even if their home equity has declined because of a drop in home prices (Berg et al. 2018).
   Mortgages in Denmark also have lower credit risk due to the 20% down payment, to the
fact that the interest rate risk and prepayment risk are borne by the investors rather than by
the mortgage banks, and to the credit friendly legal system in case of foreclosure (Berg et al.
2018). As a result, the degree of creditworthiness of the loan applicants plays a smaller role in
Denmark than in the US. In particular, all Danish borrowers who are deemed to be creditworthy
   7 The Danish Childcare Leave act, LBK nr 822 af 20/06/2018, https://www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/r0710.aspx?id=202000

(in Danish).
   8 Kjeldsen (2004) and Berg et al. (2018) provide detailed comparisons of the Danish and the US mortgage credit systems.




                                                            6
face the same interest rate, with household income and wealth influencing only the size of the
loan. In contrast, borrowers with higher credit scores in the US typically face lower interest
rates than those with lower scores. Overall, the Danish system makes it possible to provide low
and stable interest rates for homeowners, resulting in higher rates of homeownership across the
income distribution than in the US.


2.2   Theoretical Predictions

In this section, we lay out a simple household utility maximization framework to understand
why fertility responds to housing wealth and to be able to more easily compare estimates
across countries. In a simple household utility maximization framework, children can be seen
as consumption goods. The decision to have a child and the investments in children will be
a function of the structure of preferences for children and other goods, prices for child-related
goods and services, prices for non-child goods and services, total household resources, and the
opportunity cost of time. Changes in housing wealth affect total household resources because
housing is a large component of overall household savings portfolios and because housing is a
relatively liquid asset (Mian and Sufi 2011). However, variation in housing wealth does not
affect the opportunity cost of time for raising children, so we abstract from labor market effects
on fertility in this discussion.
   Theoretical predictions for how households respond to the change in resources primarily
depend on whether or not households are credit constrained. If households are not credit con-
strained, housing wealth will affect fertility and child health through the structure of preferences
for children and their health. Assuming children and child health are normal goods, increas-
ing housing wealth should lead to increased fertility and to better child health outcomes. If
households face credit constraints, then increases in housing wealth can relax those constraints,
allowing the households to more easily smooth consumption and investments surrounding the
birth of a child. Hence, housing wealth effects on fertility will be muted among unconstrained
relative to constrained households, as income effects are present for both but only the latter
experiences an increased ability to consume optimally due to a home price increase.
   The price of having children (net of government subsidies) plays an important role in de-



                                                 7
termining the extent to which households are credit constrained. If the net price of having a
child is high, credit constraints are more likely to bind, which will increase the responsiveness
of households to wealth changes. The effect of a real wealth increase on fertility will not be
impacted by price levels for unconstrained households, however.9 Because government subsidies
and family policies mainly act to alter the net price of childbearing and rearing, these polices
will influence the effect of housing wealth variation on fertility only in the presence of credit
constraints. This suggests that, all else equal, credit constrained households living in countries
with high net prices of having a child will have stronger fertility and child investment responses
to changes in housing wealth.
    In the specific case of the US-Denmark comparison, we document that the net price of having
children is significantly different between the two countries. Appendix Table A-7 presents
comparisons of child-related government subsidies in the US and Denmark for the four largest
policy categories outside of housing: cash subsidies, child care, parental leave, and health care.10
Unsurprisingly, subsidies in Denmark are substantially higher than in the US. Denmark has a
generous "family allowance" that ranges from $2,704 for 0-2 year olds to $562 for 15-17 year
olds. The closest analogue in the US is the child tax credit, which families with children under
17 receive and is equal to $1,000 per year.11 Including the Earned Income Tax Credit makes the
US comparably generous in terms of child-related cash payments, but families that receive the
EITC (and in particular the maximum EITC) tend not to be wealthy enough to own homes. For
homeowner families, the Danish cash subsidies are much larger than their US counterpart. This
difference is even larger for child care subsidies. The Danish government subsidizes upwards
of 75% of child-care costs, while the US government only provides a non-refundable tax credit
of up to $3,000 for one child. As a result, out-of-pocket expenditures on child care are much
higher in the US than in Denmark.
    Parental leave differences also are stark across the two countries. In Denmark, there is a total
of 52 weeks of paid family leave when a child is born, with a maximum weekly parental leave
   9 Higher  net prices also lead to a muted wealth effect for a given nominal amount of wealth. However, the effect of a given
real wealth change that incorporates these prices should be unaffected by price variation by construction. For this reason we use
purchasing power parity based exchange rates when comparing across countries, which effectively adjusts wealth levels for any price
differences.
  10 We do not consider housing subsidies because such subsidies do not change among homeowners upon the birth of a child in

either country.
  11 This tax credit was non-refundable during the period of our analysis, which limits the ability of many households to claim the

full credit.



                                                                8
benefit of $645. In contrast, there is no national paid family leave policy in the US; American
women are entitled to 12 weeks of unpaid leave, however many employers have more generous
paid and unpaid leave policies. Virtually no employers have 52-week paid leave policies, though.
Finally, there are differences in the cost of health insurance surrounding premiums and co-pays.
It is important to stress that almost no children are uncovered in the US due to Medicaid
and SCHIP. But most home-owning families in the US have private insurance, and they not
only experience co-payments for birth and any subsequent medical care but also experience a
premium increase upon the birth of the first child. Danish families pay nothing out-of-pocket
for a birth and do not pay premiums. Taken together, it is clear that having and raising a child
in Denmark is far less expensive than having a child in the US in terms of net out-of-pocket
expenditures. This institutional framework suggests that US households are more likely to face
credit constraints because of the higher net price of having children, which should make those
households respond more strongly than their Danish counterparts to housing wealth changes.
    One last consideration when conducting cross country comparisons is that "all else" is not
equal. Countries differ not only in terms of the net price of having children but also in terms of
the prices of other goods and services. As a result, the same nominal wealth change impacts the
likelihood of households facing binding credit constraints differently between the two countries.
In order to abstract from these effects, we will consider the effects of real housing wealth changes
and scale the estimated effects by a purchasing power parity exchange rate.
    Absent credit constraints, it is much more difficult to make ex-ante predictions of how
housing wealth should affect fertility and child health outcomes across countries. The reason
for this ambiguity is that the size of any effect is based on preferences for children, health, and
other goods. To the extent any of these preferences differ, there will be different wealth effects
across countries. However, absent credit constraints, our theoretical discussion underscores that
similar responses to housing wealth across countries reflect similar preferences for children.



3    Data

We use Danish register data from 1992 to 2011. The data include individual-level records with
household linkages, allowing us to follow the universe of Danish households for almost two


                                                 9
decades. Our outcome variables of interest concern fertility and early-life child health. We use
two complementary data sets to define our outcome variables. The first is the Birth Registry,
which includes all (hospital and home) births in Denmark as well as information on infant health
at birth. We use these data to construct an indicator for giving birth and, for those who have
live births, we construct separate indicators for having a low birth weight (birth weight below
2,500 grams), very low birth weight (birth weight below 1,500 grams), or premature (gestational
age less than 37 completed weeks) baby. We also use birth weight as an outcome on its own.
We supplement these with data on hospital admissions and ER visits from the National Patient
Registry, which cover the universe of hospitalizations in public and private hospitals. Using
the National Patient Register, we construct separate indicators for the child having hospital or
ER admissions during the first year of life and during ages 1-5. Our outcomes also include the
number of days hospitalized and number of ER visits during the first five years of life.12
    Our main independent variable concerns short-term housing price changes. The housing data
are obtained from The State's Sales and Valuation Registry, which includes detailed information
on public valuations, sales prices, ownership, and housing type. We rely on public valuation data
to construct our measure of once-lagged one-year housing price changes. Public valuations are
used as the taxable value for almost all properties in Denmark. All privately owned properties
are valued in uneven years and adjusted in even years, which yields estimated values in every
year.13 While these valuations account for an extensive set of observable housing characteristics
(e.g., geographic location, year of construction, size, type of heating, type of roof), they have
been criticized for being unable to precisely reflect the market value of houses.
    To obtain a more accurate measure of the market value of properties not traded in the market,
we use a method similar to how the equal-weighted sale price appraisal ratio (SPAR) index is cal-
culated (Bourassa et al. 2006). We use the public valuation of homes in each year corrected by
the mean over or undervaluation of houses actually sold in the same year/municipality/housing
type/valuation quartile cluster c as an estimate of the market value of homes not traded in
the market. As a hypothetical example, consider a house that is valued at 1,000,000 DKK in
the municipality of Horsens in 2000, and assume that this valuation is in the third valuation
   12 The number of inpatient days excludes the admission related to the childbirth and the following four days. During this period

it was not uncommon to spend two to four days in the hospital after childbirth to recover and adjust to the new role as parent.
   13 The public valuations occur in January of the prior year until the end of 2003. Afterwards, they occur in October of the prior

year. Very few properties are exempt from public valuations, e.g., churches.


                                                                10
quartile of all houses in Horsens in 2000. If houses that are actually traded in the market in
Horsens in 2000 in the third valuation quartile are sold at a price that is 20% higher than their
public valuation, a better estimate of the house would be to multiply the public valuation with
an adjustment factor of 1.2 to obtain an estimated market value of 1,200,000 DKK.
   More formally, denote the public valuation by V , the share of the house an individual owns by
S , the sales price of the k  K houses sold in a cluster c by P . Among homeowner households,
home value for woman i with partner j is then calculated as:



                                                       K                                K
                                                  1         Pktc                    1         Pktc
                          HVit = (Vitc Sit )                        + (Vjtc Sjt )                    .   (1)
                                                  K   k=1
                                                            Vktc                    K   k=1
                                                                                              Vktc

We assign to each woman the value of HVit from the first house we see her purchase in the
data regardless of whether she subsequently moves. Hence, HVit is based on the same house
for each woman throughout the sample period.
   In order to shed light on the accuracy of our constructed home price value, we compare
in Figure 1 mean purchase price for homes that are actually sold and the mean estimated
home value in the same year calculated using Equation (1) as well as the associated confidence
intervals. The figure shows that the two lines are almost completely overlapping, which indicates
that estimated home value is on average closely aligned with market value. In Figure 2, we
show the mean difference between estimated home values and actual sales prices. This is close
to being horizontal, which indicates that short-run home price variation is not driven by time-
varying differences in the ability of Equation (1) to estimate the market value of the home.
   Finally, we use data from the Population Registry and other relevant registries to obtain in-
formation on demographic characteristics (age, years of completed schooling, household income,
having a partner). All monetary variables are in 100,000 Danish Kroner (DKK) deflated to 2006
prices using the consumer price index (CPI). The exchange rate in 2006 was approximately 0.17
USD per DKK. If we take into account differences in purchasing power, the exchange rate in
2006 becomes 0.12.14 The latter exchange rate is what we use for international comparisons
throughout this paper.
 14 Source:   https://data.oecd.org/conversion/purchasing-power-parities-ppp.htm.




                                                               11
3.1     Analysis Sample

We impose two types of restrictions on the data: one for the sample of houses used and one for
the sample of women.15 We only include houses and apartments with residential use that are
located in clusters with at least five sales. The other cases represent particular types of homes,
e.g., very expensive apartments in rural areas that do not provide us with sufficient variation
to estimate the home value. We only consider normal sales between individuals.16 We exclude
homes with a negative public valuation, negative sales price, or multiple addresses at the same
location. Finally, we omit homes that are sold for more than 300% or less than 40% of the
public valuation.17 Appendix Table A-1 shows the number of observations excluded due to each
of these conditions.
   Turning to the sample selection criteria for women, we focus on individuals who were not
home owners in the beginning of 1992-1993 and who became a homeowner between 1993 and
2004.18 This gives us a sample of potential first time home owners. We only focus on women
who purchase a home between the ages of 18 and 42.19 We also drop 7,324 observations with
incomplete data on household income, home price, and home ownership. We next omit women
whose partners purchased a home after 1993 but before the woman and partner became a
couple. Finally, we exclude individuals who bought houses whose public valuation increased by
more than 50% from one year to the next and homes in the 1st and 99th percentile of lagged
one-year price change. These fluctuations are likely driven by major changes to the property
(i.e., additions, selling off land) and not by local housing market variation. This leaves us with
a final sample of 1,105,559 observations on 198,435 women aged 20 to 44 who gave birth to
a total of 125,903 children in the period 1995 through 2006. Panel B in Appendix Table A-1
shows how many observations are affected by each of these sample restrictions.
   Table 1 presents the summary statistics for our analysis sample. The first group of variables
are outcome variables. The fertility rate among homeowners is 11.66%, which is somewhat
higher than the national fertility rate of around 7% for the same age group (Appendix Table
  15 Restrictions on the sample of homes used to calculate the adjustment factors also apply to the construction of the sample of

home owners.
  16 For example, sales between family members are not included since these might not reflect the actual market value.
  17 These restrictions exclude 8,581 women.
  18 Individuals who moved out of their newly purchased home before the end of the year are not included.
  19 Due to the use of a once-lagged one-year change independent variable, this leads to an age range of 20 to 44 years when we

investigate fertility effects. Around 98% of all births in Denmark are to women in this age group.



                                                               12
A-2). The latter is similar to the average birth probability in the US (see, e.g., Dettling
and Kearney (2014), who report a fertility rate of 70 births per 1,000 women in a reasonably
comparable period and age range). Women in our sample are likely to have a higher fertility
rate than the average population due to selection into home ownership prior to the decision to
have a child. Turning to early-life health outcomes, the average infant in the sample has a birth
weight of around 3,570 grams. Over 3% of these children have low birth weight, 0.58% have very
low birth weight, and 4.67% are premature. The births in our sample are healthier on average
than in the US, where over 8% of births are low birthweight, 1.4% are very low birth weight,
and 9.85% are premature.20 However, they are closely aligned with birth outcomes among the
full sample of Danish births for women aged 20-44 (Appendix Table A-2). On average, children
in the sample are hospitalized for 1.69 days during their first year of life, and around 6% have
an ER visit. These means are slightly lower than those for the broader sample of Danish births.
   The second group of variables in Table 1 are housing variables. Consistent with the evidence
in Figure 1, we see that the mean estimated home value at the time of purchase is very close
to the actual mean purchase sum of houses sold. The average lagged one-year home price
change is about 71,000 DKK. Compared to prior studies from the US, women in our sample
are subject to smaller and less varied housing price changes. This is in part due to differences
in the timespan used to construct the main independent variables but likely also reflects the
differences in the credit mortgage markets. Approximately 53% of homes in Denmark were
occupied by the owner in 2000 (not included in the table), which is somewhat higher than the
overall ownership rate in the US (44% in 2000 for a sample of women between 20 and 44; see
Dettling and Kearney 2014). In Figure 3, we present the evolution of the average one-year
home price change by quartile of the home's value in the initial year. Price changes are sizable
and stable across the home value distribution, and the housing boom of the early- to mid-2000s
is clearly evident. Home prices vary across municipalities as well: Figure 4 shows the average
home price change for each municipality in 2006. While home price increases tend to be larger
around the urban areas, home price increases are not concentrated in one part of the country
and are not localized to urban centers.
   The final group of variables in Table 1 summarizes characteristics of homeowners. The
 20 Source:   https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/birthweight.htm.



                                                           13
average homeowner is around 33 years old with 14 years of completed schooling, 88% are
married or cohabiting with a partner, and 96% are employed. Compared to the full population
of women aged 20 to 44, homeowners in Denmark tend to be older, more likely to be married
or cohabiting and have higher socio-economic status (see Appendix Table A-2). However,
demographic characteristics of homeowners in our sample are comparable to those in the US
(Lovenheim and Mumford 2013).



4     Empirical Approach

Our empirical approach relates short-run home price changes to fertility and early-life child
health outcomes.21 Specifically, we estimate models of the following form:


                        Birthiaymt =  +  HVi,t-1 + Xit + mt + ay +                                    iaymt ,                    (2)


where Birthiaymt is an indicator for whether woman i whose household purchased a house
when she was age a in year y and who lives in municipality m gave birth in year t. The main
variable of interest in the model is HVi,t-1 , which is the once-lagged one-year home value
change experienced by woman i: HVi,t-1 - HVi,t-2 . The model controls for a wide array of
observed individual-year level characteristics that are available in the rich Danish register data,
including women's age fixed effects, woman's years of education, number of children in the
household, an indicator for having a partner (being married and/or cohabiting), an indicator
for being unemployed at least 6 months in a given year, and total CPI-adjusted real family
income (woman + partner) in 100,000 DKK units.
    The key identification assumption in this model is that changes in home prices are unrelated
to unobserved characteristics that also correlate with the likelihood of giving birth and with
birth outcomes. In order to assess the validity of this assumption, Table 2 shows average
observable characteristics across the distribution of the lagged one-year home price change. We
examine real household income, years of education, number of children, whether the woman is
unemployed and whether she has a partner. Home price changes vary considerably across the
  21 Our register data includes years 1992 to 2011. We use data from 1995-2006 to examine the effects on fertility. When investigating

health outcomes within the first year and during ages 1-5, we expand the sample period accordingly.




                                                                 14
quartiles (by construction). While there also is some evidence that real household income and
educational attainment increase slightly across quartiles, what matters for our identification
strategy is whether they change in ways that predict our outcomes of interest. To see more
directly how the observables vary with home price variation, we calculate predicted outcomes
for each woman based on all observed characteristics. These are essentially summary measures
of observed characteristics as they relate to our outcome variables. Table 2 shows means of
each predicted outcome by home price change quartile. For each of the thirteen outcomes in
the table, the predicted outcomes are remarkably similar across home price growth quartile.
There is no discernible pattern across quartiles for any outcome, and for no outcome do we
observe predicted changes that would generate spurious treatment effects.
   While it is reassuring to see that average observable characteristics are unrelated to the
changes in housing prices, there still can be some sources of bias remaining. The variation
in housing prices comes from two sources. The first is municipality-level changes in home
prices that affect all homes similarly. The second is within-municipality changes in home
price that are likely to be neighborhood specific. We include in our preferred estimates two
types of fixed effects that restrict the identifying variation in HVi,t-1 that is used. Given
prior work finding procyclical fertility behavior (e.g., Currie and Schwandt 2014; Kearney and
Wilson 2018), biases from macroeconomic conditions are a first-order concern. In order to
address this, we include municipality-by-year fixed effects (mt ) that account not only for fixed
differences across years and municipalities but also for any unobserved year-specific municipality
level shocks that may be correlated with home prices and fertility decisions or outcomes. For
example, municipality economic conditions could affect birth outcomes and home prices, as
well as changes to municipality services such as child care. One may object to the use of these
fixed effects, as the municipality-by-year level changes are arguably more likely to be exogenous
than across-household home price changes within a municipality. We therefore show estimates
that include just municipality and year fixed effects akin to Lovenheim and Mumford (2013)
and Dettling and Kearney (2014). The comparison of estimates across these two specifications
shows how accounting for any municipality-specific shocks in a given year affects the results.
   The second set of fixed effects we include that are new to this literature are age-of-purchase-



                                               15
by-year-of-purchase fixed effects. These controls account for a potential mechanical bias in
prior work that has not been addressed because of data limitations. Women who have been
in a house longer are more exposed to housing market changes and are more likely to have a
baby as they age. Similarly, women who purchase houses at a younger age are more likely to
give birth at some point after purchase and have more time of exposure to home price changes.
Hence, there is a potential bias stemming from the interaction of a housing tenure effect and
an age-of-purchase effect. The age-of-purchase-by-year-of-purchase fixed effects fully account
for any bias coming from this source, and comparisons of estimates with and without these
controls show the size of the bias in prior work from not accounting for this source of variation.
   The addition of these two sets of fixed effects considerably reduces the possibility of a remain-
ing bias. Once we add municipality-by-year fixed effects, the identification assumption becomes
that differences in home price growth across houses in the same municipality (and year) are un-
correlated with unobserved trends in or shocks to fertility behavior and child health outcomes.
Here, the age-of-purchase-by-year-of-purchase fixed effects are important, as we essentially are
comparing fertility behavior and outcomes of households within a municipality in the same year
that purchased the home in the same year with women who were identically aged. In order for
there to still be a bias in these estimates, it must be that higher fertility households or those
with better underlying infant health are better at predicting future home price growth when
they purchase a home in a way that is uncorrelated with the rich set of observables in the model
and with the age at purchase and year of purchase. While possible, we emphasize that this
is a weaker set of identifying assumptions than what has been used in prior research on this
question.
   It also is important to emphasize that our estimates are less sensitive to bias from parent
mobility than are those from prior work. Rather than focus on a sample of "stayers" who do
not move (which is potentially endogenous), we examine a sample of women who first purchase
a home after 1992. If they move, they remain in the sample, but we assign everyone the price
changes of their first home even if they move. Conceptually, this is the same as using price
changes of one's first home as an instrument for the actual price changes women experience.
Our estimates represent the reduced form version of this IV model. Mobility rates are low



                                                16
in Denmark, but our approach still is more robust to endogenous mobility behavior than the
approaches used by prior research on this question.
    Finally, errors are likely to be correlated within household over time and within municipality
over time because of the strong within-municipality correlation of home price changes. There-
fore, standard errors are clustered at the municipality level throughout the analysis, which
handles both sources of error correlation.22



5     Home Prices and Fertility

5.1     Baseline Results

Table 3 presents the effect of short-run home price changes on fertility. We alter the set of fixed
effects and controls across columns to assess the relative importance of different modeling as-
sumptions. In column (1), we control only for year and municipality fixed effects. The estimate
indicates that a 100,000 DKK increase in home value is associated with a 0.16 percentage point
increase in the likelihood of giving birth. This estimate is statistically significantly different
from zero at the 10% level, and it represents a 1.34% increase relative to the mean fertility
rate of 0.1166 (Table 1). As Table 1 shows, the standard deviation of one-year lagged home
price growth is about 1, so this also has the natural interpretation of the percent effect of a 1
standard deviation increase in home value.
    In column (2), we include municipality-by-year fixed effects. The estimate decreases sub-
stantially in magnitude, and it no longer is significant at even the 10% level. This change
likely reflects the existence of unobserved shocks at the municipality-year level that are posi-
tively correlated both with home price changes and fertility (e.g., local business cycle variation).
While suggestive that the estimated effect of home price changes on fertility is not robust to
the inclusion of municipality-by-year fixed effects, in column (3) we add in age-of-purchase-
by-year-of-purchase fixed effects and the estimate increases substantially. We find in column
(3) that a 100,000 DKK increase in home prices leads to a 0.36 percentage point increase in
the likelihood of giving birth, which is a 3.07% effect relative to the mean. This estimate is
  22 While women can move across municipalities, we assign each women the home price changes of her first purchased home

throughout even if she moves. Thus, each woman's municipality is fixed and is based on the location of the first purchased home
after 1992. Household clusters hence are fully subsumed by the municipality clusters.




                                                              17
significant at the 1% level. Thus, controlling for municipality-by-year fixed effects reduces the
size of the estimated effect, but conditional on those controls accounting for age-of-purchase-
by-year-of-purchase fixed effects substantially increases the size of the coefficient. This occurs
because the age and year of purchase is associated both with underlying fertility likelihood and
with exposure to home price shocks. For example, women who have owned a house for longer
may experience larger home price increases but are less likely to have a child because of prior
fertility decisions. On net, the more extensive fixed effects that we are able to use here relative
to previous studies has little impact on the estimated fertility effect of home price changes.
    The final column of Table 3 adds controls for observed characteristics and shows our preferred
estimate. We find that a 100,000 DKK increase in home prices leads to a 0.27 percentage
point increase in the likelihood of giving birth. Relative to the mean fertility rate, this is a
2.32% effect. Comparing columns (3) and (4), the observables exert very little influence on
the estimate. As Appendix Table A-3 demonstrates, this is because the fixed effects soak up
similar variation to the observables. If only municipality and year fixed effects are included in
the model, adding our set of observed characteristics has a very similar effect on the estimates
as adding municipality-by-year and age-of-purchase-by-year-of-purchase fixed effects without
observables. The estimate from such a model (column (2) of Appendix Table A-3) is almost
identical to the estimate in column (3) of Table 3.23 To explore which observables matter most,
we include them one-by-one in Appendix Table A-4. The table makes clear that age fixed effects
and the number of children are the controls that cause the largest increase in the estimated
effect.24 Because these variables are highly related to fertility patterns and to the types of
homes families occupy, this is a sensible result. Together, the estimates in Tables 3, A-3, and
A-4 indicate that it is necessary either to control for observed homeowner characteristics such
as number of children, age, education, and family composition or to control for the expanded
set of fixed effects we employ. Controlling for both simultaneously produces effects that are
quite similar to, if somewhat smaller than, estimates that use either set of controls separately.
  23 We  also estimate a model similar to that in column (2) of Appendix Table A-3 that includes women who purchase a home
prior to 1993. The estimate of 0.0026(0.0005) is similar to baseline and suggests focusing on women who purchase a home in 1993
or after does not drive our results.
  24 Conversely, controlling for years of education and whether one has an identified partner substantially attenuates the estimate.




                                                                18
5.2     Robustness Checks and Heterogeneous Effects

In this section, we first investigate the robustness of the estimated effects on fertility along
several dimensions. A core identification assumption embedded in our approach is that there
are no contemporaneous, unobserved shocks in municipalities that are both correlated with the
timing, magnitude, and sign of home price changes and with fertility outcomes. One way to
test for such shocks is to examine renters, who are subject to such local shocks but who do
not experience wealth effects from home price changes. In column (1) of Table 4, we present
estimates using a sample of renters who were not homeowners in the prior two years, current
year, or subsequent year and who do not live with their parents. We define the sample in
this way to avoid problems associated with renters purchasing homes right before they have a
child. In addition, we want to avoid a bias from spillovers from parents to children that could
be induced by home price changes. The resulting sample of renters generally is composed of
those who are younger, have fewer years of education, are lower income, have fewer children,
and are less likely to have a partner than the those in the homeowner sample. Nonetheless,
these estimates provide a check on the results and the existence of bias from contemporaneous
shocks. Table 4 shows that the effect of municipality-wide changes in home prices on renter
fertility is very small, (-0.003 percentage points or -0.04% at the mean), and it is not statistically
significant at conventional levels. Lack of evidence that renters respond to home price changes
supports our identification strategy.25
    In column (2) of Table 4, we include woman fixed effects in the model. We confirm that
short-run housing price changes significantly increases fertility. This suggests that our baseline
results are not driven by unobserved attributes of women and households. In columns (3)-(5)
we use two-, three-, and four-year lags to assess the robustness of our estimates to the use of
one-year lagged home prices. The estimates are similar to one another and to our baseline
result. Finally in Column (6), we assess the sensitivity of our results to more carefully aligning
the timing of home price valuation and births. In our baseline model, we link births in a
given year to the house price change in the previous year. In doing so, we ignore the fact that
some conceptions occur before the parents observe the change in the home price. In order to
  25 These findings are similar to the null results for renters in Lovenheim and Mumford (2013), while Dettling and Kearney (2014)

actually find a slight negative effect for renters.




                                                               19
address this concern, we use the gestational length and birth date to calculate the conception
date. We then scale the one-year home price change by the fraction of the year until the
time of conception. Among women who do not give birth, we conduct a similar calculation
using a randomly-assigned birth month. We assign these "control" birth months such that the
distribution of birth months is the same across women who do and do not give birth. The
resulting estimate, presented in column (6), is very similar to the baseline result.
    We next examine how the baseline fertility effect we find varies according to important
household and mother characteristics. Panel A of Table 5 shows separate estimates by age
group: 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, and 40-44. Each set of results is from our preferred model
that includes observables, municipality-by-year and age-of-purchase-by-year-of-purchase fixed
effects. The effects are quite stable across age groups for those below 40. The differences in
baseline fertility rates by age, however, lead to small differences in the percent effect by age. The
least responsive group in percent terms are those aged 25-29 (1.47%), while the most responsive
group is those aged 35-39 (2.89%). We also note that the effect is not statistically significant at
even the 10% level for 20-24 year olds,26 but the estimate is quite similar to those for older ages.
The effect declines substantially among those over 40 and is no longer statistically significantly
different from zero at conventional levels, though the base fertility rate is so small among this
group that the point estimate still points to a sizable impact of home prices on fertility.
    Panel B of Table 5 shows effects by parity. The effect of home price on fertility is largest for
first-time mothers, at 0.56 percentage points per 100,000 DKK increase in home price, or 3.65%
relative to the mean. Statistically significant and sizable impacts also are evident for families
with one and two existing children, while the effect for 3+ children families is not statistically
significant. However, the effect size for this group is quite large, at over 3%.
    In Panels C and D, we investigate treatment heterogeneity by the socioeconomic status of the
household. Panel C presents results separately by family income quartile.27 The point estimates
suggest that women in the middle of the income distribution are most responsive to home price
changes in their fertility decisions. In Panel D, we estimate effects by educational attainment
quartile of the mother. There is little evidence of heterogeneity by completed education. The
  26 The lack of statistical significance among this group is driven in part by the fact that few 20-24 year olds live in a home that

they or their partner own.
  27 Income quartiles are defined over the full sample period.




                                                                 20
effects are similarly-sized and are statistically significant in all four groups.
    Finally, we study whether households respond differently to home price increases and de-
creases. In order to do so, we include in equation (2) an interaction term between home price
change and an indicator for a price decline (there are no observations with a home price change
of exactly zero). We obtain estimates of a 100,000 DKK increase in home prices on fertility of
0.0038(0.0006) and of a 100,000 DKK decrease in home prices on fertility of -0.0040(0.0017).
The effects are roughly equal and opposite in magnitude, suggesting that home price effects on
fertility are symmetric.


5.3     Interpretation and Discussion

In this section, we compare the magnitude of our fertility result to those in the previous lit-
erature. Using data from 1985 to 2007, Lovenheim and Mumford (2013) find that a $12,000
increase in home value leads to a 2.11% higher fertility rate in the US. Estimates from a similar
model in Australia using micro data from 2001-2014 show a fertility effect of 1.36% per $12,000
(Atalay, Li, and Whelan 2017), while results from Japan during the housing market downturn
of the early 1990s indicates a fertility effect of 2.8% per $12,000 among those with home loans
(Mizutani 2015). There is no effect among those without home loans, such that the weighted
average effect is a 1.28% increase in fertility per $12,000 of lagged home price increase.28
    Our preferred estimate indicates that fertility increases by 2.32% for each 100,000 DKK
increase in home prices, which is $12,00 taking into account purchasing power differences. Put
on a monetary scale, our results are in line with those found in previous studies and virtually
identical to that of Lovenheim and Mumford (2013), who use data from a similar period.29
Importantly, the heterogeneous treatment effects documented in Table 5 also broadly align
with the findings from Lovenheim and Mumford (2013) in the US.30
  28 Two studies find larger fertility effects. Using city-by-year aggregate data for the period 1990 to 2007, Dettling and Kearney

(2014) find an effect of 6.0% per $12,000 of home price increase. Clark and Ferrer (2019) examine lagged home price levels rather
than home price changes and document a fertility effect of 9.6% for each $12,000 increase in lagged home prices. That home price
levels are more strongly correlated with household unobservables than are changes is likely the reason why their estimates are so
large.
  29 Lovenheim and Mumford (2013) focus on two-year and four-year changes in home prices rather than the one-year change we

use here. Table 4 shows estimates from our data using two-year and four-year home price changes. We find that a 100,000 DKK
increase in home prices over two and four years leads to a 1.63% and 1.29% increase in fertility, respectively.
  30 In contrast to the similarity of the effects per dollar, comparing effects per standard deviation leads to large differences because

there is much more home price variation in the US than in Denmark: a standard deviation change in home prices in Denmark is
equivalent to 105,000 DKK ($12,600) using one-year changes and 152,000 DKK ($18,240) using two-year home price changes (the
lagged two-year home value change has a mean of 1.2081 with a standard deviation of 1.5281). As shown in Table 4, for a standard
deviation increase in 2-year home price change, we find an effect of 2.5% (152,000*1.63/100,000). In the US, a standard deviation



                                                                   21
   The similarity of the fertility responses in Denmark and in the US to housing wealth changes
is a surprising finding given the strong pro-natalist policies of Denmark. While it is undeniable
that the net costs of children are higher in the US than in Denmark, our discussion in Section
2 highlights that costs would be an important mechanism behind fertility responses only if
households were credit constrained. If households are not credit constrained and if households
in the two countries have similar preferences for children, then we would expect housing wealth
effects to be similar across the two settings.
   In order to shed some light on the reasons for the similarity of fertility responses, we bring
suggestive evidence on the extent of credit constraints surrounding child birth. We first exam-
ine expenditure differences across observationally-similar households with and without a child
under the age of two using the 2015-2018 Consumer Expenditure Surveys in the US. We take all
two adult households and estimate regressions of expenditures on the number of children under
two, the number of children aged 2-16, total family income, age and education fixed effects for
both adults in the household, Census Division fixed effects, and quarter and year fixed effects.
Coefficient estimates on the number of children under the age of 2 are presented in Appendix
Table A-5. While the assumptions underlying a causal interpretation of these estimates are
strong, they provide suggestive evidence of how expenditures among very similar families vary
with the presence of young children. In Panel A, we show estimates for the sample of home-
owners. Contrary to the existence of credit constraints, there is an increase in expenditures
associated with having a young child in the household of 5-6%. This increase is driven by hous-
ing and health, while food expenditures decline (possibly because new parents eat out less).
Critically, "other" expenditures that reflect general consumption is unchanged. In contrast,
in Panel B there is a large decline in total expenditures among renters, and for many large
categories the effects for homeowners and renters are statistically significantly different at the
5% level. Hence, these estimates show little evidence of credit constraints among homeowners
in the US where costs of having children are high. This is a sensible finding because most
homeowners already have secured extensive credit to purchase a home.
   It is difficult to produce similar estimates for Denmark, as there are no consumption measures
in two-year home price changes is $73,130 (Lovenheim and Mumford 2013). Thus, a standard deviation increase in housing prices
result in a fertility effect of 12.8% (73,130*2.64/15,000), which is a sizeable difference.




                                                             22
in the register data. As a means to compare the consumption effects of birth across Danish
and US homeowners, we use the consumption imputation method developed by Browning and
Leth-Peterson (2003). They show that imputing consumption using income and year-to-year
wealth changes matches reported consumption in a sample of linked consumption data. Using
their method for imputing household consumption and applying this measure to the same model
used with the CEX survey data discussed above, we find that an additional child under the age
of two reduces consumption by a non-statistically-significant 380 DKK. This is less than a third
of a percent reduction in consumption. Similar to US homeowners, Danish homeowners change
their consumption little when they have young children. These estimates suggest that both
Danish and US homeowners have access to sufficient credit to smooth consumption surrounding
childbirth.31
    Evidence from the extant literature also suggests that housing wealth is similarly liquid in
Denmark and the US, although this is most relevant in the case of binding credit constraints.
The period of our analysis incorporates an unprecedented expansion in the liquidity of home
equity through cash out refinances, home equity loans and home equity lines of credit. Mian
and Sufi (2011) estimate that each dollar of home equity led to an increase in equity extraction
of $0.25 in the US, and a similar study in Denmark found an extraction rate of 21% (De Stefani
and Hviid 2018). Combined with the lack of evidence on credit constraints among homeowners,
these studies underscore that the there are not consequential differences in the liquidity of
housing wealth across Denmark and the US.
    That the US and Denmark do not differ in ways that would suggest a difference in the
effect of housing wealth on fertility implies that variation in estimates across countries reflects
preferences for children. It thus is interesting that the effects per dollar are so similar across
countries: holding all else equal, this will only occur when children enter similarly into parental
objective functions in the two countries. The finding that parents respond similarly to home
price changes in their fertility decisions across the two countries is useful for uncovering fertility
preferences, which would be difficult to do without this comparison.
  31 The pattern of results we document are also inconsistent with credit constraints. Credit constraints should bind more for

lower-income families, but we do not find that the fertility response to home prices is higher for these families. Furthermore, if
credit constraints are the main mechanism we would expect home prices to affect the timing of births rather than the total number
of births. However, we find that overall fertility increases.




                                                               23
6     Home Prices and Early-Life Child Health

Table 6 presents the first estimates in the literature of how housing wealth affects early-life
child health outcomes. Panel A shows estimates of birth outcomes: birth weight (in grams),
and indicators for low birth weight (birth weight < 2,500 grams), very low birth weight (birth
weight < 1,500 grams), and prematurity (born before gestational week 37).32 We find that
birth outcomes are positively impacted by home price increases. A 100,000 DKK increase in
home prices in the past year leads to a 0.05 percentage point reduction in the likelihood of
low birth weight and a 0.15 percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being premature.
These are both modest effects (1.73% and 3.23% relative to the mean, respectively), but only
the latter is significant at the 5% level. Note that the incidence of low birth weight in Denmark
is extremely low, at 3.16%, so detecting an effect on this outcome is difficult. The estimate on
birth weight in Table 6 is positive and marginally significant (p-value of 0.1157), but at 0.10
percent of the mean it is economically insignificant. Hence, in the remainder of the paper, we
focus on the likelihood of prematurity and low birth weight.
    Appendix Table A-6 shows the effects of home price changes on low birth weight and pre-
maturity by mother's age, parity, income and education. The estimates are imprecise, but they
provide suggestive evidence that the low birth weight and prematurity reductions are predom-
inantly concentrated among the youngest (20-24) and oldest (40-44) mothers in our sample
and among new mothers and those with 3 or more children. While none of the estimates is
statistically significant at conventional levels, they are economically significant for these groups.
There also is suggestive evidence that mothers in the bottom half of the income distribution and
who have below-median education attainment experience the largest changes in the likelihood
of having a premature birth due to home price changes.
    Housing price changes can impact infant health outcomes both by changing the composition
of births and by changing health outcomes among inframarginal births. We conduct two types
of analyses to shed light on the importance of these channels. First, we estimate regressions
in the spirit of Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2004) to provide direct evidence on compositional
  32 We also have examined macrosomia, which is defined as having a birthweight over 4,000 grams. The mean of this variable is

0.2028 and its standard deviation is 0.4021. We estimate an effect of 0.0021(0.00004), or 1.04%, on this outcome. While statistically
significantly different from zero, the effect is small in magnitude.




                                                                 24
shifts. In particular, among those who give birth, we regress observed characteristics on lagged
home price changes as well as the full set of fixed effects and find that home price increases
cause shifts in composition of births towards older, more educated, higher income, and two-
parent households. These results are presented in Table 7. The last two columns of the
Table uses predicted prematurity and low birth-weight to assess to overall implications of these
compositional changes for our infant health estimates. The estimates are negative, of similar
magnitude to the treatment effects in Table 6, and are statistically significant, confirming that
at least some of the health effects we find are driven by changes in composition.33 One way to
account for endogenous changes in the composition of mothers is to include mother fixed effects.
When we estimate models that include mother fixed effects, we find positive but economically
small effects on prematurity and low birth weight. The estimates indicate that a 100,000 DKK
increase in housing prices increases the likelihood of prematurity and low birthweight by 0.27%
and 0.38%, respectively. These results indicate that the baseline health gains we document
reflect selection rather a causal effect of housing wealth on infant health.
    Second, we investigate effects of housing price increases prior to birth on short-run and
medium-run health outcomes. Panel B of Table 6 shows results for health outcomes in the first
year of life: number of days hospitalized, ever hospitalized, number of ER visits, and ever had an
ER visit. While these are rather extreme health outcomes, a large portion of the sample (35%)
has been hospitalized in the first year of life, and ER visits are not that uncommon. However,
we find no statistically significant evidence that health in the first year of life changes. The
point estimates in the first two columns are negative, but they are not statistically significantly
different from zero at even the 10% level. Furthermore, we can rule out a decline of more than
4% in column (1) and a decline larger than 0.9% in column (2) at the 95% level. The point
estimates in columns (3) and (4) for ER visits are positive but are small in size and also are
precisely estimated. In Panel C, we estimate effects of home price increases on the same health
outcomes in years 1-5 of life. The effects are again small, precisely estimated, and statistically
insignificant.
    Taken together, our results suggest that home price increases lead to somewhat healthier
  33 We control for each of these observables, so changes in these observables do not drive our results. However, there likely are

other characteristics for which we cannot control that also change with home prices and can be related to underlying fertility.




                                                               25
births largely due to a change in the composition of births, and they have little effect on health
measures in the first five years of life. Measures of health at birth have been shown to be
strong measures of long-run life outcomes like academic achievement (Figlio et al. 2014) as
well as later-life outcomes (Currie and Rossin-Slater 2015). That we find no effect of home
prices on health outcomes among 0-5 year olds combined with the evidence that home price
increase induce births among more advantaged households suggests that there are few real
health implications of home price variation. This finding is consistent with our argument that
homeowner households are not credit constrained. If the effect of housing wealth on fertility
simply reflects an income effect, we would not expect much of an effect on child health because
families are already optimizing health investments and because health care in Denmark is so
heavily subsidized. While there is likely to be a positive income effect in terms of child health,
since health is a normal good, the massive government subsidies in Denmark that lead health
care to ostensibly be free likely mutes any income effect.



7    Conclusion

This paper examines the effects of short-run housing price variation on fertility and early-life
child health. Using administrative data from Denmark, we first show that short-run home price
increases lead to significant increases in fertility. The magnitudes of our estimates are in line
with those established in prior literature and are virtually identical to those found by Lovenheim
and Mumford (2013) using a similar strategy in the US for a similar period. Our analyses also
reveal a similar pattern of heterogeneity as in the US. The similarity of the fertility responses
in Denmark and the US suggests that the pro-natalist policies of Denmark (e.g., long parental
leave, heavily subsidized child care, and free and universal health care) do not mitigate wealth
effects related to fertility. We argue that the similarity of effects across the US and Denmark
reflect a lack of credit constraints among homeowners combined with similar preferences for
children across the two countries.
    In the second part of the paper, we present the first estimates in the literature on the effect
of home price changes on infant health. We find modest but economically significant effects on
health at birth in terms of a lower likelihood of low birth weight and prematurity. However,


                                                26
most of this effect reflects changes in the composition of births. Overall, we do not find any
evidence that housing wealth has a causal impact on early life health. This finding generally
supports our argument that homeowner households do not face credit constraints with respect
to the birth of a child; the heavily subsidized nature of health care in Denmark renders any
income effect quite small in the absence of significant credit constraints. The effect of housing
wealth on the health of young children in a setting without such high levels of government
subsidy, such as the US, may be much larger. We view this as an important area for future
research.


References
[1] Atalay, Kadir, Ang Li, and Stephen Whelan. 2017. "Housing Wealth and Fertility: Australian Evidence."
   The University of Syndney Economics Working Paper Series 2017-08.

[2] Berg, Jesper, Morten Bækmand Nielsen, and James I. Vickery. 2018. "Peas in a Pod? Comparing the US
   and Danish Mortgage Finance Systems." Economic Policy Review 24(3): 63-87.

[3] Black, Dan A., Natalia Kolesnikova, Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2013. "Are Children `Normal' ?."
   Review of Economics and Statistics 95(1): 21-33.

[4] Bourassa, Steven C., Martin Hoesli, and Jian Sun. 2006. "A Simple Alternative House Price Index Method."
   Journal of Housing Economics 15(1): 80-97.

[5] Brown, Meta, Sarah Stein, and Basit Zafar. 2015. "The Impact of Housing Markets on Consumer Debt:
   Credit Report Evidence from 1999 to 2012." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 47(1): 175-213.

[6] Browning, Martin and Søren LethPetersen. 2003. "Imputing Consumption from Income and Wealth Infor-
   mation." The Economic Journal 113(488): F282-F301.

[7] Brueckner, Markus and Hannes Schwandt. 2015. "Income and Population Growth." The Economic Journal
   125(589): 1653-1676.

[8] Butz, William P. and Michael P. Ward. 1979. "The Emergence of Countercyclical U.S. Fertility." American
   Economic Review 69(3): 318-328.

[9] Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2018. "Housing Booms and Busts, Labor
   Market Opportunities, and College Attendance." American Economic Review 108(10): 2947-2994.

[10] Chatterjee, Shoumitro and Tom Vogl. 2018. "Escaping Malthus: Economic Growth and Fertility Change
   in the Developing World." American Economic Review 108(6): 1440-1467.




                                                      27
[11] Clark, Jeremy and Ana Ferrer. 2019. "The Effect of House Prices on Fertility: Evidence from Canada."
   Economics: The Open-Access, Open-Assessment E-Journal. ISSN 1864-6042, Kiel Institute for the World
   Economy (IfW), Kiel, Vol. 13, Iss. 2019-38: pp. 1-32.

[12] Cohen, Alma, Rajeev Dehejia, and Dmitri Romanov. 2013. "Financial Incentives and Fertility." Review of
   Economics and Statistics 95(1): 1-20.

[13] Currie, Janet. 2009. "Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood, and
   Human Capital Development. Journal of Economic Literature 47: 87122.

[14] Currie, Janet, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2015. "Earlylife Origins of Lifecycle Wellbeing: Research and Policy
   Implications." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34(1): 208-242.

[15] Currie, Janet and Hannes Schwandt. 2014. "Short-and Long-term Effects of Unemployment on Fertility."
   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(41): 14734-14739.

[16] Danish Ministry of Health and Prevention ("Ministeriet for Sundhed og Forebyggelse"). 2008. Health Care
   in Denmark.

[17] Dehejia, Rajeev and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2004. "Booms, Busts, and Babies' Health." Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 119(3): 1091-1130.

[18] De Stefani, Alessia and Simon Juul Hviid. 2018. "Housing Collateral and Home-equity Extraction." Dan-
   marks Nationalbank Working Paper No. 135, February 20.

[19] Dettling, Lisa J. and Melissa S. Kearney. 2014. "House Prices and Birth Rates: The Impact of the Real
   Estate Market on the Decision to Have a Baby." Journal of Public Economics 110: 82-100.

[20] Fichera, Eleonora and John Gathergood. 2016. "Do Wealth Shocks Affect Health? New Evidence from the
   Housing Boom." Health Economics 25: 57-69.

[21] Figlio, David, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth. 2014. "The Effects of Poor
   Neonatal Health on Children's Cognitive Development." American Economic Review 104(12): 3921-3955.

[22] Heckman, James J. and James R. Walker. 1990. "The Relationship between Wages and Income and the
   Timing and Spacing of Births: Evidence from Swedish Longitudinal Data. Econometrica 58(6): 1411-1441.

[23] Hotz, V. Joseph, Emily E. Wiemers, Joshua Rasmussen, and Kate Maxwell Koegel. 2018. "The Role of
   Parental Wealth and Income in Financing Children's College Attendance and its Consequences." NBER
   Working Paper No. 25144.

[24] Huttunen, Kristiina and Jenni Kellokumpu. 2016. "The Effect of Job Displacement on Couples Fertility
   Decisions." Journal of Labor Economics 34(2): 403-442.

[25] Jones, L. E., Alice Schoonbroodt, and Michelle Tertilt. 2010. "Fertility Theories: Can They Explain the
   Negative Fertility-Income Relationship?" (pp. 43-100), in J. Shoven (ed.), Demography and the Economy
   (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).


                                                      28
[26] Jones, L. E. and Michelle Tertilt. 2008. "An Economic History of Fertility in the United States: 1826-1960"
   (pp. 165-230), in P. Rupert (ed.), Frontiers of Family Economics (Emerald Press).

[27] Kearney, Melissa S. and Riley Wilson. 2018. "Male Earnings, Marriageable Men, and Nonmarital Fertility:
   Evidence from the Fracking Boom." Review of Economics and Statistics 100(4): 678-690.

[28] Kjeldsen, Kristian. 2004. "Mortgage Credit in the USA and Denmark." Danmarks Nationalbank Monetary
   Review 2nd Quarter 2004: 115-123.

[29] Lindo, J. M. 2010. "Are Children Really Inferior Goods? Evidence from Displacement-driven Income
   Shocks." Journal of Human Resources 45: 301-327.

[30] Lovenheim, Michael F. 2011. "The Effect of Liquid Housing Wealth on College Enrollment." Journal of
   Labor Economics 29(4): 741-771.

[31] Lovenheim, Michael F. and Kevin J. Mumford. 2013. "Do Family Wealth Shocks Affect Fertility Choices?
   Evidence from the Housing Market." Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2): 464-475.

[32] Lovenheim, Michael F. and C. Lockwood Reynolds. 2013. "The Effect of Housing Wealth on College Choice:
   Evidence from the Housing Boom." Journal of Human Resources 48(1): 1-35.

[33] Malthus, Thomas Robert. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. London: J. Johnson.

[34] Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi. 2011. "House Prices, Home Equity-based Borrowing, and the US Household
   Leverage Crisis." American Economic Review 101(5): 2132-56.

[35] Mizutani, Noriko. 2015. "The Effects of Housing Wealth on Fertility Decisions: Evidence from Japan."
   Economics Bulletin 35(4).

[36] Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. "Wealth Inequality in the United States Since 1913: Evidence
   from Capitalized Income Tax Data." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131: 519-578.

[37] Schultz, T. Paul. 1985. "Changing World Prices, Womens Wages, and the Fertility Transition: Sweden,
   18601910." Journal of Political Economy 93(6): 1126-1154.

[38] Zhao, Lingxiao, and Gregory Burge. 2017. "Housing Wealth, Property Taxes, and Labor Supply among
   the Elderly." Journal of Labor Economics 35(1): 227-263.




                                                      29
                            Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                    Mean         S.D.
 Outcome variables:
   Birth (0/1)                                                     0.1166      0.3210
   Birth weight (grams)                                          3,571.1825   571.9259
   Low birth weight (birth weight < 2,500 grams, 0/1)              0.0316      0.1750
   Very low birth weight (birth weight < 1,500 grams, 0/1)         0.0058      0.0759
   Premature (born before gestational week 37, 0/1)                0.0467      0.2109
   Number of days hospitalized in first year of life               1.6918      7.1661
   Hospitalized in first year of life (0/1)                        0.3494      0.4768
   Number of ER admissions in first year of life                   0.0647      0.2802
   ER admission in first year of life (0/1)                        0.0576      0.2331
   Number of days hospitalized ages 1 to 5                         1.1629      5.1608
   Hospitalized ages 1 to 5 (0/1)                                  0.3790      0.4851
   Number of ER admissions ages 1 to 5                             0.4309      0.8727
   ER admission ages 1 to 5 (0/1)                                  0.2745      0.4462
 Housing variables:
   Lagged one-year home value change (100,000 DKK)                 0.7084       1.0468
   Purchase sum at time of purchase (100,000 DKK)a                 9.9528       5.0229
   Estimated home value at time of purchase (100,000 DKK)a         9.7807       4.7646
 Control variables:
   Real household income                                            5.8532      3.3496
   Years of education                                              14.0773      2.2306
   Number of children                                              1.3003       1.0494
   Partner (married and/or cohabiting, 0/1)                         0.8820      0.3226
   Unemployed (0/1)                                                0.0358       0.1857
   Age                                                             32.6639      5.3914
   20-24 years old (0/1)                                            0.0594      0.2364
   25-29 years old (0/1)                                            0.2457      0.4305
   30-34 years old (0/1)                                            0.3317      0.4708
   35-39 years old (0/1)                                            0.2367      0.4250
   40-44 years old (0/1)                                            0.1265      0.3324
 Number of observations = 1,105,559, number of women = 198,435, number of births =
125,903 (125,291 with non-missing information on birth weight). 100,000 DKK  12,000
USD. a) Includes only homes where there is sufficient variation in the associated cluster
to calculate the correction factor in the year of purchase to compare it to the estimated
home value.




                                           30
Table 2: Average Observable Characteristics by Quartile of Lagged One-year Home Value Change

                                                          Quartile of One-year Lagged Home Value Change
                                                       1st quartile 2nd quartile 3rd quartile 4th quartile
                                                           (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)
         Housing variables:
           Lagged one-year home                           -0.3776          0.2892           0.8179           2.1039
             value change                                (0.3408)         (0.1424)         (0.1748)         (0.9495)
           Total adjusted housing                         9.9213           8.8944          10.1683          13.5582
             value in year of purchase                   (4.3387)         (4.0407)         (4.1470)         (5.6778)
           Purchase sum in                                 9.2939          8.1645           9.6036          12.7505
             year of purchase                            (4.5394)         (4.0626)         (4.1721)         (5.9063)
         Control variables:
           Real household income                          5.6924           5.3653           5.6860           6.6690
                                                         (2.7702)         (2.4028)         (3.0672)         (4.5898)
            Years of education                           13.8714          13.7931          14.0343          14.6104
                                                         (2.1771)         (2.1718)         (2.1931)         (2.2864)
            Number of children                            1.3781           1.2216           1.2433           1.3582
                                                         (1.0588)         (1.0601)         (1.0435)         (1.0258)
            Unemployed                                    0.0397           0.0409           0.0352           0.0274
                                                         (0.1953)         (0.1980)         (0.1842)         (0.1631)
            Partner                                       0.9062           0.8630           0.8675           0.8912
                                                         (0.2915)         (0.3438)         (0.3390)         (0.3114)
         Predicted outcomes at birth:
           Predicted fertility                             0.1145           0.1188           0.1193           0.1138
                                                          (0.0751)         (0.0741)         (0.0739)         (0.0748)
            Predicted birth weight                      3,548.6211       3,541.1214       3,543.7343       3,554.8663
                                                         (97.4629)        (97.2937)        (96.4610)        (97.7065)
            Predicted low birth weight                     0.0404           0.0411           0.0409           0.0398
                                                          (0.0155)         (0.0154)         (0.0154)         (0.0159)
            Predicted very low birth weight                0.0072           0.0074           0.0073           0.0072
                                                          (0.0030)         (0.0030)         (0.0029)         (0.0030)
            Predicted premature                            0.0558           0.0566           0.0564           0.0555
                                                          (0.0148)         (0.0146)         (0.0146)         (0.0150)
         Predicted outcomes in the first year:
           Predicted # days hospitalized                  4.3519           4.4272           4.4139           4.3289
                                                         (0.9946)         (0.9849)         (0.9697)         (0.9807)
            Predicted ever hospitalized                   0.9841           0.9845           0.9845           0.9838
                                                         (0.0064)         (0.0062)         (0.0062)         (0.0064)
            Predicted # ER visits                         0.0638           0.0654           0.0643           0.0617
                                                         (0.0128)         (0.0134)         (0.0128)         (0.0117)
            Predicted ever ER visits                      0.0568           0.0581           0.0572           0.0553
                                                         (0.0106)         (0.0110)         (0.0105)         (0.0098)
         Predicted outcomes in years 1 to 5:
           Predicted # days hospitalized                  1.1835           1.2102           1.1712           1.0840
                                                         (0.2690)         (0.2873)         (0.2718)         (0.2472)
            Predicted ever hospitalized                   0.3826           0.3874           0.3806           0.3650
                                                         (0.0496)         (0.0528)         (0.0501)         (0.0457)
            Predicted # ER visits                         0.4361           0.4432           0.4329           0.4106
                                                         (0.0760)         (0.0808)         (0.0762)         (0.0681)
            Predicted ever ER visits                      0.2770           0.2803           0.2755           0.2648
                                                         (0.0362)         (0.0383)         (0.0363)         (0.0328)
The tabulations are raw means and are not residual to any fixed effects or controls. Standard deviations in parentheses. Predicted
outcomes are obtained from the main specification estimated without lagged one-year home value change or fixed effects in the
regression, with standard errors in parentheses.




                                                               31
              Table 3: Baseline Results ­ Fertility

                            (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
 Lagged one-year         0.0016*      0.0006     0.0036***   0.0027***
 home value change       (0.0008)    (0.0006)     (0.0009)    (0.0006)
 Real household                                               -0.00002
 income                                                       (0.0002)

 % Effect                  1.34          0.49      3.07        2.32
 R2                       0.002          0.005     0.035       0.060

 Year FE                    X
 Municipality FE            X
 Year×mun FE                              X         X           X
 Age×year of FP FE                                  X           X
 Controls                                                       X
 Column (4) includes controls for the woman's age (age fixed effects),
years of education, number of children, indicator for being married
and/or cohabiting, indicator for being unemployed at least 6 months
within a given year, and total real family income (for woman + part-
ner). Both lagged one-year home value change and real household
income are in 100,000 DKK. Dependent variable mean = 0.1166; Num-
ber of observations = 1,105,559. The % Effect shows the effect of a
100,000 DKK change in home prices relative to the mean fertility rate.
Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses: sig-
nificant at *10%, **5%, and ***1%.




                                    32
                          Table 4: Robustness Checks ­ Fertility

                                                Lagged       Lagged       Lagged        Align
                                   Woman        2-Year       3-Year       4-Year     Valuation &
                     Renters          FE       Change       Change       Change      Conception
                        (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)
 Lagged home         -0.00003     0.0019***   0.0019***    0.0020***    0.0015***     0.0021***
 value change        (0.0006)      (0.0006)    (0.0005)     (0.0004)     (0.0003)      (0.0001)
 Real household     0.0012***    -0.0010***     -0.0001      -0.0001      -0.0002       0.0001
 income              (0.0004)      (0.0003)    (0.0002)     (0.0002)     (0.0002)      (0.0001)

 % Effect              -0.04        1.63          1.63         1.72         1.29          1.80
 R2                   0.0470       0.374         0.059        0.059        0.059         0.076
 Observations       3,763,425    1,082,857      904,309      730,195      580,914      1,105,559
 The sample in column (1) consists of all women between 20 and 44 in years who were not a
homeowner in the previous two years, the present year, and the subsequent year and who did
not live in the same household as their parents. The one-year lagged home price change for
renters is calculated at the municipality level and include observed characteristics as well as
municipality and year fixed effects. The estimates in column (2) include women fixed effects as
well as municipality-by-year fixed effects. The results in columns (3) through (5) use different
home price lags and include observed characteristics, age-of-purchase-by-year-of-purchase fixed
effects and municipality-by-year fixed effects. In Column (6), for women who give birth the 1-year
home price change is measured relative to the time of conception using birth date and gestation
length. Women who did not give birth are assigned a random conception date that replicates
the overall distribution of conception dates among homeowners. Observed characteristics include
woman's age (age fixed effects), years of education, number of children, indicator for being married
and/or cohabiting, indicator for being unemployed at least 6 months within a given year, and
total real family income (for woman + partner). Both lagged one-year home value change and real
household income are in 100,000 DKK. The % Effect shows the effect of a 100,000 DKK change
in home prices relative to the mean fertility rate. Standard errors clustered at the municipality
level in parentheses: significant at *10%, **5%, and ***1%.




                                                33
                                                              Table 5: Heterogenous Effects ­ Fertility

                                                      Panel A: Mother's Age                                                      Panel B: Parity
                              20-24 years       25-29 years     30-34 years    35-39 years    40-44 years      0 children       1 child       2 children    3+ children
                                  (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)            (9)
      Lagged one-year           0.0025           0.0025*         0.0030**       0.0020**         0.0005        0.0056***        0.0032**       0.0010**         0.0009
      home value change        (0.0019)          (0.0012)        (0.0010)       (0.0007)       (0.0005)         (0.0009)        (0.0012)       (0.0005)        (0.0006)
      Real household            0.0010            -0.0008         -0.0003        -0.0001        -0.0001          0.0002        0.0017***      -0.0002**       -0.0004**
      income                   (0.0007)          (0.0007)        (0.0002)       (0.0002)      (0.00009)         (0.0005)        (0.0004)       (0.0001)        (0.0001)

      % Effect                    2.20              1.47            2.02           2.89         3.25              3.65            1.52          2.20             3.16
      Dep. Var. Mean            0.1137            0.1723           0.1489         0.0683       0.0156            0.1532         0.2079         0.0475           0.0279
      R2                         0.081             0.039           0.058          0.047         0.032            0.053           0.056          0.024           0.041
      Observations              65,666            271,643         366,700        261,662       139,888          318,993         281,096        383,080         122,390

                                          Panel C: Mother's Income Quartile                                            Panel D: Mother's Education Quartile




34
                           Bottom Quartile     2nd Quartile     3rd Quartile   4th Quartile                 Bottom Quartile   2nd Quartile   3rd Quartile   Top Quartile
                                 (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)                            (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)
      Lagged one-year            0.0012          0.0037***      0.0036***       0.0017**                       0.0029***       0.0023***      0.0037***       0.0026***
      home value change         (0.0012)          (0.0009)       (0.0009)       (0.0007)                        (0.0008)        (0.0007)       (0.0011)        (0.0010)
      Real household           0.0042***        -0.0120***      -0.0085***       0.0002                        0.0008**       -0.0008***        0.0002          -0.0002
      income                    (0.0010)          (0.0027)       (0.0018)       (0.0001)                        (0.0003)        (0.0003)       (0.0002)        (0.0002)

      % Effect                    1.18              2.67            3.03           1.66                           2.97            1.97           2.93           1.85
      Dep. Var. Mean             0.1043           0.1374           0.1197         0.1050                        0.0969           0.1172        0.1256          0.1387
      R2                         0.042             0.071           0.085          0.089                          0.049           0.070          0.079           0.094
      Observations              276,385           276,384         276,384        276,384                        351,354         348,000        172,601         233,604
      Each column of each panel is a separate regression. The controls include woman's age (age fixed effects), years of education, number of children (except in panel
     B), indicator for being married and/or cohabiting, indicator for being unemployed at least 6 months within a given year, and total real family income (for woman +
     partner). In addition, municipality-by-year and age-by-year-of-first-purchase fixed effects are included. Both lagged one-year home value change and real household
     income are in 100,000 DKK. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses: significant at *10%, **5%, and ***1%.
   Table 6: The Effect of Home Price Changes on Infant Health

                           Panel A: Health at Birth
                          Birth       Low Birth     Very low
                        Weight (g)      Weight        Weight        Premature
                            (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)
 Lagged one-year          3.5267        -0.0005       0.00004       -0.0015**
 home value change       (2.2225)      (0.0006)      (0.0003)        (0.0007)
 Real household          1.2186*      -0.0005**      -0.0001*         -0.0003
 income                  (0.7342)      (0.0002)     (0.00006)        (0.0002)

 % Effect                   0.10             -1.73        0.69          -3.23
 Dep. Var. Mean            3,571            0.0316       0.0058        0.0464
 Observations             125,291           125,291     125,291       125,903

                   Panel B: Short-Run Health (age 0-1)
                     Number of         Ever      Number of           Ever ER
                         Days      hospitalized ER Visits             Visit
                     Hospitalized
                          (1)           (2)          (3)                (4)
 Lagged one-year        -0.0023       -0.0005      0.0007             0.0005
 home value change     (0.0270)      (0.0016)     (0.0009)           (0.0009)
 Real household       -0.0182***    -0.0015***    -0.00004           0.00006
 income                (0.0058)      (0.0004)     (0.0002)           (0.0002)

 % Effect                   -0.14            -0.14        1.09          0.87
 Dep. Var. Mean            1.6842           0.3496       0.0645        0.0575
 Observations             125,903           125,903     125,903       125,903

                 Panel C: Medium-Run Health (age 1-5)
                     Number of       Ever      Number of             Ever ER
                        Days     hospitalized ER Visits               Visit
                    Hospitalized
                         (1)          (2)          (3)                   (4)
 Lagged one-year       0.0019       0.0010       -0.0005               0.0010
 home value change    (0.0348)     (0.0019)     (0.0057)              (0.0018)
 Real household      -0.0209***   -0.0012***     -0.0003             -0.0009**
 income               (0.0101)     (0.0004)     (0.0022)              (0.0004)

 % Effect                   0.16             0.26         -0.12         0.36
 Dep. Var. Mean            1.1631           0.3797       0.4316        0.2751
 Observations             125,903           125,903     125,903       125,903


 Each column of each panel is a separate regression. The controls include
woman's age (age fixed effects), years of education, number of children, indi-
cator for being married and/or cohabiting, indicator for being unemployed at
least 6 months within a given year, and total real family income (for woman
+ partner). In addition municipality-by-year and age-by-year-of-first-purchase
fixed effects are included. Both lagged one-year home value change and real
household income are in 100,000 DKK. Estimates are conditional on giving
birth. Multiple births are excluded. Columns (1) through (3) in Panel A have
smaller sample sizes than the remaining columns due to missing information on
birth weight. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses:
significant at *10%, **5%, and ***1%.




                                       35
      Table 7: The Effect of Housing Prices on the Composition of Mothers Who Give Birth

                                  Years of   Number of    Household                  Predicted    Predicted
                         Age     Education    Children     Income      I(Partner)   Prematurity    Low BW
                         (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)
 Lagged one-year      0.398       0.087       0.024        0.347        0.031        -0.0007      -0.0008
 home value change     (0.056)     (0.011)     (0.005)      (0.056)      (0.008)      (0.0001)     (0.0001)
 Each column is a separate regression and includes women from our main analysis sample who give birth. The
controls include municipality-by-year and age-by-year-of-first-purchase fixed effects. Dependent variables are
measured in the year of birth. Lagged one-year home value change is in 100,000 DKK. Multiple births are
excluded. Predicted Prematurity and Predicted Low BW are predicted values from a regression of each dependent
variable on age, years of education, number of children, household income, and partner status. Standard errors
clustered at the municipality level in parentheses: significant at *10%, **5%, and ***1%.




                                                    36
       Figure 1: Estimated Home Value versus Actual Purchase Price




The solid black line illustrates mean actual purchase price in year of purchase. The solid
gray line illustrates the mean estimated home value in the year of purchase for the homes
actually sold. The black and gray dashed lines illustrate upper and lower bounds of the
95% confidence intervals associated with mean actual purchase price and mean estimated
home value, respectively.




                                           37
  Figure 2: Mean Residual (Purchase Price Minus Estimate Home Value)




The solid line illustrates mean difference in actual purchase price and estimated value in
the year of purchase for homes actually sold. The dashed lines illustrate upper and lower
bounds of the associated 95% confidence interval.




                                           38
        Figure 3: Trends in One-Year Home Price Change by Home Price Quartile




Each line shows the average one-year home value change by quartile of the home's value in the initial year
(t-1).




                                                  39
           Figure 4: One-Year Home Price Changes by Municipality, 2005-2006




The figure presents a heat map of one-year home price changes from 2005 to 2006 by municipality.




                                                 40
Online Appendix

         Online Appendix: Not for Publication




                          41
                                 Table A-1: Sample Construction

                                    Panel A: Sample of House-years
 Houses and apartments with residential uses, 1992-2006                                     20,993,937
   With non-negative public valuation                                                       20,993,865
   With non-negative sales price                                                            20,990,592
   With a single address                                                                    20,930,486
   For private use only                                                                     20,926,068
   With at least 5 houses sold in the cluster                                               20,917,232
   With sales price at least 40% of public valuation                                        20,898,305
   With sales price less than 300% of public valuation                                      20,896,221

                                      Panel B: Sample of Women
 Women ages 18-44, 1992-2006                                                                 1,493,827
  Either woman or partner own a single house (individually or jointly)                       1,476,288
  First purchased a house between 1993 and 2005                                                216,906
  With sufficient data to calculate lagged one-year house price changes*                       214,451
  With non-missing data on household income                                                    211,975
  With non-missing data on house price and ownership                                           207,127
  With sufficient data to calculate municipality correction factor                             207,016
  Purchased a house whose public valuation changed by less than 50% in the prior year          199,964
  Exclude those in 1st and 99th percentile of lagged one-year house price change               198,435
 In all cases, the houses mentioned in Panel B must meet all of the sample screens described in Panel A.
Sample size in Panel A corresponds to house-years and not individual houses.
*
  This screen drops 18 and 19 year olds and omits the first two years of the treatment period.




                                                  42
  Table A-2: Summary Statistics, Women Aged 20-44 During 1995-2006

                                                               Mean         S.D.
 Outcome variables:
   Birth (0/1)                                                 0.0661      0.2484
   Birth weight (grams)                                      3,531.4617   578.3909
   Low birth weight (birth weight < 2,500 grams, 0/1)          0.0363      0.1870
   Very low birth weight (birth weight < 1,500 grams, 0/1)     0.0066      0.0811
   Premature (born before gestational week 37, 0/1)            0.0495      0.2168
   Number of days hospitalized in first year of life           1.9304      7.5242
   Hospitalized in first year of life (0/1)                    0.3874      0.4872
   Number of ER admissions in first year of life               0.0912      0.3471
   ER admission in first year of life (0/1)                    0.0774      0.2673
   Number of days hospitalized ages 1 to 5                     1.5165      5.7639
   Hospitalized ages 1 to 5 (0/1)                              0.4636      0.4987
   Number of ER admissions ages 1 to 5                         0.5854      1.0313
   ER admission ages 1 to 5 (0/1)                              0.3511      0.4773
 Control variables:
   Real household income (100,000 DKK)                        4.3093       4.1129
   Years of education                                         13.2056      2.3203
   Number of children                                         1.1116       1.1659
   Partner (married and/or cohabiting)                        0.6454       0.4784
   Unemployed (0/1)                                           0.0416       0.1997
   Age                                                        31.4405      7.5278
   20-24 years old (0/1)                                      0.1748       0.3798
   25-29 years old (0/1)                                      0.1991       0.3993
   30-34 years old (0/1)                                      0.2177       0.4127
   35-39 years old (0/1)                                      0.2130       0.4094
   40-44 years old (0/1)                                      0.1954       0.3965


 Number of women = 11,402,379, number of births = 752,228 (748,627 with non-missing
information on birth weight), number of women giving birth = 479,349. 100,000 DKK
 12,000 USD.




                                        43
Table A-3: Effects of Housing Prices on Fertility
           Using Different Sets of Controls

                            (1)          (2)           (3)
 Lagged one-year         0.0016*     0.0037***     0.0031***
 home value change       (0.0008)     (0.0006)      (0.0007)
 Real household                       -0.00004      -0.00001
 income                               (0.0002)      (0.0002)

 % Effect                  1.34         3.20         2.67
 R2                       0.0020       0.0557       0.0572

 Year FE                     X           X             X
 Municipality FE             X           X             X
 Controls                                X             X
 Age×year of FP FE                                     X
 Columns (2)-(3) include controls for the womans age (age
fixed effects), years of education, number of children, indica-
tor for being married and/or cohabiting, indicator for being
unemployed at least 6 months within a given year, and to-
tal real family income (for woman + partner). Both lagged
one-year home value change and real household income are
in 100,000 DKK. Dependent variable mean = 0.1166; Num-
ber of observations = 1,105,559. The % Effect shows the
effect of a 100,000 DKK change in home prices relative to
the mean fertility rate. Standard errors clustered at the mu-
nicipality level in parentheses: significant at *10%, **5%,
and ***1%.




                              44
Table A-4: Effects of Housing Prices on Fertility
           Controlling Separately for Each Observable Characteristic

                             (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)
 Lagged one-year          0.0016*    0.0056***    0.0055***   0.0016**    0.0003      0.0002      0.0016*
 home value change        (0.0008)    (0.0010)     (0.0011)   (0.0007)   (0.0007)    (0.0006)     (0.0008)
 Number of children                              -0.0532***
                                                   (0.0022)
 Total household income                                       0.00002
                                                              (0.0004)
 Years of education                                                      0.0081***
                                                                          (0.0002)
 Partner                                                                             0.0421***
                                                                                      (0.0012)
 Unemployed                                                                                      -0.0610***
                                                                                                  (0.0014)
 Year FE                     X          X            X           X          X           X             X
 Municipality FE             X          X            X           X          X           X             X
 Age FE                                 X

 R2                         0.002      0.033       0.030       0.002       0.005       0.004       0.003
 Each column is a separate regression; N=1,105,559. Column (1) replicates column (1) in Table 3. Both lagged
one-year home value change and real household income are in 100,000 DKK. Standard errors clustered at the
municipality level in parentheses: significant at *10%, **5%, and ***1%.




                                                   45
Table A-5: The Relationship Between Expenditures and the Pres-
           ence of a Young Child in the Household

 Expenditure    Expenditure            Log           Mean       Percent Effect
 Category        (Dollars)          Expenditure     (Dollars)    (Column 1)
                      (1)               (2)           (3)            (4)
 Panel A: Homeowners
 Total             436.27             0.060**        8734.45        5.00%
                  (282.83)             (0.025)
 Food              -81.79*              -0.018       1234.88        -6.62%
                   (44.04)             (0.028)
 Housing          398.51**            0.101**        2994.65        13.31%
                  (158.95)             (0.033)
 Health          161.04***            0.375**        876.61         18.37%
                   (39.67)             (0.055)
 Education       -81.48***            -0.673**       140.55        -57.97%
                   (21.25)             (0.227)
 Transportation      50.43               0.062       1318.44        3.82%
                  (111.24)             (0.044)
 Other              -10.43              0.013        2169.32        -0.48%
                  (138.50)             (0.033)

 Panel B: Renters
 Total            -814.30***          -0.037         1816.45       -44.83%
                    (171.04)          (0.032)
 Food                -113.67**          0.013        299.46        -37.96%
                       (29.67)         (0.037)
 Housing           -199.96**          -0.015         648.63        -30.83%
                      (59.62)         (0.043)
 Health             -42.57**           0.009         153.54        -27.73%
                      (23.04)         (0.104)
 Education          -114.10***          -0.398        37.14        -307.21%
                       (33.54)         (0.271)
 Transportation       -99.05**          0.001        276.74        -35.79%
                       (40.47)         (0.062)
 Other               -244.95**           -0.06       400.94        -61.09%
                       (57.34)         (0.045)
 Source: Authors calculations using the 2015-2018 Consumer Expenditure Sur-
veys. The estimates come from an OLS regression of the given expenditure
category on the number of kids under 2, the number of kids 2-16, total fam-
ily income, age and education fixed effects for both adults in the household,
Census Division fixed effects, and quarter and year fixed effects. Estimation
sample consists of all household with exactly two adults and household with
two adults and at least one child under the age of two. Bolded and itali-
cized estimates are statistically different at the 5% level across the renter and
homeowner samples. Standard errors in parentheses: *** significant at the
1% level, ** significant at the 5% level, * significant at the 10% level.




                                       46
Table A-6: Heterogeneous Effects of Housing Prices on Low Birth Weight and Prema-
           turity

                                   Panel A: Mother's Age
                       20-24 years    25-29 years    30-34 years          35-39 years     40-44 years
                            (1)            (2)           (3)                  (4)             (5)
 Dependent Variable: Low Birth Weight
 Lagged one-year          -0.0032        -0.0010       -0.0003               0.0014         -0.0026
 home value change       (0.0061)       (0.0013)      (0.0009)              (0.0018)       (0.0079)

 Dependent Variable: Prematurity
 Lagged one-year          -0.0088            -0.0021         -0.0010         0.0008         -0.0062
 home value change       (0.0062)           (0.0015)        (0.0012)        (0.0021)       (0.0075)
                                           Panel B: Parity
                        0 children           1 child       2 children     3+ children
                            (1)                (2)             (3)            (4)
 Dependent Variable: Low Birth Weight
 Lagged one-year          -0.0015             0.0004         -0.0013         -0.0053
 home value change       (0.0014)            (0.0008)       (0.0016)        (0.0081)

 Dependent Variable: Prematurity
 Lagged one-year         -0.0025*         -0.0002       -0.0020              -0.0047
 home value change       (0.0014)        (0.0010)      (0.0020)             (0.0115)
                                  Panel C: Mother's Income
                     Bottom Quartile 2nd Quartile 3rd Quartile            4th Quartile
                            (1)             (2)           (3)                 (4)
 Dependent Variable: Low Birth Weight
 Lagged one-year          -0.0002         -0.0002       -0.0011              -0.0005
 home value change       (0.0018)        (0.0014)      (0.0014)             (0.0011)

 Dependent Variable: Prematurity
 Lagged one-year          -0.0032          -0.0021       -0.0015             0.0002
 home value change       (0.0026)         (0.0016)      (0.0016)            (0.0014)
                                  Panel D: Mother's Education
                     Bottom Quartile 2nd Quartile 3rd Quartile            Top Quartile
                            (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)
 Dependent Variable: Low Birth Weight
 Lagged one-year          0.0001           -0.0011        0.0022             -0.0004
 home value change       (0.0015)         (0.0015)      (0.0018)            (0.0011)

 Dependent Variable: Prematurity
 Lagged one-year          -0.0008           -0.0048***       0.0031          -0.0003
 home value change       (0.0020)            (0.0017)       (0.0030)        (0.0012)
 Each column is a separate regression. The controls include woman's age (age fixed effects), years
of education, number of children (not in panel B), indicator for being married and/or cohabiting,
indicator for being unemployed at least 6 months within a given year, and total real family income (for
woman + partner). In addition municipality-by-year and age-by-year-of-first-purchase fixed effects
are included. Both lagged one-year home value change and real household income are in 100,000
DKK. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level in parentheses: significant at *10%, **5%,
and ***1%.




                                                  47
         Table A-7: Comparison of Child-Related Subsidies in the US and Denmark


 Policy                   United States                             Denmark
 Child Cash Subsidies     Child Tax Credit:                         Family Allowance:
                          $1,000 for ages 0-17 (phases out at       $2,704 for ages 0-2
                          incomes above $110,000; non-              $2,140 for ages 3-6
                          refundable)                               $1,685 for ages 7-14
                                                                    $562 for ages 15-17
                          EITC:
                          Max credit increases by $2,942 with       Benefit is reduced by 2% of the
                          birth of first and by $2,255 with birth   amount if either partner's
                          of second child. One-child families       income is in excess of DKK
                          earning over $40,320 and two-child        765,800 ($114,870).
                          families earning over $45,802 are
                          ineligible.
 Child Care               $3,000 child care credit (non-            Children are guaranteed a place
                          refundable) for one child or $6,000       in a day care facility. The
                          for two children under the age of 13.     government pays 75% of the
                                                                    cost and families pay 25% out
                          Daycare costs for babies and              of pocket. Higher subsidies for
                          toddlers average $972/month and for       families earning under $80,970
                          pre-schoolers $733 per month              and if there are multiple
                          (NACCRRA 2015).                           siblings.

                                                                    Prices after subsidy range
                                                                    across Denmark, but typically
                                                                    fall between $400 and $500 per
                                                                    month.
 Parental Leave           12 weeks of unpaid leave if you           A total of 52 weeks of paid
                          work for a company with 50+               leave between mother and
                          employees. Many states and                father. The final 32 weeks can
                          companies have paid leave policies.       be split between the mother and
                                                                    the father. Maximum weekly
                                                                    benefit of $645.
 Health Insurance          Near-universal coverage for children     Universal health insurance
                           because of Medicaid and SCHIP.           coverage with no premiums or
                           Premiums increase with birth of first    co-pays.
                           child only.
Child tax credits in the US use rules from prior to the 2018 TCJA that increased the child tax
credit and the phase-out cutoff. The US-based fertility estimates are prior to the TCJA. Details
on Danish benefits can be found at:
https://ec.europa.eu/social/BlobServlet?docId=13746&langId=en. When possible, 2018 program
details are used. Danish program parameters are converted into US Dollars using a 0.15
exchange rate. NACCRRA report can be found here: http://usa.childcareaware.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/05/Parents-and-the-High-Cost-of-Child-Care-2015-FINAL.pdf.




                                                 48
