                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TRADE WARS, CURRENCY WARS

                                        Stéphane Auray
                                      Michael B. Devereux
                                       Aurélien Eyquem

                                      Working Paper 27460
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27460


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




We would like to thank participants in the 5th International Macroeconomics and Finance
Conference for interesting comments. Devereux thanks SSHRC for research funding. Auray and
Eyquem acknowledge the financial support of Projets Generique ANR 2015, Grant Number
ANR-15-CE33-0001-01. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Stéphane Auray, Michael B. Devereux, and Aurélien Eyquem. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Wars, Currency Wars
Stéphane Auray, Michael B. Devereux, and Aurélien Eyquem
NBER Working Paper No. 27460
July 2020
JEL No. F30,F40,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

For most of the post WWII period, until recently, trade protectionism followed a downward trend,
and was formulated in multilateral or bilateral agreements between countries. Recently however,
there hasbeen a sharp shift towards unilateral, discretionary trade policy focused on short term
macroeconomic objectives, and as a consequence, the use of trade policy has become entangled
with that of monetary policy. This paper explores the consequences of this shift within a standard
DSGE open economy macroeconomic model. We find that a discretionary non-cooperative
approach to trade policy can significantly worsen macroeconomic conditions. Moreover, the
stance of monetary policy has major implications for the degree of protection in a non-
cooperative equilibrium. In particular, cooperative determination of monetary policy implies an
increase in both equilibrium tariffs and inflation, and a significant fall in welfare. By contrast,
when the exchange rate is pegged by one country, equilibrium rates of protection are generally
lower, but in this case, there are multiple asymmetric equilibria in tariff rates which benefit one
country relative to another. We also explore the determination of non-cooperative tariffs in a
situation where monetary policy is constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.


Stéphane Auray                                   Aurélien Eyquem
CREST (UMR9194) - Ensai and                      Univ Lyon,
Université du Littoral Côte d'Opale              Université Lumière Lyon 2
ENSAI                                            GATE L-SE UMR 5824 and
Campus de Ker-Lann                               Institut Universitaire de France
Rue Blaise Pascal                                93 Chemin des Mouilles
BP 37203, 35172 BRUZ Cedex,                      BP167, 69131 Ecully Cedex
France                                           France
stephane.auray@ensai.fr                          aurelien.eyquem@univ-lyon2.fr

Michael B. Devereux
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1
CANADA
and NBER
mbdevereux@gmail.com
1       Introduction

    Until quite recently, the research on optimal trade policy was quite separate from optimal

macroeconomic and monetary policy. Traditional studies on trade policy focused on the different

degrees of bilateral or multilateral cooperation implied by trade agreements within regions or more

widely orchestrated by the WTO1 . But in recent years, we have seen a progressive breakdown of

existing trade agreements and a rise in protection among many countries. A particular aspect of this

trend is the tendency to engage in protectionism to achieve short term macroeconomic objectives,

such as targeting the trade balance. In this environment, the distinction between trade policy and

macroeconomic policy has been blurred. This paper is intended to explore the consequences of the

breakdown in cooperation between countries in trade policy, and to investigate how non-cooperative

trade policy interacts with macro policy, and in particular monetary policy.

    In the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, many writers described the spillovers of non-

cooperative monetary policy across countries as an outcome of `currency wars'2 . Much of the

discussion of currency wars emphasized the spillover of monetary policy from large countries to

small countries, and the need for some form of monetary policy coordination. But with the in-

creasing aggressive use of protectionist policies, it becomes necessary to focus on `trade wars', and

to understand the interaction between currency wars and trade wars 3 .

    In the case of the US for example, persistent threats of trade protection have been made after

accusations of `currency manipulation' by US trade partners. In light of these linkages, it may

not be tenable to focus on trade policy determination independent of the stance of macroeconomic

policy and in particular monetary policy.

    Our paper explores the relationship between `currency wars' and `trade wars' within a standard

two country New Keynesian DSGE model. Aside from the exploration of endogenous trade policy,

the model is quite standard. Households consume and supply labour, and monopolistic competitive

firms maximize profits subject to costs of price adjustment. Prices are set in producer currencies.

Policymakers in each country are assumed to have the choice of inflation rates through endogenous
    1
      For a recent survey, see Bagwell and Staiger (2016).
    2
      For instance, Mishra and Rajan (2018) argue that " Aggressive monetary policy actions by one country can lead
to significant adverse cross-border spillovers on others, especially as countries contend with the zero lower bound. If
countries do not internalize these spillovers, they may undertake policies that are collectively suboptimal. "
    3
      For recent evaluation of the policy issues, see for instance B´
                                                                    enassy-Qu´er´
                                                                                e, Bussi`
                                                                                        ere, and Wibaux (2018), Fajgel-
baum et al. (2019), and Eichengreen (2019).


                                                          2
monetary policy but also trade protection in the form of tariffs.

   We first explore the consequences of currency wars on their own. That is, we compare a

non-cooperative outcome of a game between discretionary policy makers who set monetary policy

by choosing their domestic inflation rates with a similar game where inflation rates are set co-

operatively. In this setting, as is well known, there is a tension between the motive to follow a

contractionary monetary policy so as to improve the terms of trade, and an expansionary policy

to eliminate domestic monopoly distortions. Moreover, as shown by Rogoff (1985) and many other

papers since, cooperation in monetary policy can then be counterproductive, unless monopoly dis-

tortions are separately removed by subsidies to firms. Our analysis confirms this result within our

model.

   When we extend the model to allow for the joint determination of tariffs and inflation rates in a

non-cooperative discretionary equilibrium, we find very different outcomes. In the non-cooperative

game, each country imposes a very high tariff rate, and because tariffs focus on the manipulation

on the terms of trade, equilibrium rates of inflation are substantially higher than in the `currency

war' equilibrium alone. Welfare is much lower when trade wars are combined with currency wars.

Moreover, when countries cooperate in monetary policy, eliminating the possibility of currency wars,

equilibrium tariffs rise even further, leading to higher equilibrium inflation rates, as each country

attempts to further exploit its terms of trade advantage, given that under cooperation, monetary

policy plays no role in affecting the terms of trade. In this case, monetary policy cooperation

generates large welfare losses, much larger than in the case of currency wars alone. In addition,

this negative impact of cooperation remains, even when monopoly pricing distortions are removed

by subsidies to firms.

   We explore the effects of alternative parameterization in the currency war-trade war equilibrium.

One notable implication is the effect of country size. When we focus on monetary policy alone,

we find that contrary to conventional wisdom, a rise in country's size generally reduces its welfare

- large countries don't gain an advantage in the currency war. This is because larger countries

generally choose higher equilibrium inflation rates. By contrast, with endogenous trade policy

and monetary policy, a rise in a country's size increases its welfare, because it becomes more

protectionist, increasing its tariff rate, while the smaller country reduces its tariff. Hence, in the

currency and trade war, larger countries win.

                                                  3
   The main analysis of the paper assumes discretionary policy-making. Both trade and monetary

policy is determined without committing to future policy decisions. But it may be realistic to

consider that trade policy engenders some degree of commitment. In a later subsection of the

paper we present a simplified version of the trade war where trade policy-makers choose tariffs

non-cooperatively, but can commit to tariff rates in advance of the currency war. We find in this

case that equilibrium rates of protection are much lower than in the baseline case. The reason is

that with commitment, trade authorities take account of the impact of higher tariffs on inflation

choices of the monetary authorities, and this leads them to temper their desire for terms of trade

manipulation. We then extend the model to the analysis of a fixed exchange rate, and in particular

to a setting where one country pegs its nominal exchange rate to another country. Here again, we

find a dramatically different outcome between the currency war and the currency and trade war

equilibrium. In a fixed exchange rate regime where inflation is the only policy instrument, only one

country has an independent choice of instrument, and in a symmetric equilibrium inflation rates

are equalized across countries. In fact, the fixed exchange rate outcome is identical to the steady

state of the cooperative monetary policy outcome.

   When we allow for independent choice of tariff rates combined with a fixed exchange rate, in a

symmetric equilibrium with identical tariff rates, the most striking result is that equilibrium tariffs

are much lower than in the baseline case with flexible exchange rates. For our calibration tariff

rates are only 14 percent, as opposed to 50 percent in the baseline case. The intuitive reason for

this large difference between fixed and flexible exchange rates is due to the fact that under fixed

exchange rates, terms of trade manipulation can be done only through generating differences in

inflation rates, which in itself imposes additional costs.

   However, while a symmetric equilibrium with fixed exchange rates has a very low rate of pro-

tection, in this case there are also multiple asymmetric equilibria. Since terms of trade movements

under fixed exchange rates are determined by inflation dynamics, the terms of trade displays persis-

tent dynamics. This dynamic feature, in conjunction with non-cooperative choice of tariffs, implies

that there is a continuum of asymmetric tariff equilibria. As a result, either country can gain or lose

relative to the other in the trade war. There are equilibria where either the Home country or the

Foreign country is more protectionist, and different equilibria imply substantially different welfare

outcomes. However, for reasonable parameter values, we find that Nash equilibrium tariff rates are

                                                   4
lower and welfare for each country higher than in the baseline model under flexible exchange rates.

   Finally, we extend the analysis to a situation where countries do not have control over monetary

policy due to the zero lower bound constraint on nominal interest rates. In this case, our model is

extended to allow for interest rate determination of monetary policy. An equilibrium constrained

by the ZLB delivers lower rates of inflation, lower consumption and output, and lower welfare than

the outcome under currency wars. When the ZLB constraint is present in the trade war equilibrium

however, we again find high equilibrium rates of protection. Each country attempts to use tariffs to

raise its terms of trade and welfare. While the trade war under the ZLB does raise equilibrium rates

of inflation, the higher degree of protection reduces equilibrium consumption and output, leading

to much lower welfare for all countries.

   The interaction between trade policy and the macroeconomy has long been a subject of inter-

est to economists (e.g. Eichengreen (1981) and Krugman (1982)). But recent events have seen

a revival of interest in this area and an attempt to formalize the relationship within the modern

macroeconomic toolkits. A number of recent paper that investigate the effects of trade restrictions

in dynamic open economy macro models. Barattieri, Cacciatore, and Ghironi (2018) investigate

empirically the impact of exogenous changes in tariffs in an SVAR framework, and show that they

act as negative supply shocks, depressing GDP and raising inflation with little effects on the trade

balance. A similar mechanism applies to our paper, as shown in Section 4 below. They develop a

small open economy model with firm entry and endogenous tradability that successfully rational-

izes the empirical evidence. We adopt an alternative approach, considering tariffs as endogenous

exploring the consequences of alternative strategic settings for both monetary policy and tariff for-

mation. Another paper by Erceg, Prestipino, and Raffo (2018) looks at the impact of trade policies

in the form of import tariffs and export subsidies. They find that the effects critically depend on

the response of the real exchange rate, and that in turn depends on the expectations about future

policies and potential retaliation from trade partners. A recent paper by Furceri et al. (2019) ex-

amines the macroeconomic consequences of tariff shocks, and shows that these shocks are generally

contractionary. Lind´
                    e and Pescatori (2019) study the conditions under which Lerner symmetry, the

absence of allocative and trade-flow effects of an equally-sized change in import tariff and export

subsidy, holds, and how this affects the macroeconomic costs of a trade war.

   Two papers that are more closely related to our study are Jeanne (2020) and Bergin and

                                                 5
Corsetti (2020). Jeanne (2020) is closest in spirit to our paper. He explores the interaction between

'currency wars' and 'trade wars' in a simple analytical two period model with a continuum of small

open economies with downward nominal wage rigidity and in some cases a global liquidity trap,

and explores the benefits of international cooperation. By contrast, our study is focused on a more

conventional infinite horizon two country DSGE model, where countries are large, and focuses

on a discretionary Ramsey approach to policy-making.4 Bergin and Corsetti (2020) develop a

rich multi-country DSGE model with global value chains and look at the optimal response of

monetary policy to exogenous tariff shocks. In addition, they focus on cooperative determination

of monetary policy and consider tariffs as exogenous. Another relevant paper is Caballero, Farhi,

and Gourinchas (2015), who investigate the interaction between an environment of low interest

rate, financial imbalances and currency wars. Our paper does consider a binding ZLB constraint

as one of the possible cases but deals with more generic environments, and considers the joint

endogenous formation of tariff and monetary policies while neglecting imbalances by assuming

balanced-trade restrictions. We thus consider our paper as an important complement, with a focus

on the interaction between trade and monetary policy. In particular, we find that international

cooperation may be significantly welfare reducing in this environment.5

    Focusing more closely on the endogenous determination of trade policies, we noted above that

there is a large empirical literature investigating the link between trade restrictions and the eco-

nomic cycle, and separately, the effect of real exchange rate undervaluation on trade policy (e.g.

Oatley (2010), Gunnar and Francois (2006), Bown and Crowley (2013), among others). In a the-

oretical model Eaton and Grossman (1985) study optimal tariffs when international asset markets

are incomplete and show that they can be used to partly compensate the lack of consumption insur-

ance. Bergin and Corsetti (2008) also consider tariffs as policy instruments in addition to monetary

policy but their focus is not specifically on tariffs, rather on the implications of monetary policy on

the building of comparative advantages. Campolmi, Fadinger, and Forlati (2014) offer a detailed


   4
      This type of approach echoes the approach of Chari, Nicolini, and Teles (2018) or Auray, Eyquem, and Gomme
(2018), although these papers focus on flex-price environments.
    5
      Corsetti and Pesenti (2001) show how national welfare in open economies may depend on a terms of trade
externality, using a two-country model with monopolistic competition. There are many papers analyzing optimal
monetary policy in different open economy frameworks, among them Benigno and Benigno (2003), Gal`     i and Monacelli
(2005), Faia and Monacelli (2008), De Paoli (2009), Bhattarai and Egorov (2016), Groll and Monacelli (2016), Fujiwara
and Wang (2017), or more recently Egorov and Mukhin (2019).


                                                         6
analysis of optimal non-cooperative policies with a large set of instruments, including tariffs.6 In a

rich model with endogenous location of firms and an extensive margin of trade, they show that the

terms-of-trade externality remains the dominating incentive to apply positive tariffs. Bagwell and

Staiger (2003) propose a trade model featuring potential terms-of-trade manipulation by govern-

ments, and trade agreements as means to restrict this policy option. Our paper is complementary

to theirs. Most importantly, we incorporate endogenous tariff formation within a standard open

economy macro model, showing the importance of price stickiness, the exchange rate regime, the

extent of cooperation or the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates for the equilibrium degree

of trade protection.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 sets out the basic model. Section 3 defines

how inflation and tariffs are determined by policymakers. Section 4 sketches out a simple version

of the model to give an intuition for the impact of tariffs. Section 5 develops the main results of the

paper under currency wars and trade wars, where we explore the impact of cooperation, country

size, and partial commitment. Section 6 analyzes the model under fixed exchange rates. Section 7

shows the results for trade wars under the zero lower bound constraint on monetary policy. Some

conclusions are offered in Section 8.



2     The Model

    We describe a two country model, denoted Home and Foreign, where agents supply labour and

consume goods from both countries. The world is populated with a unit mass of agents and Home

has share n of these, with Foreign share 1 - n. Firms set prices in domestic currency (PCP), and

adjust prices constrained by Rotemberg style price adjustment costs. Agents in the Home country

have preferences over consumption and hours given by

                                                 1-
                                                Ct  -1    
                                          U=           -    Ht1+                                                    (1)
                                                 1-      1+

We assume no financial market trading across countries, which implies that trade is balanced.7
    6
      More generally, our paper also relates to the literature on tax and structural reforms to manipulate the exchange,
which includes Correia, Nicolini, and Teles (2008), Hevia and Nicolini (2013), Farhi, Gopinath, and Itskhoki (2014),
Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Raffo (2014), Cacciatore et al. (2016), Auray, Eyquem, and Ma (2017) or Barbiero et al.
(2019).
    7
      Extending the model to allow for non-zero current accounts is left for future research.


                                                           7
2.1    Households

    Absent international asset trading, the Home country budget constraint is


                                                    
                            Ph,t Ch,t + (1 + t )St Pf,t Cf,t = Wt Ht + t + T Rt                             (2)


              ) is the Home (Foreign) goods price in Home (Foreign) currency, S is the exchange
where Ph,t (Pf,t                                                               t

rate, Ch,t (Cf,t ) is the consumption of the Home (Foreign) good, t is an import tariff imposed by

the Home government, Wt is the Home nominal wage, t represents the profits of the Home firm

and T Rt is a lump sum transfer from the Home government. The elasticity of substitution between

Home and Foreign goods is .

    It is assumed that
                                                                                  1
                                             1    1- 1               1    1- 1   1- 1
                                                                                    
                                  Ct =           Ch,t    + (1 - )        Cf,t                               (3)

where   n, representing the possibility of home bias in preferences.8

    The true price index for the Home consumer given the above preferences and the price definitions

then becomes
                                                                                         1
                                   1-                        1-                         1-
                             Pt = Ph,t + (1 - )((1 + t )St Pf,t )                                           (4)

    Optimal consumption of Home and Foreign goods for the Home consumer is

                                                           -
                                                   Ph,t
                                 Ch,t =                        Ct                                           (5)
                                                    Pt
                                                                                 -
                                                           (1 + t )St Pf,t
                                 Cf,t = (1 - )                                       Ct                     (6)
                                                                    Pt

Optimal labour supply is described by


                                                            
                                                  Wt = Pt Ct Ht                                             (7)


The preferences, budget constraints, and optimal choices for the Foreign economy are analogous.

The presence of home bias in Foreign preferences then implies that the price index for the Foreign


   8
    Letting 0  x  1 represent the degree of home bias in preferences, where x = 0 (x = 1) represents zero (full)
home bias, we can define  = n + x(1 - n).


                                                           8
economy is
                                                                                           1
                                                                                   1-     1-
                                       1-                     Ph,t
                            Pt =      Pf,t + (1 -  ) (1 + t )                                          (8)
                                                               St

2.2     Firms

   A measure n of firms in the Home economy produce differentiated goods. The aggregate Home

good is a composite of these differentiated goods, where the elasticity of substitution between

individual goods is denoted as        > 1. The production function for firm i in the Home country is


                                                              - 
                                                 Yi,t = At L1
                                                            i,t Xi,t                                   (9)


where At is an aggregate productivity term. Here, Xi,t represents the use of intermediate goods

on the part of the Home firm i and Li,t the use of labor. We allow that intermediate good inputs

are composed of Home and Foreign goods in a different composition than that of the consumption

aggregator. Namely
                                                                                    1
                                             1
                                               1-  1                  1    1-  1   1- 1
                                                                                      
                                  Xi,t =     
                                            x Xi,h,t    + (1 - x )        Xi,f,t

where Xi,j,t is the Home firm i's use of inputs from country j = h, f . The profits of Home firm i

are then represented as

                                     i,t = ((1 + si,t )Pi,h,t - M Ct ) Yi,h,t                        (10)

                  (1-)-1 -
where M Ct =          At   Wt1- Px,t
                                           denotes the firm's marginal cost, where Px,t is the price index

relevant for the firm's use of intermediate inputs, and si,t represents a subsidy that may be given

to the firm to offset the monopoly distortion in pricing.9

   Cost minimization by the firm implies:


                                            At (1 - )L-  
                                                      i,t Xi,t M Ct = Wt                             (11)
                                                                 1
                                                                -
                                    - -1 
                                                   1   Xi,h,t
                              At L1
                                  i,t Xi,t x                         M Ct = Ph,t                     (12)
                                                       Xi,t
                                                                 1
                                                                -
                            - -1                   1   Xi,f,t                           
                      At L1
                          i,t Xi,t (1      - x )                     M Ct = (1 + t )St Pf,t          (13)
                                                       Xi,t


                                                                       1
   9                            1-                          1-        1-
       In particular, Px,t = x Ph,t + (1 - x )((1 + t )St Pf,t )           .


                                                           9
The firm chooses its price to maximize its present value of expected profits, net of price adjustment

costs
                                                           Pi,h,t
                               Et          t i,t - t                 Ph,t Yh,t                      (14)
                                                          Pi,h,t-1
                                    j =0

where t is the firm's nominal stochastic discount factor, and t (.) represents a price adjustment

cost function for the firm. We assume that  (.) > 0, and  (.) > 0. Price adjustment costs

are proportional to the nominal value of Home output, to be consistent with the nominal profit

objective function of the firm.

   The first order condition for profit maximization for the Home firm i can be described as

                                                     Yi,h,t          Pi,h,t      1
          (1 + st )Yi,h,t = (Pi,h,t (1 + st ) - M Ct )      +                        Ph,t Yh,t
                                                     Pi,h,t         Pi,h,t-1 Pi,h,t
                                                            Pi,h,t+1 Pi,h,t+1
                                              + Et t+1                     2    Ph,t+1 Yh,t+1 = 0   (15)
                                                             Pi,h,t      Pi,h,t

2.3     Economic Policy

   There are three separate levers of policy in this model. Fiscal policy may be used to subsidize

monopoly firms. Trade policy may be used to levy tariffs on imports, and monetary policy may be

used to either target inflation rates or exchange rates. In the case where firms are subsidized, we

follow the literature in assuming that a fiscal authority chooses a subsidy to offset the steady-state

monopoly markup. But we also allow for the possibility that the monopoly markup remains as a

pre-existing distortion in the economy. As we see, this may have an important implication for both

optimal monetary policy and trade policy.


2.3.1    Monetary Policy

   Monetary policy is represented in two ways. In the first case, we assume that each country

chooses its inflation rate independently, and the nominal exchange rate is flexible. In this case, it is

implicitly assumed that the monetary authority can implement a desired inflation rate through an

interest rate policy, but we abstract from the details of this policy. An alternative assumption is that

monetary policy is represented by an exchange-rate target on the part of the Foreign government,

leaving the Home country to independently choose an inflation rate. In this case, only the Home

policymaker has an independent monetary instrument.

                                                     10
   Nevertheless, it is both possible and realistic to imagine that neither monetary authority has the

ability to achieve a desired inflation target due to the zero-bound constraint on nominal interest

rates. We therefore explore a situation where monetary policy is temporarily constrained, and

inflation rates are determined endogenously, given expectations about future monetary policy as

well as the current stance of trade policy. In this case, the only policy tool available during the

zero-bound period is that of trade policy.     10




2.3.2    Trade Policy

   Trade policy is represented by tariffs chosen by each country. We assume that tariff rates are

chosen to maximize domestic welfare. In this scenario, countries engage in a `trade war', where

equilibrium tariff rates are determined in a Nash equilibrium. But in an economy with sticky prices

and optimally determined monetary policy, an important determinant of the outcome of trade wars

is the relationship between the domestic monetary authority and the trade authority. In the Nash

equilibrium of the game between countries (as described below), we assume that both inflation and

tariffs are chosen simultaneously by a domestic policymaker to maximize domestic welfare. We

can think of this as a case where monetary and trade policy are determined by a single decision

maker, although because both authorities are `benevolent' in maximizing Home welfare, and act

at the same time, the result would be the same if we thought of monetary and trade policy as

determined separately by a monetary and fiscal authority. In the above case, we have assumed

that the authorities in each country act separately, without cooperation. However, investigating

the effects international cooperation is of critical interest. In this case, we focus on monetary policy

alone, assuming that tariffs are determined independently (and non-cooperatively) by domestic

policymakers. This assumption is natural, since cooperative tariffs would always be zero in a

symmetric equilibrium of our model, were trade policy to be determined jointly by policymakers.

As we show below whether monetary policy is cooperative versus non-cooperative delivers very

different outcomes when trade policy is determined in a non-cooperative way.

   It is possible however that trade policy is determined at a different frequency than monetary

policy. That is, even though countries may engage in trade wars, the trade authorities may be able

  10
     Since we are assuming that all monetary policy-makers lack commitment, we do not explore the consequences
of Forward Guidance in monetary policy announcements.


                                                     11
to pre-commit in a way that is not possible for monetary authorities. While a full investigation of

the duration of commitment is beyond the scope of our analysis, we can explore a simple version

of this idea by asking whether equilibrium tariff rates would differ if tariff setters could internalize

the ex-post response of monetary authorities to the tariff rates chosen by each country. We analyze

this case below, by assuming that the `trade war' takes place `before' the 'currency war', with trade

authorities taking account of the endogenous responses of the monetary authorities.

   In all cases, regardless of the assumptions about trade and monetary policy, we assume that

policy is discretionary. This means that policymakers maximize current welfare, taking as given

that future policymakers will behave in a similar fashion.


2.3.3     Government Budget constraint

   While the assumptions about the stance of policy differs, the representation of the consolidated

government budget constraint is the same in all situations. The government in each country balances

its budget. Tariffs generate revenues, while subsidies represent a cost paid to domestic firms. The

difference is rebated back to domestic households in the form of lump-sum transfers. Hence, for

the Home country we have


                                                          
                            T Rt = t St Pf,t Cf,t + t St Pf,t Xf,t - st Ph,t Yh,t                              (16)


where the last expression on the right hand side represents total subsidies paid to all domestic

firms.


2.4      The Competitive Equilibrium

2.4.1     Baseline model

   The full description of the competitive equilibrium for this economy is available in the Ap-

pendix. As noted above, we assume that when monetary policy is active, it can be represented
                                                                    
                                                                 Pf,t
                                            Ph,t        
by the PPI inflation rates, h,t =          Ph,t-1   and f,t =    
                                                                Pf h,t-1   . In addition, we can define the
                            St Pf,t                                                         Ph,t       1
terms of trade as St =       Ph,t .   Using this notation, and also noting that              Pt    =   Pt ,   where
                                       1                                                                1
Pt =  + (1 - )((1 + t )St )1-         1-
                                           , and likewise Px,t = x + (1 - x )((1 + t )St )1-           1-
                                                                                                            . Then,

the Appendix shows that, conditional on monetary policies                   
                                                                      h,t , f,t     and tariff policies {t , t },

                                                       12
                                                                                       , C , C  and
the equilibrium can be written in the form of 5 equations in the 5 variables Yh,t , Yf,t  t   t

St . These are expressed as follows:

                                                       -                      -
                                        (1 + t )St           f          1            h
    Yh,t -  (h,t )Yh,t = St                                 Dh,t   +                Dh,t                                       (17)
                                            Pt                          Pt
             (1 + st ) =            (1 + st ) - Px,t -1 Xt +  (h,t ) h,t + Et t  (h,t+1 ) h,t+1                                (18)
                                                      -1 -1 
             (1 + st) =             (1 + s                                           
                                          t ) - Px,t St  Xt +  f,t f,t + Et t  f,t+1 f,t+1 (19)
                                         -                                      -
                                   1           h       1-n         (1 + t )            h
     Yh,t (1 -  (h,t )) =                     Dh,t +                                  Df,t                                     (20)
                                   Pt                   n             Pt
                                          -                                          -
                                   St          f        n          (1 + t ) St              f
    Yf,t (1 -  f,t ) =                        Df,t +                                       Dh,t                                (21)
                                   Pt                  1-n             Pt

where

                                                             -                                                  -
             f                                       Pt                  h                              Pt
            Dh,t = (1 - )Ct + (1 - x )                           Xt and Dh,t = Ct + x                               Xt         (22)
                                                     Px,t                                               Px,t
                                                            -                                                    -
                                                  Pt                          f                          Pt
          h
         Df,t   = (1 -       )Ct   + (1 -   x)                  Xt     and   Df,t   =       
                                                                                           Ct   +   x                Xt        (23)
                                                  Px,t                                                   Px,t

stand for aggregate Home/Foreign demands for Home/Foreign goods, and

                                       1-                                                                    1-
                     Y 
                 Pt Ct               1-+2                                                Y 
                                                                                    Pt Ct                  1-+2
                       h,t                                                                f,t
   Xt =           (1+ )/(1-)
                                               Yh,t 1 and Xt =                        (1+ )/(1-)
                                                                                                                    Yf,t 1     (24)
            Px,t At                                                             A
                                                                              Px,t t


                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                         1      1-+2
for the Home and Foreign aggregate use of intermediate goods, with 1                                    ( )2
                                                                                                                         . Equation

(17) represents the concentrated Home budget constraint, taking account of the demand for Home

intermediate goods on the part of Home firms. Then, (18) and (19) are the Home and Foreign

inflation equations, after substituting for the marginal cost functions, while (20) and (21) are the

goods market clearing conditions for the two countries.


2.4.2   Fixed Exchange Rates

   In the baseline model, we assume that the policymaker in the Home and Foreign country can
                respectively. But if the Foreign country targets the nominal exchange rate, we
choose h,t and f,t




                                                              13
must have
                                                        St-1
                                           h,t = f,t                                            (25)
                                                         St

This adds a state variable to the model in the form of the lagged terms of trade. Since the nominal

exchange rate is pegged, the terms of trade can only adjust via differences in inflation rates. In
                                                                                                 ,
addition, because the Foreign country is pegging the nominal exchange rate, it cedes control of f,t

so the Home country takes (25) as a constraint in its choice of h,t .


2.4.3   The Zero Bound

   As discussed above, in recent experience it is quite natural to think of monetary policy as being

constrained by the zero bound. In the above formulation, we implicitly assumed that the mone-

tary authority could freely adjust nominal interest rates to target its desired rate of domestic PPI

inflation. When there is no constraint on nominal interest rate adjustment, it is not necessary to

incorporate household's Euler equation conditions. But in order to capture the zero bound con-

straint, we must explicitly incorporate households inter-temporal choice. Note that because we are

focusing on a model of financial autarky, net national saving is zero, so household's Euler equations

must be consistent with zero current account balance. Nonetheless, when nominal interest rates

are constrained at zero, households inter-temporal savings decisions have an impact on aggregate

demand and economic activity. In the case of the Home economy, defining Rt as the gross nominal

interest rate, the Euler equation is:


                                                          CtP
                                                              t
                                    1 =  exp (-t )Et      P       Rt                            (26)
                                                        Ct +1 t+1

   We assume that outside of the ZLB, the interest rate is determined by the Taylor rule:


                                     T aylor     1          h,t   
                                    Rt       =     exp (t )                                     (27)
                                                            ¯

where ¯ is a target rate of inflation, which is set to mimic the steady state of the Nash equilibrium

in the policy game defined below, and t is a time preference shock. We also assume that  > 1.

We will assume an `MIT' shock process for the t shock. Initially,  = 0, but then  < 0 occurs

without anticipation, and continues with probability µ, while it reverts to zero with probability


                                                   14
1 - µ. We assume identical t shocks in each country. We focus on a t < 0 that is large enough in

absolute value that, without restriction, Rt < 1 would be required so satisfy (26) and (27). In this

case, we need to impose the interest rate non-negativity constraint:


                                                       T aylor
                                             Rt = max Rt       ,1                              (28)



3     Monetary Policy and Trade Policy

3.1   Optimal Monetary Policy: Currency Wars

    We first analyze the determination of optimal inflation rates in a discretionary Nash equilib-

rium. In a discretionary Nash equilibrium each government chooses its inflation rate to maximize

domestic welfare, subject to (17)-(21). Since there is no trade in financial assets, there are no

endogenous state variables in the model, so a discretionary (time-consistent) Nash equilibrium can

be described simply by each government's choice of current-valued variables, taking future inflation

rates, consumption levels, output levels and terms of trade as given. Hence, a discretionary Nash

equilibrium in monetary policy can be described as:

                                                                                1+
                                                           1-
                                                          Ct  -1         Yh,t   1-
                    Max          ,Y
                          {Ct ,Ct   h,t ,Yf,t St ,h,t }
                                                                 -                             (29)
                                                           1-      1+   At Xt

subject to (17)-(21).

                                                                                1+
                                                    1-
                                                   Ct   -1               Yf,t   1-
                   Max {Ct ,Ct
                              ,Y    ,Y  S ,    } ,         -                                   (30)
                                 h,t f,t t f,t
                                                      1-     1+         At Xt
                                                                             



subject to (17)-(21).

    We compare the Nash discretionary equilibrium to a cooperative discretionary equilibrium. In

this case, a global social planner chooses inflation rates in both countries to maximize the sum of




                                                           15
Home and Foreign utility, subject to the competitive equilibrium conditions (17)-(21).

                                                                                               1+
                                                                       1-
                                                                      Ct  -1           Yh,t    1-
            Max           ,Y
                   {Ct ,Ct   h,t ,Yf,t St ,h,t ,f,t }
                                                                n            -
                                                                       1-      1+     At Xt
                                                                                                        1+
                                                                            1-
                                                                           Ct   -1             Yf,t     1-
                                                          + (1 - n)                -                              (31)
                                                                              1-     1+       At Xt
                                                                                                   



subject to (17)-(21).


3.2    Optimal monetary policy under a fixed exchange rate

   Under a fixed exchange rate regime, we must explicitly account for the initial conditions faced

by the policymakers in the form of the lagged terms of trade St-1 . Since the peg itself represents

the monetary policy of the Foreign country, we describe a fixed exchange problem as the problem

of the Home country. In this case, we the Home country will choose h,t to maximize its value

V (St-1 ). The problem can be stated as

                                                                                              1+
                                                             C 1- - 1                 Yh,t    1-
      Max          ,Y
            {Ct ,Ct   h,t ,Yf,t ,St ,h,t ,f,t }
                                                  V (St-1 ) = t       -                            + Et V (St )   (32)
                                                               1-       1+           At Xt

subject to (17)-(21) and (25).


3.3     Currency Wars and Trade Wars

   Our main interest is in the determination of trade policy and its interaction with the monetary

policy stance. To explore this we allow the policymakers to choose both tariffs and inflation

rates in a Nash discretionary equilibrium. The definition of a Nash discretionary equilibrium with

endogenous tariffs and inflation is extended in a straightforward way as follows:

                                                                                               1+
                                                                       1-
                                                                      Ct  -1           Yh,t    1-
                          Max            ,Y
                                  {Ct ,Ct   h,t ,Yf,t ,St ,h,t ,t }
                                                                             -                                    (33)
                                                                       1-      1+     At Xt

subject to (17)-(21).

                                                                                               1+
                                                                       1-
                                                                      Ct   -1          Yf,t    1-
                        Max            ,Y
                                {Ct ,Ct                       
                                          h,t ,Yf,t ,St ,f,t ,t }
                                                                              -                                   (34)
                                                                         1-     1+    At Xt
                                                                                           




                                                                      16
subject to (17)-(21).

    As noted above, we will also analyze a case where monetary policy is chosen cooperatively as

described by (31), but trade policy is chosen separately by each national government.


3.3.1   Currency Wars and Trade Wars under a fixed exchange rate

    In the case of a fixed exchange rate, the Home country chooses both an inflation rate and its

tariff rate to maximize Home welfare, while the Foreign country's only policy lever is its tariff rate.

In this case, the Foreign country's problem is an amended version of (34) where it chooses only the

tariff rate and has no control over its inflation rate, which is indirectly determined as a consequence

of the Home country's inflation policy as well as the tariff rates chosen by both countries.



4    A simple illustration of the model mechanism

    Before we analyze the full solution and optimal policy problem, in this section we develop a

simplified version of the model to illustrate the impact of `currency wars' and `trade wars' in the

form of inflation choices and tariffs in the model. For this section we assume that  = 0, so there
                                                                                          1
are no intermediate goods, and we take countries to be equally sized, so that n =         2.   We take

a linear approximation of the model around a steady state of zero inflation and zero tariffs. We

assume that all changes in tariffs and inflation are i.i.d., so shocks are purely transitory. We can

then represent the model in the form of log deviations from the steady state. Equations (17), (20)

and (21) can then be represented as:



                                           c = y - (1 - )s                                        (35)

                         y = c + (1 - )c + 2 (1 - )s +  (1 - )(t - t )                            (36)

                        y  = c + (1 - )c - 2 (1 - )s -  (1 - )(t - t )                            (37)

Lower case letters represent log deviations from the steady state symmetric mean, where s is the

log deviation of the terms of trade, and t and t represent log deviations of tariffs.

    Equations (35)-(37) can be solved for relative consumption and the terms of trade as a function



                                                  17
of relative output and relative tariffs:

                                           2(1 - )t + (2 - 1)y
                                  c =                                                             (38)
                                                2( - 1) + 1

                                                 -t + y
                                            s=                                                    (39)
                                                 2( - 1) + 1

where c = c - c , t = t - t , and y = y - y  .

   Equation (38) gives relative Home versus Foreign consumption as an increasing function of

Home versus Foreign output, and Home versus Foreign tariff rates (all in terms of log deviations

from steady state). Equation (39) gives the terms of trade as a negative function of relative tariffs

and a positive function of relative output.

   The linearized inflation equations from (18) and (19) when inflation shocks are transitory can

be represented as:



                                     h = (y + c + (1 - )(s + t))                                  (40)

                                  
                                  f = (y  + c + (1 - )(-s + t ))                                  (41)

   Here  represents a measure of price stickiness coming from the underlying price adjustment

cost model. Substituting in the solutions (39) we get a relationship between relative consumption,

relative output, the relative tariff rates, and relative inflation rates, as follows:


                                (2 - 1)(1 - )t - (2( - 2) + 3)y 
                         c =                                   +                                  (42)
                                            2( - 1) + 1          

   Equations (38) and (42) can be represented as the upward and downward sloping lines in Figure

1, respectively. Together they determine relative consumption and relative output as a function

of relative inflation and relative tariff shocks. Since (38) is independent of inflation shocks, a rise

in inflation, shifting up (42), will raise relative Home consumption, and relative Home output. By

contrast, a rise in the Home tariff rate will shift up both curves, when      >1
                                                                               2 . The relative demand

curve shifts up because tariffs redirect world demand towards the Home country, even accounting

for the terms of trade appreciation. The relative supply curve shifts up because, given the impact

of tariffs on the terms of trade, marginal costs for the Home relative to the Foreign country are


                                                    18
                         Figure 1: A tariff shock in the simplified model




reduced by a Home tariff rate increase when there is home bias in preferences. Figure 1 illustrates

that for the calibration used in the model solution below, a Home tariff will shift up (38) by more

than (42). As a consequence, relative Home consumption rises, but relative Home output falls, for

given  .

   It is straightforward to use the same approximation of equations (35)-(37) and (40) and (41) to

show that a rise in the Home tariff rate reduces overall world consumption and output as follows

                                                        (1 - )t
                                   c + c = y + y  = -
                                                           2

Since a rise in the Home tariff rate increases Home relative consumption but decreases Home relative

output, and world consumption and output fall together, it follows that in this simple version of

the model, a rise in the Home tariff will reduce Foreign consumption and reduce Home output. By




                                                19
contrast, the impact on Home consumption is positive, given by

                                          1-    t
                                   c=                    > 0.
                                           2 2( - 1) + 1

Since Home welfare will therefore increase, this supports the conventional intuition that each coun-

try will have a welfare based incentive to raise tariffs, starting at a symmetric steady state with

zero tariffs.



5     Optimal Monetary and Trade Policy

5.1    Calibration

    We calibrate the model in a very straightforward manner. We let the trade elasticity  = 3.

This is on the higher end of the range estimated by Feenstra et al. (2018) , but is more appropriate

for the evaluation of trade policy. Initially, we set  = 1 to imply log utility, but also examine

alternative values of  . We set  = 1 to capture a Frisch elasticity of labor supply equal to unity,

and normalize  = 1. We assume the individual firm's elasticity of demand       = 6, which implies a

20 percent price-cost markup. We initially assume equal sized countries so that n = 0.5. We then

set x = .3, so that  =  = .6. In addition, following standard settings for Rotemberg pricing
                                    
equations, we assume that  ( ) =    2 (   - 1)2 and set  = 70. Finally, we assume that materials

constitute 40 percent of gross output, so that  = 0.4.


5.2    Currency Wars

    Table 1 describes the steady state outcome of the Nash and Cooperative equilibrium where

policymakers choose only inflation rates, without being constrained by the zero bound. In the Nash

equilibrium each country faces a trade-off between choosing a positive rate of inflation in order to

eliminate the monopoly pricing distortion on economic activity, and choosing disinflation to reduce

output and appreciate the terms of trade vis-a-vis their trading partner, thus partly substituting

for the absence of direct trade policy instruments. For the particular calibration in Table 1, the

first motive dominates, and the Nash equilibrium inflation rate is 1.4 percent. By contrast, with

cooperative monetary policy the terms of trade motive is eliminated, and each country chooses a


                                                 20
                                        Table 1: Currency wars
         Variable    Non-cooperative      Cooperative     Non-coop/Subsidy        Coop/Subsidy
            C             0.291              0.287              0.328                0.339
           C              0.291              0.287              0.328                0.339
           Yh             0.437              0.460              0.554                0.555
           Yf             0.437              0.460              0.554                0.555
            S             1.00               1.00               1.00                  1.00
           h              1.014              1.036              0.973                 1.00
           f              1.014              1.036              0.973                 1.00
            U            -1.651             -1.699             -1.654                -1.604
               Table showing equilibrium of Non-cooperative and Cooperative Monetary Policy,
                         with and without offsetting subsidies for monopoly pricing


much higher positive rate of inflation of 3.6 percent. The Table in fact indicates that monetary

policy cooperation is welfare reducing. This is essentially the well-known Rogoff (1985) result that

international cooperation may be counterproductive in face of discretionary monetary.

   If subsidies are in place to offset the monopoly distortion, then Table 1 indicates that each

country follows a sharply deflationary monetary policy in a Nash equilibrium, since the terms

of trade motive then fully dominates the incentives for inflation in each country. Output and

consumption are higher than in the absence of optimal subsidies, but the lower rate of inflation

generates welfare costs which means that welfare is lower than in the Nash equilibrium without

subsidies. Hence, eliminating the monopoly price distortion so much exacerbates the currency war

that welfare falls for both countries. By contrast, if optimal subsidies are in place, and monetary

policy is chosen cooperatively, inflation rates are zero, then the equilibrium is first-best, since all

distortions are eliminated and inflation is zero.

   To address the motivation discussed in the introduction, we conclude from these results that

`currency wars' may be either good or bad. If there is a pre-existing monopoly distortion, then,

following the logic of Rogoff, we confirm that cooperation in monetary policy may be undesirable,

whereas with optimal subsidies in place, cooperation supports the first best outcome.

   Before we address the interaction of currency wars and trade wars, it is revealing to ask how the

presence of exogenously determined tariffs would affect the outcome of the currency war in Table

1. Tariffs are inherently distortionary and, when equally applied by both countries, they convey no

terms-of-trade advantage to either country. But in the presence of a different set of distortions, the



                                                    21
welfare consequences of trade restrictions cannot be immediately inferred. Figure 2 illustrates this.

The Figure shows the impacts of tariffs, on the horizontal axis, and inflation rates and welfare, on

the vertical right and left axis respectively. In both the left and right panel, corresponding to the

case where the monopoly pricing distortions are present or eliminated by an offsetting subsidy, we

find that tariffs increase the Nash equilibrium inflation rate. Intuitively, the production distortion

imposed by tariffs leads policymakers to choose a higher rate of inflation. When there is a monopoly

pricing distortion, the left panel shows that even small tariffs reduce welfare, since the combination

of an increased production distortion and higher inflation is unambiguously negative. But in the

case where the monopoly pricing distortion is offset, the right panel of Figure 2 shows that a

small mutual tariff (imposed by both countries) can actually increase welfare through its effect

on endogenously reducing the deflation rate that is chosen in the currency war between the two

countries. Thus, surprisingly, a small level of trade restrictions can be desirable in reducing the

negative impacts of currency wars when monopoly distortions are eliminated.


5.3   Currency Wars and Trade Wars

   We now compare the previous results to a situation where national governments choose both

tariffs and inflation rates in a Nash discretionary equilibrium. Table 2 illustrates the allocations and

welfare effects of the combined currency war and trade war. We start with the far right-hand panel in

the Table, which shows the outcome where both countries choose inflation rates non-cooperatively,

but the Home country chooses an optimal tariff unilaterally. Under the current calibration, the

Home country chooses a tariff rate of 52 percent. This generate a 22 percent appreciation in its

terms of trade and raises Home welfare at the expense of Foreign welfare, comparing the left panel

of Table 1 with the right panel of Table 2. In addition, as suggested by the simplified model of

the last section, the tariff raises relative Home consumption, but reduces relative Home output. In

addition, the Home country unilateral tariff leads to an endogenous rise in PPI inflation rates in

both countries, but more-so in the Home country.

   The left-hand panel of Table 2 shows the results for a trade war, where both countries choose an

optimal tariff rate, in addition to an optimal inflation rate, in a Nash equilibrium. The trade war

leads to mutual tariff rates of 49 percent. In the symmetric Nash equilibrium, there is no change

in the terms of trade, but the rise in domestic prices leads to a shift back in labor supply which

                                                  22
                     Figure 2: Effects of exogenous tariffs under currency wars




                                  Table 2: Trade and Currency Wars
 Variable    Non-coop M.       Coop M.      Subsidy, Non-coop M.        Subsidy, Coop M.        Unilateral
    C            0.249           0.243               0.289                    0.289                0.284
   C             0.249           0.243               0.289                    0.289                0.252
   Yh            0.399           0.416               0.478                    0.487                0.402
   Yf            0.399           0.416               0.478                    0.487                0.421
    S            1.00             1.00               1.00                     1.00                 0.777
   h             1.034           1.049               1.00                     1.016                1.033
   f             1.034           1.049               1.00                     1.016                1.022
                 0.490           0.526               0.58                     0.590                0.522
                 0.490           0.526               0.58                     0.590                 0.00
    U           -1.794          -1. 845             -1.713                   -1.720              -1.6352
   U            -1.794           -1.845             -1.713                   -1.720               -1.808
Table showing equilibrium of Tariff war and Currency Wars, with and without offsetting subsidies for monopoly
                                                   pricing



                                                     23
reduces equilibrium employment and output. At the same time, the fall in consumption of imported

goods distorts the composition of consumption and leads to a fall in aggregate consumption in both

countries. Thus, the trade war has large negative effects on real activity.11

    Table 2 also shows, however, that the trade war causes a change in equilibrium inflation rates.

Absent the trade war, Nash equilibrium inflation rates were 1.4 percent (see Table 1), which as

described above, represented a balance between the desire to eliminate monopoly distortions and

the desire to improve the national terms of trade. When countries engage in the trade war, optimal

tariffs focus on the second objective ­ terms of trade manipulation ­ and monetary authorities

redirect inflation rates towards the first objective. As a result, inflation rates are quite higher ­ at

3.4 percent ­ in the equilibrium with both a Trade and a currency wars.

    Table 2 further indicates that the trade war has major implications for welfare. Comparing the

Nash discretionary equilibrium of the combined Trade and currency wars with that of the Nash

equilibrium under the currency war alone (left panel of Table 2 compared with that of Table 1)

leads to a fall in welfare of 14 percent in terms of consumption equivalents.

    The second column of Table 2 documents the outcome where policymakers cooperate on mon-

etary policy, but follow a trade war in the choice of tariffs. As we would anticipate, given the

results of Table 1, monetary policy cooperation is, again, counter-productive. But this is now for

two reasons. First, as before, the equilibrium inflation rates increase from 3 percent to 4.9 percent,

as monetary policy focuses only on eliminating domestic distortions and ignores the impact on the

terms of trade. Second, this adjustment in the focus of monetary policy leads to a redirection of

tariffs: the trade war becomes more intense, as independent policymakers increase tariffs to more

fully exploit a terms of trade advantage. Tariff rates increase to 53 percents ­ against 49 percents

when monetary policy is non-cooperative ­ and aggregate consumption falls by 2.5 percent. As a

result, the welfare costs of counter-productive cooperation in monetary policy are greater in the

presence of endogenous tariffs.

    When optimal subsidies are in place to eliminate the monopoly pricing distortion, inflation rates

are no longer targeted at eliminating the distortion in equilibrium output. While Table 1 showed

that, in this case, governments follow deflationary policies, Table 2 shows that inflation rates are

   11
     We note that while these tariff rates are significantly higher than average tariffs among high income countries,
in a calibrated model, Ossa (2014) finds that average tariffs would be over 60 percent in a full-scale world `tariff war.


                                                           24
zero in the trade war and currency war equilibrium. However, equilibrium tariffs rise further to 58

percent in this case. Intuitively, in the absence of the domestic distortion and with inflation rates

set to zero, there is no equilibrium cost of price re-setting and each policymaker further attempts to

exploit its terms of trade advantage, leading to a Nash equilibrium with lower output and aggregate

consumption than in the analogous case with a currency war alone.

   While Table 1 showed that the combination of an optimal subsidy and monetary policy coop-

eration delivered the first-best outcome with zero inflation and no distortions, the fourth column

of Table 2 shows that monetary policy cooperation reduces welfare when tariffs are determined

non-cooperatively, even in the presence of optimal subsidies. Indeed, comparing the 3rd and 4th

column of Table 2, cooperation in monetary policy leads to a rise in equilibrium inflation rates,

and a rise in equilibrium tariff rates. Not only do tariff rates rise again as in the no-subsidy case

because tariffs alone can be directed towards improving the terms of trade, but inflation rates rise

in both countries. The rise in inflation is intuitive: with joint determination of monetary policy,

policymakers raise inflation to offset the distortion in output and consumption imposed by the

trade war. Thus, monetary policy cooperation is counter-productive, even without the presence of

monopoly pricing distortions.

   These results illustrate that there is a significant interaction between trade policy and monetary

policy in an environment with sticky prices. A natural question is how does trade policy in this

environment differ from an economy without nominal rigidities; i.e. how do these results differ

compared with a standard tariff war in a flexible price economy? Table 3 illustrates the outcome

of a trade war in a flexible price economy. The second column shows that equilibrium tariffs

are actually lower and welfare higher than in the economy with sticky prices and non-cooperative

monetary policy (the first column of Table 2). Thus, trade wars are more intense in the equilibrium

where there is a combined trade war and currency war.


5.4   Country-size effects and alternative parameter values

   All the previous derivations assumed equal sized countries. But discussion of currency wars

and trade wars in the policy debate is most often focused on the role of large countries relative to

small countries. Particularly in the discussion of monetary policy spillovers, it is often argued that

smaller countries are more prone to the negative effects of uncoordinated policy spillovers from

                                                 25
                              Table 3: Trade War under flexible prices
                        Variable    Flexible Price    Flexible Price Trade War
                           C             0.290                  0.254
                          C              0.290                  0.254
                          Yh             0.430                  0.377
                          Yf             0.430                  0.377
                           S              1.00                   1.00
                                            -                    1.05
                                            -                    1.05
                                           0                    0.448
                                           0                    0.448
                           U            -1.646                  -1.744
                          U             -1.646                  -1.744
              Table showing equilibrium of Flexible Price economy with and without Trade War


larger countries.

   In the baseline model without endogenous policy choice, country size is irrelevant for real

outcomes such as consumption, output, terms of trade or welfare. This is because as country size

varies, so also does the range of goods that each country has. Country size may however matter

when countries engage in currency wars or trade wars. Table 4 illustrates the importance of large

versus small countries in the case of currency wars, and currency and trade wars.

   The first two panels on the left hand side illustrate the impact of an increase in the Home country

from 50 percent to 75 percent of the world economy in the case of a currency war alone, with zero

tariffs. Counter to received wisdom, the Home country actually suffers relative to the equal-size

benchmark. The reason is, again, related to the trade-off between terms-of-trade manipulation and

inflation. When the Home country is larger, it behaves more like a closed economy and focuses

more on inflationary stimulus to offset the monopoly distortion. In a discretionary equilibrium, this

leaves the Home country worse off. The Foreign country, by contrast, focuses more on terms-of-

trade manipulation. In equilibrium, the Home ends up with a higher inflation rate and the Foreign

country with zero inflation, at least for our calibration. So, in the currency war, country size is

welfare reducing.

   The two right-hand panels of Table 4 illustrate the impact of country size in the case of combined

currency and trade wars. Relative to the equal-size Nash equilibrium, the Home country increases its

tariff and the Foreign country reduces its tariff. Intuitively, since the larger country's consumption



                                                     26
             Table 4: Effects of country size on combined Trade and Currency Wars
       Variable   Currency War       Currency War n = .75        Trade War      Trade War n = .75
          C           0.291                 0.289                   0.249             0.272
         C            0.291                 0.291                   0.249             0.218
         Yh           0.437                 0.448                   0.399             0.431
         Yf           0.437                 0.430                   0.399             0.362
          S            1.00                 1.005                    1.00              0.90
                      1.014                  1.025                  1.034             1.035
                      1.014                   1.00                  1.034             1.030
                        0                      0                    0.490             0.564
                        0                      0                    0.490             0.436
          U          -1.651                 -1.672                 -1.794             -1.727
         U           -1.651                 -1.640                 -1.794             -1.909
           Table showing the effect of a change in country size on the Currency War and Trade War


basket is more weighted towards its own goods, the cost of a tariff on domestic consumption is less,

while conversely, that for the Foreign country is greater. The result is that the Home country is

more protectionist, obtains a significant terms-of-trade advantage, and gains in welfare relative to

the Foreign country. Hence, country size is an advantage in the combined currency and trade war

environment, while it is a disadvantage in the currency war alone.

   Table 8 in the Appendix illustrates the outcome under alternative parameter values for the Trade

and currency war. For the degree of protection, the most important parameter, not surprisingly is

the trade elasticity. Our calibration uses  = 3, which is on the high side of the trade elasticities

used in the aggregate macro literature. But elasticities in the trade literature tend to be higher.

For a value of  = 6 we find that the symmetric Nash equilibrium of the current and trade war

implies a tariff rate of 20 percent, substantially lower than that of Table 2. The consequent welfare

impacts of the trade war are then less. But the main qualitative implications are the same as above.

The trade war leads to a higher equilibrium rate of inflation in all countries, and monetary policy

cooperation leads to a more severe trade war, as above.


5.5   Commitment in trade policy

   In the above analysis of the interaction of currency wars and trade wars, we have assumed

that both inflation and tariffs are chosen simultaneously by domestic policymakers to maximize

own country welfare. A central assumption is that policy is discretionary, so that policy-makers


                                                    27
cannot bind the hands of future policy-makers, rather take these future actions as given. But it

could be argued that trade policy embodies more commitment than monetary policy. Trade policy

is typically enacted by legislation, and this is not as easily changed as monetary policy decisions,

which can be altered at the whim of an independent central bank.

   In this subsection, we analyze a simplified game where trade policy is determined in a non-

cooperative game between policy-makers, but assuming that the trade policy-makers can commit

to their tariff choices. The general case where trade policy is made with commitment and monetary

policy is discretionary in the two country setting involves a complicated dynamic interaction. We

focus instead on a much simplified setting where trade authorities commit to a single tariff rate that

remains constant. Moreover, we assume that in choosing tariffs, the trade authorities internalize

the endogenous response of inflation rates to tariffs in the currency war game between monetary

authorities.

   Therefore, in the initial period trade authorities choose a tariff rate, taking the tariff rate

of the other authority as given, but taking into account the equilibrium of the monetary policy

game played by the monetary authorities, within each period. We focus on a steady state of this

tariff game with commitment. Thus, given the initial tariff rate, monetary authorities choose their

inflation rate in a currency war, without commitment. Given the constant tariff rates, which are

equal in a symmetric equilibrium, inflation rates are constant over time, and also equal across

countries in the symmetric equilibrium of the currency war.

   Given that there is just a one-time choice of tariffs, and we focus on a steady state, the optimal

tariff rates for this game can be chosen simply as a Nash equilibrium in  and   where each

trade authority chooses to maximize one-period domestic utility, taking account of the competitive

equilibrium, and internalizing the response of inflation in both countries to their tariff rate, but

taking as given the tariff rate of the other country.

   Somewhat more formally, define V (t , t ) and V  (t , t ) as follows:

                                                                                            1+
                                                                       1-
                                                                      Ct  -1         Yh,t   1-
               V   (t , t )   = Max          ,Y
                                      {Ct ,Ct   h,t ,Yf,t St ,h,t }
                                                                             -                   (43)
                                                                       1-      1+   At Xt




                                                              28
subject to (17)-(21).

                                                                                        1+
                                                                  1-
                                                                 Ct   -1         Yf,t   1-
             V      (t , t )   = Max {Ct ,Ct
                                            ,Y    ,Y  S ,    } ,         -                         (44)
                                               h,t f,t t f,t
                                                                    1-     1+   At Xt
                                                                                     



subject to (17)-(21).

   Then a Nash equilibrium with commitment in tariff policy, tN , tN is defined by the equilibrium

to the conditions:



                                                Maxt V (t , tN )                                   (45)

                                               Maxt V  (tN , t )                                   (46)

   Table 5 below illustrates the equilibrium of this game. The most striking feature of the Table

is that tariff rates are significantly lower than those in the baseline case of the simultaneous move

game. The Nash tariff rates for the calibrated model are 27 percent, compared with 49 percent in

the baseline model. At the same time, the equilibrium inflation rates are lower, and consumption,

output, and welfare for each country is higher.

   What accounts for the difference between the commitment equilibrium and the baseline case?

The key factor is that the trade authorities take account of the endogenous increase in inflation that

will follow from a higher round of tariffs facing the monetary policy-makers in the second stage of

the game. Because this inflation will be costly due to price adjustment costs, but have little benefit

in terms of higher output, the trade authorities endogenously choose lower equilibrium tariff rates.

Individually, monetary authorities choose a rate of inflation taking future inflation rates as given.

In a steady state equilibrium, the future inflation rate is equal to the current inflation rate, so that

from the firm's first order condition in the Home country, we have


                           (1 + s) - ((1 + s) - mc) -  (h ) h +  (h ) h = 0


Since the trade authorities take account of the sequence of their tariff choices on  , they individually

choose a lower degree of protection than in the tariff game without commitment, where both tariffs

and inflation are taken as given.



                                                       29
     This example highlights the implications of a loss of commitment in trade policy. Even in the

absence of any international trade agreements, when tariffs are chosen without commitment, at the

same frequency as monetary policy, there may be significant losses in welfare.

                  Table 5: Trade and Currency Wars with commitment in trade policy
                                     Variable    Baseline.    Commitment
                                        C          0.249         0.265
                                       C           0.249         0.265
                                       Yh          0.399         0.408
                                       Yf          0.399         0.408
                                        S          1.000         1.000
                                       h           1.034         1.029
                                       f           1.034         1.029
                                                   0.490         0.270
                                                   0.490         0.270
                                        U         -1.794        -1.730
                                       U          -1.794        -1.730
    Table showing equilibrium of Tariff war and Currency Wars, comparing baseline model with tariff commitment
                                                       model




6      Fixed Exchange Rates

     Table 6 illustrates the outcome of the trade war in the case of fixed exchange rates. When

exchange rates are pegged by the Foreign country, only the Home country has an independent

monetary policy. Absent tariffs, the first column shows that the Home country will choose an

inflation rate of 3.6 percent under our calibration, and the equilibrium is perfectly symmetric.

Given unitary initial terms of trade, so that St-1 = 1, the Home country can only improve its

terms of trade by a higher rate of inflation, relative to the Foreign country. This contrasts with the

flexible exchange rate case, where, for a given Foreign rate of inflation, the terms of trade can be

improved by a contractionary monetary policy and an exchange rate appreciation, giving rise to a

downward bias in inflation rates in both countries. With a fixed exchange rate, the Home country

instead focuses on removing the monopoly distortion for a given terms of trade. This leads to a

symmetric equilibrium where both countries inflation rates are positive, and the terms of trade is

unchanged. In fact, in comparing Table 6 with Table 1, we see that the fixed exchange rate case

is identical to the equilibrium of the currency war with cooperation in monetary policy. This then


                                                       30
                            Table 6: Trade war under fixed exchange rates
                              Variable    Fixed ER      Fixed ER,Trade War
                                 C           0.287             0.271
                                C            0.287             0.271
                                Yh           0.460             0.441
                                Yf           0.460             0.441
                                 S           1.00               1.00
                                             1.036             1.043
                                             1.036             1.043
                                               -                0.144
                                               -                0.144
                                 U          -1.699             -1.746
                                U           -1.699             -1.746
                 Table showing equilibrium of Trade War in the model with fixed exchange rates


implies that in welfare terms, the currency war equilibrium dominates the equilibrium with fixed

exchange rates, absent the trade war.

   The second column of Table 6 compares this to the case of a trade war under an exchange

rate peg. This column also identifies a fully symmetric outcome, where the existing terms of trade

facing each policymaker is unity. The Home country chooses its inflation rate and its tariff rate,

and the Foreign country chooses only its tariff rate. In a symmetric equilibrium both inflation rates

and tariff rates are equal. What is most striking about this outcome is the huge difference between

non-cooperative tariff rates relative to the flexible exchange rate case. In the Nash equilibrium tariff

rates in each country are only 14 percent, compared to 49 percent in the flexible price equilibrium.

As a result, in a reversal of the above welfare ranking, when countries engage in trade wars, the

symmetric equilibrium implies that an exchange rate peg dominates the equilibrium with flexible

exchange rates.

   What is the intuition for the substantial difference between fixed and flexible exchange rates

with respect to equilibrium tariff rates? This can be best explained by focusing on equation (25),

repeated here.
                                                           St-1
                                              h,t = f,t
                                                            St

Under the fixed exchange rate regime, the Home country is choosing both its tariff rate and its own

inflation rate. If it chooses its tariff rate to appreciate the terms of trade, then this implies, given

St-1 , that it must be increasing its inflation rate, relative to the Foreign country inflation rate.


                                                      31
But the fact that the authority is simultaneously choosing h,t subject to the costs of inflation

adjustment, effectively reduces the benefits of an appreciated terms of trade. In a symmetric

equilibrium where St-1 = 1 these factors exactly offset, so that it chooses an inflation rate identical

to the Foreign rate, and a tariff rate identical to the Foreign tariff rate. For our calibration, the

reduced benefit of tariff hikes under a peg leads to a very low equilibrium tariff rate.

   However, there is a very important qualification to this result. Indeed, there exists a continuum

of equilibrium Nash equilibrium tariff rates in a symmetric equilibrium, conditioned on different

values of St-1 . If we take an initial value St-1 < 1, then the Home country will choose a tariff

rate higher than that of the Foreign country, so that in equilibrium St = St-1 < 1, and equilibrium

inflation rates are again equalized. Likewise for St-1 > 1, then the Home country chooses a lower

tariff rate than the Foreign country, and again St = St-1 > 1, with identical inflation rates. Thus,

there is a continuum of Nash equilibrium tariff rates in which the Home country is more or less

protectionist than the Foreign country, and each delivers a more or less appreciated terms of trade

for the Home country.

   Figure 3 illustrates the set of equilibria conditional on initial values of the terms of trade. In

each panel, the equilibrium terms of trade is on the horizontal axis. The top right panel shows

that a low initial terms of trade (to the advantage of the Home country) may be sustained by a

low Home tariff, and a lower Foreign tariff. The Foreign tariff may even be negative, indicating

an import subsidy (or an export subsidy, since this model satisfies Lerner equivalence). In this

case, the top left panel shows that Home welfare exceeds Foreign welfare, and the bottom left panel

shows that Home consumption exceeds Foreign consumption. By the same token, with a lower

tariff rate, Foreign gross output exceeds Home output. But there are also equilibria in which the

equilibrium terms of trade exceed unity, the Foreign tariff exceeds the Home tariff, Home welfare

and consumption are lower than Foreign, and Home output exceeds Foreign output.

   In each of these equilibria, Home and Foreign inflation rates are equal. Moreover, inflation

is invariant to the equilibrium tariff rates chosen by the Home and Foreign country. Table 6

indicates that in the symmetric equilibrium, inflation rates in each country are 3.8 percent. For our

calibration, this inflation remains the equilibrium outcome for all values of St and for all different

equilibrium tariff rates reported in Figure 3.



                                                  32
                            Figure 3: Trade wars under fixed exchange rates




The graphs report outcomes of a trade and currency war for given values of the initial value of terms of trade, i.e.
                                                    St-1 .




                                                        33
                  Table 7: Trade and Currency Wars under the zero lower bound
                                  Variable     ZLB        ZLB,Trade War
                                     C         0.249           0.225
                                    C          0.249           0.225
                                    Yh         0.353           0.330
                                    Yf         0.353           0.330
                                     S          1.00            1.00
                                               0.982           0.984
                                               0.982           0.984
                                                  -            0.378
                                                  -            0.378
                                  U = U       -1.703          -1.782
    Table showing equilibrium of Trade War in the model where monetary policy is constrained by the ZLB.


7    Trade Wars under the Zero Lower Bound

    Table 6 illustrates the impact of the zero lower bound on the trade war. We assume that the

zero bound is forced in the manner as discussed in 2.4.3. In our numerical computation, the zero

bound is generated by a fall in the subjective discount rate of the private sector so that  = 1.25,

and we assume this persists with probability 0.5. As discussed above, in this case, the monetary

authority has no control of current rates of inflation, and inflation is determined by aggregate

demand, given forward looking consumers and the expectation that the economy will revert to the

Nash equilibrium of the currency and trade war as described in Table 1. In the absence of trade

policy, the ZLB outcome leads to an equilibrium with deflation rates of 2 percent in both countries,

with consumption and output significantly below the Nash equilibrium of the currency war levels

as shown in Table 1.

    When countries engage in a trade war under the zero lower bound, the outcome is substantially

worse. Each country levies tariffs in the Nash equilibrium, but this has little effect in increasing

the inflation rate, and leads to lower levels of consumption, output, and welfare. Interestingly, the

Nash equilibrium tariff rates are only 38 percent, notably lower than in the full currency war and

trade war equilibrium under flexible exchange rates. They key explanation for this is similar to

the example of commitment in trade policy discussed above. In the environment of the ZLB, trade

policy-makers take account of their choice of tariffs on the endogenous rates of inflation in the two

countries. This leads them to limit the size of their tariff choices relative to the case where inflation



                                                     34
and tariff rates are chosen simultaneously in the full discretionary equilibrium.



8    Conclusions

    This paper is primarily a theoretical exploration of the links between trade and macroeconomics

from the point of view of international strategic policy interaction. There is a large literature both

on international macroeconomic policy coordination/non-coordination on the one hand and the

determinants of trade policy and tariff setting in strategic environments on the other hand. In

our labeling, we denote the first topic as pertaining to `currency wars', and the second related

to `trade wars'. Our paper represents a first pass at combining `currency wars' and `trade wars'

within a simple New Keynesian open economy framework. In the introduction, we argued that

contemporary developments in global economic policy made the interaction of these two dimensions

of policy-making of much greater relevance than in the past. The results of our analysis show that

in many ways, currency wars and trade wars are very closely linked to one another, and differences

in policy settings can lead to major differences in macroeconomic outcomes, the overall degree of

trade protection, and welfare.




                                                 35
References

Auray, St´
         ephane, Aur´
                    elien Eyquem, and Paul Gomme. 2018. "Ramsey-optimal Tax Reforms and

  Real Exchange Rate Dynamics." Journal of International Economics 115 (C):159­169.

Auray, St´
         ephane, Aur´
                    elien Eyquem, and Xiaofei Ma. 2017. "Competitive Tax Reforms in a Mone-

  tary Union with Endogenous Entry and Tradability." European Economic Review 98 (C):126­143.

Bagwell, Kyle and eds. Staiger, Staiger. 2016. "Handbook of Commercial Policy." North Holland .

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2003. "Protection and the Business Cycle." The B.E. Journal

  of Economic Analysis & Policy 3 (1):1­45.

Barattieri, Alessandro, Matteo Cacciatore, and Fabio Ghironi. 2018. "Protectionism and the Busi-

  ness Cycle." NBER Working Paper 24353.

Barbiero, Omar, Emmanuel Farhi, Gita Gopinath, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2019. "The Macroeconomics

  of Border Taxes." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 33 (1):395­457.

B´
 enassy-Qu´
          er´
            e, Agn`
                  es, Matthieu Bussi`
                                    ere, and Pauline Wibaux. 2018. "Trade and Currency

  Weapons." CESifo Working Paper Series (7112).

Benigno, Gianluca and Pierpaolo Benigno. 2003. "Price Stability in Open Economies." The Review

  of Economic Studies 70 (4):743­764.

Bergin, Paul R. and Giancarlo Corsetti. 2008. "The Extensive Margin and Monetary Policy."

  Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (7):1222­1237.

------. 2020. "The Macroeconomic Stabilization of Tariff Shocks: What is the Optimal Monetary

  Response?" NBER WP 26995 .

Bhattarai, Saroj and Konstantin Egorov. 2016. "Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy at the Zero

  Lower Bound in a Small Open Economy." Working Paper 260, Globalization and Monetary

  Policy Institute.

Bown, Chad P. and Meredith A. Crowley. 2013. "Import Protection, Business Cycles, and Exchange

  Rates: Evidence from the Great Recession ." Journal of International Economics 90:50­64.

                                              36
Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2015. "Global Imbalances

  and Currency Wars at the ZLB." CEPR Discussion Papers 10905.

Cacciatore, Matteo, Romain Duval, Giuseppe Fiori, and Fabio Ghironi. 2016. "Market Reforms in

  the Time of Imbalance." Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 72 (C):69­93.

Campolmi, Alessia, Harald Fadinger, and Chiara Forlati. 2014. "Trade Policy: Home Market Effect

  versus Terms-of-trade Externality." Journal of International Economics 93 (1):92­107.

Chari, V. V., Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2018. "Ramsey Taxation in the Global Econ-

  omy." Cepr discussion paper.

Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2008. "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy:

  Equivalence Results." Journal of Political Economy 116 (1):141­170.

Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti. 2001. "Welfare and Macroeconomic Interdependence." The

  Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (2):421­445.

De Paoli, Bianca. 2009. "Monetary policy and welfare in a small open economy." Journal of

  International Economics 77 (1):11­22.

Eaton, Jonathan and Gene M. Grossman. 1985. "Tariffs as Insurance: Optimal Commercial Policy

  When Domestic Markets Are Incomplete." Canadian Journal of Economics 18 (2):258­272.

Eggertsson, Gauti, Andrea Ferrero, and Andrea Raffo. 2014. "Can Structural Reforms Help Eu-

  rope?" Journal of Monetary Economics 61 (C):2­22.

Egorov, Konstantin and Dmitry Mukhin. 2019. "Optimal Monetary Policy under Dollar Pricing."

  2019 Meeting Papers 1510, Society for Economic Dynamics.

Eichengreen, Barry. 1981. "A Dynamic Model of Tariffs, Output and Employment Under Flexible

  Exchange Rates." Journal of International Economics 11:341­59.

------. 2019. "Trade Policy and the Macroeconomy." IMF Economic Review 67:4­23.

Erceg, Christopher, Andrea Prestipino, and Andrea Raffo. 2018. "The Macroeconomic Effect of

  Trade Policy." 2018 Meeting Papers 221, Society for Economic Dynamics.


                                               37
Faia, Ester and Tommaso Monacelli. 2008. "Optimal Monetary Policy in a Small Open Economy

  with Home Bias." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40 (4):721­750.

Fajgelbaum, Pablo D., Pinipoli K. Goldberg, Patrick K. Kennedy, and Amit K. Khandelwal. 2019.

  "The Return to Protectionism." NBER Working Paper (25638).

Farhi, Emmanuel, Gita Gopinath, and Oleg Itskhoki. 2014. "Fiscal Devaluations." Review of

  Economic Studies 81 (2):725­760.

Feenstra, Robert C., Philip Luck, Maurice Obstfeld, and Katheryn N. Russ. 2018. "In Search of

  the Armington Elasticity." Review of Economics and Statistics 100.

Fujiwara, Ippei and Jiao Wang. 2017. "Optimal Monetary Policy in Open Economies Revisited."

  Journal of International Economics 108 (C):300­314.

Furceri, Davide, Swarnali A. Hannan, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Andrew K. Rose. 2019. "Macroeco-

  nomic Consequences of Tariffs." IMF Working Paper 9.

Gal`
   i, Jordi and Tommaso Monacelli. 2005. "Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a

  Small Open Economy." The Review of Economic Studies 72 (3):707­734.

Groll, Dominik and Tommaso Monacelli. 2016. "The Inherent Benefit of Monetary Unions." Dis-

  cussion Paper 11416, CEPR.

Gunnar, Niels and Joseph Francois. 2006. "Business Cycles, the Exchange Rate, and Demand for

  Antidumping Protection in Mexico." Review of Development Economics 10:388­399.

Hevia, Constantino and Juan Pablo Nicolini. 2013. "Optimal Devaluations." IMF Economic Review

  61 (1):22­51.

Jeanne, Olivier. 2020. "Currency Wars, Trade Wars, and Global Demand." Mimeo Johns Hopkins

  University .

Krugman, Paul. 1982. "The Macroeconomics of Protection with a Floating Exchange Rate."

  Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 16:41­82.

Lind´
    e, Jesper and Andrea Pescatori. 2019. "The Macroeconomic Effects of Trade Tariffs: Revisiting

  the Lerner Symmetry Result." Journal of International Money and Finance 95 (C):52­69.

                                               38
Mishra, Prachi and Raghuram Rajan. 2018. "Rules of the Monetary Game." Hoover Institute

  mimeo .

Oatley, Thomas. 2010. "Real Exchange Rates and Trade Protectionism." Business and Politics

  12 (2):1­17.

Ossa, Ralph. 2014.    "Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data."    American Economic Review

  104 (12):4104­46.

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1985. "Can International Monetary Cooperation be Counterproductive?" Journal

  of International Economics 18:199­217.




                                             39
A     Appendix: The Competitive Equilibrium

    When we combine the description of optimal behaviour for the Home economy with the anal-

ogous conditions for the Foreign economy, and impose market clearing conditions, we obtain a

competitive equilibrium which can be described by the following equations:



           -                  -                                                -                                            -
    Ph,t               Ph,t                       St Pf,t   (1 + t )St Pf,t                     St Pf,t   (1 + t )St Pf,t
               Ct +x              Xt +(1-)                                         Ct +(1-x )                                   Xt
     Pt                Px,t                        Ph,t             Pt                           Ph,t          Px,t

                                                                Ph,t
                                                 = Yh,t -  (          )Yh,t                                     (A.47)
                                                               Ph,t-1


                                                                                 Yi,h,t
                              (1 + st )Yi,h,t - (Pi,h,t (1 + st ) - M Ct )
                                                                                 Pi,h,t

                         Pi,h,t Ph,t Yh,t             Pi,h,t+1 Pi,h,t+1
                  - (           )         + Et t+1  (         ) 2       Ph,t+1 Yh,t+1 = 0                       (A.48)
                        Pi,h,t-1 Pi,h,t-1              Pi,h,t   Pi,h,t



                                           At (1 - )L-  
                                                     t Xt M Ct = Wt                                             (A.49)



                                                    -1
                                             At Lt Xt  M Ct = Px,t                                              (A.50)



                                                             
                                                   Wt = Pt Ct Ht                                                (A.51)


                                                                               Y
                                                                           M Ct   i,f,t
                              (1 + s               
                                    t )Yi,f,t - (Pi,f,t (1 + st ) -             ) 
                                                                            At Pi,f,t
                           
                         Pi,f,t         Y
                                      Pf,t                         
                                                                 Pi,f,t      
                                           f,t                          +1 Pi,f,t+1 
                  - (             )              + Et t+1  (              )   2    Pf,t+1 Yf,t+1 = 0            (A.52)
                        Pi,f,t -1 Pi,f,t-1                        Pi,f,t    Pi,h,t


                                                   - 
                                         At (1 - )Lt
                                                           
                                                     Xt M Ct = Wt                                               (A.53)




                                                            40
                                                      -1
                                                At Lt Xt
                                                            
                                                         M Ct    
                                                              = Px,t                                                 (A.54)



                                                             
                                                   Wt = Pt Ct Ht                                                     (A.55)


                                                                     -                     -
                                             Ph,t           Ph,t                    Ph,t
                             Yh,t (1 -  (          )) =                  C t + x               Xt
                                            Ph,t-1           Pt                     Px,t
                                                                                                         
                                                        -                                           -
          (1 - n)                      (1 + t )Ph,t                              (1 + t )Ph,t
        +         (1 -  )                                    
                                                            Ct + (1 - x)
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                        Xt           (A.56)
             n                            St Pt                                         
                                                                                    St Px,t



                  
                 Pf,t                                                    -                                       -
                                  n                 (1 + t )St Pf,t                            (1 + t )St Pf,t
 Yf,t (1 -  (             )) =          (1 - )                               Ct + (1 - x )                           Xt
                Pf,t -1          1-n                     Pt                                         Px,t


                                                        -                       -
                                                 Pf,t                    Pf,t
                                       +                    Ct   +   x
                                                                                     
                                                                                    Xt                               (A.57)
                                                 Pt                       
                                                                         Px,t

    Equation (A.47) is the Home country budget constraint after netting out the government bud-

get constraint. Equation (A.48) and equations (A.49)-(A.51) are the profit maximizing and cost

minimizing relationships for each Home firm i, and the Home labour supply equations. Equa-

tions (A.52) and equations (A.53)-(A.55) are the analogous conditions for the Foreign firm. Then

equations (A.56) and (A.57) are the Home and Foreign goods market clearing conditions.

    The system (A.47)-(A.57) can be simplified and rewritten into the 5 equations (17) - (21) of

the text.



B     Appendix: Alternative parameter values

    Table 8 describes the results of the currency and trade war under alternative parameter values.

For a larger trade elasticity, assuming  = 6, equilibrium tariffs in the trade war are substantially

lower. Tariffs are higher than the baseline when the monopoly markup is lower ( = 11, implying a

10 percent markup), and lower in the case of greater home bias in preferences and production. In

addition, a smaller weight of intermediate goods, and a lower elasticity of intertemporal substitution


                                                             41
              Table 8: Trade and Currency Wars under alternative parameter values
                   Variable    =6          = 11     = 0.75      = .2     =2        =0
                      C         0.270    0.270      0.265       0.234     0.389     0.220
                     C          0.270    0.270      0.265       0.215     0.389     0.220
                     Yh         0.431    0.425      0.425       0.359     0.620     0.366
                     Yf         0.431    0.425      0.425       0.390     0.620     0.366
                      S         1.00      1.00      1.00        1.00      1.00        1
                                1.035    1.017      1.002       1.025     1.031     1.043
                                1.035    1.017      1.002       1.025     1.031     1.043
                                0.204    0.513      0.460        0.53     0.543     0.503
                                0.204    0.513      0.460        0.53     0.543     0.503
                      U        -1.738    -1.729    -1.754      -1.257    -2.499    -2.184
                     U         -1.738    -1.729    -1.754      -1.257    -2.499    -2.184
           Table showing equilibrium of Tariff War and Currency War, for varying parameter values.


also leads to higher Nash equilibrium tariff rates. A lower Frisch elasticity of substitution in labor

supply has minimal effects on equilibrium tariff rates, but leads to a 1 percentage point rise in the

equilibrium inflation rate.




                                                     42
