                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




UNDERSTANDING 100 YEARS OF THE EVOLUTION OF TOP WEALTH SHARES IN THE U.S.:
                   WHAT IS THE ROLE OF FAMILY FIRMS?

                                            Andrew Atkeson
                                              Magnus Irie

                                          Working Paper 27465
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w27465


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2020




  I acknowledge financial support from the Economic Social and Research Council (ESRC) under
  the DTP studentship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
  reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
  reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
  NBER publications.

  © 2020 by Andrew Atkeson and Magnus Irie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
  two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
  is given to the source.
Understanding 100 Years of the Evolution of Top Wealth Shares in the U.S.: What is the Role
of Family Firms?
Andrew Atkeson and Magnus Irie
NBER Working Paper No. 27465
July 2020
JEL No. E21

                                         ABSTRACT

We use a simple random growth model to study the role of changing dynamics of family firms in
shaping the evolution of top wealth shares in the United States over the course of the past
century. Our model generates a time path for top wealth shares remarkably similar to those found
by Saez and Zucman (2016) and Gomez (2019) when the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks to the
value of family firms is similar to that found for public firms by Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and
Van Nieuwerburgh (2016) over the past 100 years. We also show that consideration of family
firms contributes not only to overall wealth inequality, but also to considerable upward and
downward mobility of families within the distribution of wealth. We interpret our results as
indicating that improving our understanding of the economics of the process by which families
found new firms and then, eventually, diversify their wealth is central to improving our
understanding of the distribution of great wealth and its evolution over time.


Andrew Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
andy@atkeson.net

Magnus Irie
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London
United Kingdom
magnus.irie@gmail.com
1     Introduction

Research by Saez and Zucman (2016), Smith, Zidar, and Zwick (2020) and others
indicates that the share of total wealth held by the wealthiest Americans has changed
substantially over the past 100 years. Top wealth shares have followed a U-shaped
pattern -- they were high in the 1920's, they fell to a low around 1980, and have risen
substantially since then (see Figure 1). Wealth based on dynastic family ownership
of large firms both private and public is a striking feature of capitalist economies
worldwide. We ask in this paper, what is the role of family firms in shaping the
dynamics of top wealth shares in the United States over the past century?

   Families with a concentrated ownership position in a single family firm constitute a
large fraction of the wealthiest families in America. Due to the concentration of their
portfolios in the shares of a single firm, these families are subject to highly volatile
idiosyncratic shocks to their wealth. Research by Herskovic et al. (2016) and others
indicates that the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks to firm value, at least for publicly
traded firms, has changed substantially over the past century. The idiosyncratic
volatility of firm value has also followed a U-shaped pattern over the past century --
the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks to firm value was high in the 1920's, it reached
a low in the early 1950's, and has risen substantially since then (see Figure 2). We
explore the hypothesis that the evolution of the shares of wealth held by families in
the top percentiles of the distribution of wealth of the United States over the last
100 years can be accounted for by changes in the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks to
the value of family firms over this time period.

   We present a purely statistical model of the evolution of the distribution of wealth
similar to that in Champernowne (1953), Luttmer (2016), Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and
Moll (2016) and Benhabib, Bisin, and Luo (2017) that adds consideration of the role
of family firms in shaping the distribution of wealth. We find that when we feed into
the model a time series for the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks to firm value similar
to that observed by Herskovic et al. (2016) for public firms over the past 100 years,
our model generates a time path for extreme top wealth shares over this time period

                                            1
similar to that found by Saez and Zucman (2016) and Gomez (2019) (see Figure 8).
Of particular interest is the observation that the transition dynamics of the model
lead to a roughly 30 year lag between the minimum point of firm volatilities and
the minimum point of top wealth shares. Likewise, the model implies a roughly 30
year lag between the increase in firm volatilities observed in the stock market and
increases in top wealth shares. This lag emerges endogenously from the dynamics of
the model.

  We also explore our model's implications for the mobility of families within the
overall distribution of wealth once family firms are taken into account. Building on
the work of Gabaix et al. (2016), Luttmer (2016), and Gomez (2019), we establish
analytically a tight link between our model's quantitative success in explaining the
transition dynamics of top wealth shares with its implications for the degree of wealth
mobility experienced by families starting out at the bottom of the distribution of
wealth and for the rate at which families starting out with great fortunes dissipate
their wealth.

   Our model is populated by a continuum of family dynasties that live forever and
are subject to both common and idiosyncratic shocks to wealth. The family dynasties
in our model have one of two types. The vast majority of dynasties in the model are
what we term the Diversified type. These dynasties hold portfolios of assets that
are subject to a relatively small amount of idiosyncratic risk. A small minority of
dynasties are what we term the Family Firm type. These dynasties hold portfolios
of assets subject to a large amount of idiosyncratic risk. We interpret these dynasties
as holding a concentrated position in a single firm, which we term a family firm. We
focus on family firms over and above the traditional notion of entrepreneurship (see,
for example, Cagetti and De Nardi (2009) and Quadrini (2009)) because we allow for
the possibility that these dynasties may maintain a concentrated ownership position
in the family firm for multiple generations.

  Family dynasties in our model switch type at random. We interpret the switch of
a dynasty from holding a diversified portfolio to a concentrated position in a family


                                          2
firm as the founding of a new family business by a previously diversified dynasty.
We interpret the switch of a dynasty from holding a concentrated position in a
family firm to a diversified portfolio as occurring when the firm's founding family
sells the bulk of its ownership stake and diversifies its portfolio. We interpret these
switching probabilities as standing in for an underlying economic process in which
entrepreneurs and their families found new firms and hold a concentrated position in
these new firms while these firms are young and then eventually sell out and diversify
their wealth.

   The quantitative success of our model in accounting for the evolution of top wealth
shares in the United States over the past 100 years rests heavily on our assumption
that those dynasties with a concentrated investment in a single family firm face a
great deal of idiosyncratic risk in the returns to their wealth -- a level of idiosyncratic
risk on par with that found for individual publicly traded stocks in Herskovic et al.
(2016). This level of idiosyncratic risk in the returns to wealth for family firms is
considerably higher than is found in available studies of the idiosyncratic risk in
returns to wealth found even for wealthy families in panel data.1 Our model can be
reconciled with these data on the idiosyncratic volatility of family wealth for wealthy
families, however, because of our assumption that our model economy is populated by
two types of families facing different levels of idiosyncratic risk in returns to wealth.
Thus, our model predicts that the distribution of idiosyncratic returns to wealth for
families at any initial level of wealth is a mixture of two distributions of returns. This
feature is decisive for reconciling the data in Gomez (2019) on the average standard
deviation and excess kurtosis of innovations to wealth for the Forbes 400 with the
large amount of idiosyncratic volatility faced by family firms in the calibration of our
model.

   We derive both analytical and numerical results regarding the connections between
the mobility of families within the distribution of wealth and the transition dynamics
of top wealth shares. We derive analytical results regarding the link beetween wealth

   1
    See, for example Bach, Calvet, and Sodini (2018), Fagereng, Guiso, Malcrino, and Pistaferri
(2020), and Gomez (2019).

                                              3
mobility and the transition dynamics of top wealth shares in a simplified version of
our model in which all families are identical. We refer to this simplified version of our
model as the one-type version of our model.2 In particular, we show analytically that
there is a tight connection in our one-type model between the speed of transition of
top wealth shares and the degree of upward wealth mobility for families starting at
the bottom of the distribution of wealth. Moreover, in our one-type model, given a
level of volatility of idiosyncratic risk in returns to wealth, there is a direct connection
between the model's implications for top wealth shares in the steady-state and the
rate at which dynasties that start high up in the distribution of wealth dissipate their
fortunes -- holding fixed the model's implications for top wealth shares, the higher is
the volatility of idiosyncratic shocks to wealth, the faster is the dissipation of great
fortunes relative to aggregate wealth. We provide an extension of our analytical
transition results to the two-type version of our model in the Appendix.

   Motivated by these analytical results for our one-type model, we examine the
quantitative implications of our full model that includes family firms for both upward
and downward wealth mobility. We find that, after 50-70 years, the probability that
a family that started at the bottom of the distribution of wealth ends up in the very
top wealth percentiles approaches quite closely to the unconditional probability that
any family is in these very top wealth percentiles. We also consider our model's
implications for the dissipation of great fortunes. We compare the implications of
our model in this dimension to data in Gomez (2019) on the level of turnover in the
Forbes 400 over the period 1983 to the present and find that the two match well.

   We show that policy changes that speed up the rate at which families with concen-
trated ownership positions in family firms sell those positions and diversify their port-
folios would also have a powerful impact on the equilibrium distribution of wealth.
We illustrate this point with an experiment in which we speed up the rate at which
dynasties switch from the Family Firm to the Diversified type and find that, holding

   2
     Our model implies a stationary distribution of wealth across dynasties in the long run because
we assume that there is a minimum level of the idiosyncratic component of dynastic wealth that
serves as a reflecting barrier as in Gabaix et al. (2016) andChampernowne (1953).

                                                4
all other parameters fixed, our model implies a dramatic reduction in top wealth
shares.

   We interpret our results as indicating for researchers going forward that improving
our understanding of the economics of the process by which families found new firms
and then, eventually, diversify their wealth is central to improving our understanding
of the distribution of great wealth and its evolution over time.3

   Our paper follows on a large literature on the dynamics of the distribution of
income and wealth. To allow for an analytical comparison of our results to those
in the literature, particularly those in Gabaix et al. (2016), we keep the model very
simple. In particular, motivated by the results in Benhabib et al. (2017), we abstract
from the role of idiosyncratic risk in labor earnings in shaping the wealth distribution
in our model and focus instead on the role of idiosyncratic risk in the returns to
wealth in leading to the large shares of wealth held by those in the very top wealth
percentiles as observed in the data. Benhabib, Bisin, and Luo (2019) and Hubmer,
Krusell, and Smith (Forthcoming) study much richer models than ours and they look
to account for the distribution of wealth across a broad range of wealth percentiles.
Our work differs from theirs in that we focus our attention on the evolution shares
of wealth held by families in wealth percentiles above the top 1% including a very
top percentile corresponding to the Forbes 400. The model in Aoki and Nirei (2017)
is most similar to ours in that they have only a small fraction of agents exposed to a
large amount of idiosyncratic risk due to the concentration of their portfolios in the
shares of a single firm. They study the evolution of top incomes shares in the United
States in response to changes in tax rates. Jones and Kim (2018) also use a related
model with creative destruction to study the evolution of top incomes shares in the
United States in response to changes in tax rates.

  Our paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we review the key data we use in
calibrating and evaluating our model. In section 3 we present our model. In section
4 we present analytical results in the one-type version of our model. In section 5 we

   3
       See Bertrand and Schoar (2006) for a discussion of the economics of family firms.

                                                  5
present the quantitative results from our full model. In section 6, we conclude. We
provide an extension of our analytical transition result in the two-type version of our
model and our procedure for mapping our calibration moments to the parameters of
the model in the Appendix in section 7.



2    Review of Key Data

In this section we review the data that we target with our model. We also review
some of the data available on the prevalence of family firms among top firms in the
United States using several alternative definitions of such firms.


Data on top wealth shares We ask whether our model can reproduce the evo-
lution of top wealth shares in the United States over the past century. We target
specifically the data on these shares reported in Saez and Zucman (2016). We also
compare the model's implications to data on the evolution of the wealth share of the
Forbes 400 since the early 1980's as reported in Gomez (2019) and Zheng (2019). In
Figure 1, taken from Smith et al. (2020), we show the data on the evolution various
alternative estimates of the wealth share of the top 0.1% over the past century.




                                          6
Figure 1: Evolution of the wealth share of the top 0.1% over the past century as shown in Smith
et al. (2020)



  As shown in this figure, the share of wealth held by the top 0.1% of the wealth
distribution has followed a distinctive U-shape: this share was high in the 1920's, it
reached a minimum around 1980, and has risen since then.

  This U-shaped pattern of top wealth shares extends to very top percentiles of the
wealth distribution. In Table 1, we show data on a variety of top wealth shares at
various dates as reported in Saez and Zucman (2016). Gomez (2019) and Zheng
(2019) also report a large increase in the share of wealth held by the Forbes 400 from
the early 1980's to the present -- they report an increase of the share of wealth held
by the Forbes 400 by a factor of 3.5 over this time period.




                                              7
                                   % of total Household Wealth

                  Year    top 1%      top 0.1%       top 0.01%    top 0.00025%
                  1925      43.1        18.6            6.7
                  1950      30.5        10.6            2.8
                  1975      24.7         7.6           2.4
                  1982      25.7         9.4           3.3               .83
                  2000      34.1        16.0            6.9             3.04
                  2012      41.8        22.0           11.2             3.09
                   Table 1: Top wealth shares from Saez and Zucman (2016)




   Vermuelen (2018) reports on the tail coefficient of the distribution of top wealth
implied by these top wealth shares.4 In the calibration of the initial steady-state of
our two-type model described below, we target a top tail coefficient of the distribution
of gross assets of 1.5.


Data on Wealth Volatility When we calibrate our model, we target the volatility
of innovations to wealth from one year to the next for very wealthy individuals.
Gomez (2019) reports on the moments of annual changes in the logarithm of wealth
for members of the Forbes 400. We reproduce these moments from his paper in Table
2. In our calibration of our model, we aim to match the volatility and excess kurtosis
of innovations to the logarithm of wealth reported in this table.

                   Forbes 400      Volatility    Skewness     Excess Kurtosis
                   1983-2016         0.27          -0.35           4.70
 Table 2: Summary statistics on log wealth growth of Forbes 400 from Gomez (2019) Table 2.



  Two recent papers use more comprehensive panel data on wealth drawn from
Scandanavian wealth tax files to study the distribution of innovations to wealth.
   4
     It is common to model the right tail of the distribution of wealth as if it was the right tail
of a Pareto distribution. The shape coefficient of a Pareto distribution fit to the right tail of the
distribution of wealth is referred to as the tail coefficient of the wealth distribution.

                                                 8
Bach et al. (2018) report data on the idiosyncratic volatility of gross wealth for
households in Sweden. They find that the level of volatility of innovations to wealth
for the very wealthy is considerably higher than is the case for those lower down in
the wealth distribution. They report that the idiosyncratic volatility of returns on
gross wealth range from 1.6% per year in the bottom decile to 6% per year for the
top 10%-5%, 13.4% per year for the top 1%-0.5%, and 34.7% per year for the top
0.01%.

  Fagereng et al. (2020) report on the volatility of innovations to wealth drawn from
Norwegian data. In their Table 3, they report a standard deviation of pre-tax returns
to wealth of 22% and a standard deviation of after-tax returns of 15%. Consistent
with the findings of Gomez (2019), for both measures of returns, they report a large
kurtosis of the distribution of returns.


Data on the evolution of the idiosyncratic volatility of firm values The
only factor driving changes in top wealth shares in the baseline simulations of our
model are changes in the idiosyncratic volatility in firm value experienced by families
with a concentrated ownership position in a single firm. To calibrate the time path
of this idiosyncratic volatility in firm value, we rely on the estimates reported in
Herskovic et al. (2016) on the evolution of the average idiosyncratic volatility of indi-
vidual publicly traded stocks in the United States since 1926. Figure 2, reproduced
from that paper, shows their results for this evolution of the average volatility of the
idiosyncratic component of individual stock returns since 1926.

  Of particular interest is the observation that the volatility of the idiosyncratic
component of equity returns also follows a U-shaped pattern since 1926, but that
the minimum of this U-shape occurs in the early 1950's, some 25-30 years before the
minimum in top wealth shares reported on above. We show below that our model
reproduces this lag between the dynamics of firm volatility and the dynamics of top
wealth shares quite well.




                                           9
correlation for total and idiosyncratic returns within each calendar year.
 rage annualized firm-level volatility each year for total and idiosyncratic
he standard deviation of residuals from the market model, the Fama-
actor principal components model for daily returns within each calendar


orrelation                                         Panel B: Average Volatility
           Total                                                                                Total
                                1                                                               MM Residuals
           MM Residuals
           FF Residuals                                                                         FF Residuals
           5 PC Residuals                                                                       5 PC Residuals

                               0.9



                               0.8



                               0.7



                               0.6



                               0.5



                               0.4



                               0.3



                               0.2
    1990   2000         2010         1930   1940    1950   1960     1970     1980      1990     2000         2010


                     Figure 2: Evolution of the average of the volatility of the idiosyncratic component of individual
                     stock returns since 1926 as reported in Herskovic et al. (2016)
                                                                    .

diosyncratic volatility cannot be explained by comovement
             Data on the prevalence of large family firms Central to our model is the
  for instance   due to
             assumption  thatomitted
                              a minority ofcommon        factors.
                                             families hold               stakes in A
                                                           concentratedPanel           of firm.
                                                                                   a single
             We refer to these families as owning family firms. Here we review evidence on the
             prevalence
 share substantial      of family firms
                      common            among the most
                                     variation,     withwealthy families andpairwise
                                                            an average       largest firms in the
             United States over the past 100 years.

26-2010 sample,   and occasionally
            In a precursor                 exceeding
                           to the work of Saez and Zucman 40%.     However,
                                                          (2016), Lundberg (1937) used
                     tax data made public in 1924 to estimate the income and wealth of what he termed
el captures          nearly all
                     "America's     of this
                                60 Families"    common
                                             at that          variation
                                                     date. He highlights      atofthe
                                                                         the role       daily owner-
                                                                                   concentrated

                                       10
ons among its residuals are typically less than 0.2%, and are
The same is true for the market and Fama-French models.
principal components, such as 10, has no quantitative impact
ship in family firms as the source of these large fortunes.5

   Further evidence of the importance of family firms in pre-WWII U.S. top fortunes
is available in Goldsmith (1940). In 1937, the U.S. Congress commissioned Raymond
Goldsmith to lead a study of the question of who owned the shares of the top 200
non-financial firms traded on the New York Stock Exchange. In Chapter 7 of this
volume, Goldsmith organizes the data on share ownership by family interest group
and reports on three striking observations. Of the interest groups represented by
America's wealthiest families, Goldsmith observes that

   1. "Each interest group shows a strong tendency to keep its holdings concentrated
      in the enterprise in which the family fortune originated."

   2. "Only a few of the large fortunes represented among the 20 largest record
      shareholdings appear to be on the way to a diversified state."

   3. "None of the three largest family interest groups seem to be in this state [. . .]
      the Mellon group is now in the third generation, while the Rockefeller and
      Dupont groups are mainly in the second and partly in the third generation.
      Most of the other interest groups encountered in the study are also of the
      second or third generation"

  We take these observations as motivation for our assumptions regarding the preva-
lence and persistence across multiple generations of undiversified portfolio holdings
for many of the wealthiest dynasties in our model.

  The available evidence suggests that this pattern of concentration of family wealth
in a family firm over multiple generations persists today in the United States even
for some very large, publicly traded firms.6
   5
      Lundberg (1937) also highlights the role of intermarriage between heirs to large fortunes in
concentrating wealth. Consideration of family demographics would be an interesting extension of
our model.
    6
      See Smith, Yagan, Zidar, and Zwick (2019) for a study of the importance of business income
in top incomes in the U.S. today. Here we are focused on the prevalence of family ownership even
of very large firms both private and public over multiple generations.

                                               11
   Anderson and Reeb (2003) report that family firms constitute over 35% of the
S&P 500, with founding families owning on average 18% of the equity of the firm.
Villalonga and Amit (2006) report that family control is prevalent in 37% of the
firms in the Fortune 500.7 More recently, two public lists of the largest family firms
worldwide have been created which corroborate these findings.

   Ernst and Young, in cooperation with the University of St. Gallen, has constructed
a Family Business Index.8 This index is a worldwide database of the 500 largest
family owned companies (both public and private) by revenue. To qualify as a family
firm, the family must be in the second generation or more and have ownership of at
least 32% of the shares of the firm. This index lists 122 U.S. firms, 82 of which are
private and 40 of which are public.

   Credit Suisse has constructed a list of the 1000 largest public family owned firms
worldwide in Klerk, Kersley, Bhatti, and Vair (2018). To qualify as a family firm,
the founding family must have ownership or voting rights totalling over 20%. This
list includes 121 US Firms. Of these 121 US Firms, over 80 are in the second or
greater generation of family ownership.



3       The Model

We present a discrete-time, trinomial model of the evolution of the distribution of
wealth. Time is denoted t = 0, 1, 2, . . . and the length of a time period in calendar
time measured in fractions of a year is denoted by t .

  The economy is populated by a continuum of infinitely lived dynasties. The gross
assets of an individual dynasty is the product of two components, Wt = Wc,t Wi,t ,
where Wc,t is a component of assets that is common to all dynasties and Wi,t is a
component of assets that is idiosyncratic to each individual dynasty. We assume that
    7
      Note that the Fortune 500 is a ranking of firms by sales that includes both public and private
firms.
    8
      Available at http://familybusinessindex.com/

                                                12
the support of the idiosyncratic component of assets for a dynasty is on a grid with
nodes indexed by n = 0, 1, 2, . . .. The nodes of this grid are evenly spaced in logs so
that Wi (n) = exp(n) where  is the step size of the grid.

   The fraction of dynasties with idiosyncratic assets equal to Wi (n) at time t is
denoted by gt (n) and Gt (n)  kn gt (k ) denotes the complementary cumulative
distribution function (CCDF) of dynasties over nodes of the grid of the idiosyncratic
component of assets at t. Aggregate assets at time t are equal to the common com-
ponent of assets at that date Wc,t times the aggregate of the idiosyncratic component
of assets across dynasties at t given by   n=0 Wi (n)gt (n).

  We assume that all dynasties hold a common and constant level of debt d relative
to the common component of assets, so the net wealth of a dynasty at t is equal to
their assets less their debt Wc,t (Wi,t - d).

  The share of aggregate net worth held by agents with net worth greater than or
equal to a given percentile  of the cross-section distribution of net wealth at t is
given by
                              
                              kn() exp(k )gt (k ) - Gt (n())d
                   St () =                                                      (1)
                                    n0 exp(n)gt (n) - d

where n() is the smallest value of n such that Gt (n)  .

   We refer to the tail coefficient of the distribution of assets as the negative of the
slope of a graph with the logarithm of assets on the x-axis and the logarithm of
the fraction of dynasties with assets at or above this level on the y -axis. We denote
this tail coefficient measured at node n of the grid of the idiosyncratic component of
assets by9
                                     log Gt (n + 1) - log Gt (n)
                          t (n) = -                                                  (2)
                                                 

  The evolution of assets for a given dynasty from period t to t + 1 is as follows.

    9
     For large values of net wealth, the tail coefficient of the distribution of net wealth across
dynasties is equal to the tail coefficient of assets since the level of debt d is fixed and small relative
to large levels of assets.

                                                   13
A dynasty starts period t with assets Wc,t Wi,t and is subject to shocks to both
the common and idiosyncratic components of assets. The evolution of the common
component of assets Wc,t+1 follows an exogenous stochastic process. While the details
of this stochastic process are important for understanding the evolution of aggregate
wealth, they are not important for understanding the evolution of its distribution as
captured by wealth shares as defined in equation (1).


Idiosyncratic innovations to assets The idiosyncratic component of assets evolves
according to the following type-dependent trinomial process. We assume that at each
date t, each dynasty has one of two types j  {D, F }, where the type j indexes the
distribution of changes in the idiosyncratic component of assets from t to t + 1. For
dynasties of type j at t with idiosyncratic component of assets Wi,t = exp(n) for
nodes on the grid n  1, the probability that the idiosyncratic components of assets
move one step up on the grid (Wi,t+1 = exp((n + 1))) is denoted by pu,j,t , the
probability that this component of assets moves down one step down on the grid
(Wi,t+1 = exp((n - 1)) is denoted by pd,j,t , and the probability that this compo-
nent of assets remains at the same node on the grid (Wi,t+1 = exp(n)) is given by
1 - pu,j,t - pd,j,t .

   The dynamics of the idiosyncratic component of assets is modified for dynasties
of type j at t with idiosyncratic component of assets at the lowest node on the grid
Wi,t = 1. For such a dynasty, the probability that the idiosyncratic component of
assets move one step up on the grid to node n = 1 is denoted by pu,j,t and the
probability that this component of assets remains at node Wi,t = Wi (0) is given by
1 - pu,j,t . It is not possible for the idiosyncratic component of assets to fall below
this lowest node on the grid of assets. This assumption is referred to as a reflecting
barrier for the idiosyncratic component of assets at the lowest level of assets on the
grid.

  This lowest level of the idiosyncratic component of assets is positive and normalized
to 1 (since n = 0 at this node). The net worth of dynasties at this lowest level of
grid is given by Wc,t (1 - d) which may be negative if d > 1.

                                          14
   Under these assumptions, the expected value at t of the innovations to the loga-
rithm of the idiosyncratic component of assets for all dynasties of type j except those
at the lowest node on the grid is given by

                        Et [log Wi,t+1 - log Wi,t ] = (pu,j,t - pd,j,t )                          (3)

The uncentered second moment of these innovations to the logarithm of the idiosyn-
cratic component of assets is given by

                       Et [log Wi,t+1 - log Wi,t ]2 = (pu,j,t + pd,j,t )2                         (4)


Transitions over types At the end of period t, after these realizations to the
idiosyncratic component of assets have been realized, each dynasty of type j expe-
riences a shock to its type. It remains of the same type j with probability j and
transitions to the opposite type with probability 1 - j . These transitions of types
are independent over time and of dynastic wealth. We assume that at each date t
the fraction of dynasties of type j is equal to the fraction j corresponding to the
stationary distribution induced by this Markov process over types.


The forward equation for the distribution of wealth We use the notation
gj,t (n) to denote the fraction of dynasties of type j at time t with idiosyncratic
component of assets equal to Wi (n). The overall fraction of dynasties with this
level of assets is given by gt (n) = j =D,F gj,t j . With our assumption that j is
given by the stationary distribution over types, the evolution through time of these
conditional distributions of the idiosyncratic component of assets by type is given by
the following second order difference equation for all n  1

  gj,t+1 (n) = j [pu,j,t gj,t (n - 1) + pd,j,t gj,t (n + 1) + (1 - pu,j,t - pd,j,t )gj,t (n)] +   (5)

   (1 - j ) [pu,-j,t g-j,t (n - 1) + pd,-j,t g-j,t (n + 1) + (1 - pu,-j,t - pd,-j,t )g-j,t (n)]



                                                15
where -j denotes the type opposite to j . For n = 0, this evolution is given by

                    gj,t+1 (0) = j [pd,j,t gj,t (1) + (1 - pu,j,t )gj,t (0)] +          (6)

                     (1 - j ) [pd,-j,t g-j,t (1) + (1 - pu,-j,t )g-j,t (0)]

   We consider specifications of the model in which the type-specific moments of the
innovations to the logarithm of the idiosyncratic component of assets for dynasties
are constant over time. For these specifications of the model, we refer to the steady-
state distribution of the idiosyncratic component of wealth across dynasties as the
stationary solution to the transition equations (5) and (6).

   To summarize, the full set of parameters of our model are the grid step size , the
probabilities for wealth innovations of both types {pu,j,t , pd,j,t }T
                                                                     t=0 , the unconditional
fractions of each type j , the transition probabilities for types j , the level of debt d,
and the initial distributions gj,0 (n). We then compute the evolution of the distribu-
tion of assets across types using equations (5) and (6) and the implied evolution of
top wealth shares using equation (1) for T periods corresponding to 100 years. We
use the notation j,t  pu,j,t /pd,j,t


Parameterization for comparison with continuous time results To compare
results in our discrete time model to closely related results in continuous time versions
of the model as presented in Luttmer (2016), Gabaix et al. (2016), and elsewhere,
we use the following procedure to adjust the parameters of our model as we change
the length of the time period t . This is done to consider the limiting implications
of our model as the time period gets short. We set pd,j,t and j,t to match annualized
                                                     2
date and time-specific means µj,t and variances j,t     of innovations to the logarithm
of the idiosyncratic component of assets. Specifically, we set the grid step size  as
a function of the length of a time period t as

                                        = max         2t



                                               16
where max is the largest annualized standard deviation of innovations to the loga-
rithm of assets that we consider. We then choose the parameters pd,j,t and j,t so
that the expression in equation (3) is equal to the implied per-period mean t µj,t ,
and the expression in equation (4) is equal to the implied per period uncentered
                     2
second moment t j,t    + 2    2
                           t µj,t . We set the transition probabilities over types as
1 - j = j t for fixed values of j .

   In the transition experiments that we conduct, we specify the initial distributions
of the idiosyncratic component of assets by type gj,0 (n), the parameters j governing
the Markov process over types for dynasties, and sequences of type-specific moments
{µj,t , j,t }T
             t=0 governing the innovations to the logarithm of the idiosyncratic com-
ponent of assets for dynasties. We compute the corresponding per-period switching
probabilities j and the per period transition probabilities {pu,j,t , pd,j,t }T
                                                                              t=0 using the
equations above.



4      Steady-State, Wealth Mobility and Transitions
       in The One-Type Model

The steady-state and transitions in the version of the model in which all dynasties
are of a single type j can be solved analytically. These analytical formulas extend
results in Luttmer (2016), Gabaix et al. (2016), and Gomez (2019). We present these
analytical formulas to offer intuition for the mechanics of our model with two types.

  We show that our model implies a tight link between the speed of convergence of
the distribution of assets to steady-state and the degree of wealth mobility in the
steady-state for dynasties starting out with the lowest level of assets on our grid.
We show in turn that this speed of wealth mobility starting from the bottom is also
intimately linked to the speed with which dynasties starting out very high up in the
distribution of assets dissipate their fortunes.

    In the one-type version of our model, we assume that j = F for all dynasties (so

                                            17
F = 1 and F = 1). To simplify the notation, we suppress reference to types j for
the remainder of this section on the one-type model.


Steady State In the one-type model, there is a steady-state distribution of the
idiosyncratic component of assets across dynasties that solves equations (5) and (6)
if pu < pd . This steady-state distribution of dynastic assets over asset nodes is given
by
                                  gss (n) = (1 - ss )n
                                                     ss                              (7)

where ss = pu /pd . The CCDF of this distribution is given by Gss (n) = n
                                                                        ss .

   Aggregate assets are defined in steady-state if exp()ss < 1. In this case, the
steady-state tail coefficient of the distribution of assets across dynasties as defined
in equation (2) is given by
                                            1
                                   ss = - log(ss )
                                            

  Note that, holding the grid step-size  fixed, all versions of the one-type model
that have the same steady-state tail coefficient ss have the same ratio of probabilities
ss = pu /pd and hence, from equations (3) and (4), the same ratio of first and
second moments of innovations to the logarithm of the idiosyncratic component of
assets. Different specifications of the one-type model with the same steady-state tail
coefficient vary in the magnitude of these moments, as indexed by the level of the
probability pd .10

   We use the procedure described above to set parameters of the model as a func-
tion of the length of a time period t to consider the implications of our model as
the time period becomes short. With this procedure for setting parameters, it is
   10
      Note that this result does not hold in the binomial specification of innovations to the logarithm
of the idiosyncratic component of assets. In the binomial specification of this model, the steady-
state distribution is given by equation (7). But, in the binomial model, the probabilities pu,t and
pd,t are restricted to satisfy pu,t + pd,t = 1 since assets must either move up or down one step on the
grid. Thus, in the binomial specification of this model, there is a unique choice of pd consistent with
a given tail coefficient ss . In the trinomial specification of the model we consider, the probabilities
need only satisfy the restriction pu,t + pd,t  1.

                                                  18
straightforward to show that
                                                 2µ
                                    lim ss = -                                      (8)
                                    t 0          2
which is the standard formula in continuous time for the tail coefficient of the steady-
state distribution of assets in this model.

  Thus, as we said before, there is a family of specifications of the one-type model
that all share the same ratio of moments of innovations to the idiosyncratic com-
ponent of assets 2µ/ 2 and thus all share the same steady-state tail coefficient of
assets. Members of this family of model specifications differ in the magnitude of
these moments.

   We now show that these different specifications of the one-type model differ in the
speed with which the distribution of assets transitions to steady-state from a given
initial distribution of assets different from steady-state, with the transition being
faster the larger is the magnitude of the moments µ and  2 .


Transitions: We now consider the speed with which the distribution of assets
transitions to steady-state from a given initial distribution of assets different from
steady-state in the one-type model. Specifically, we study the transition experiment
considered in Gabaix et al. (2016). We assume that the initial distribution of the
idiosyncratic component of assets across dynasties is given by

                                  g0 (n) = (1 - 0 )n
                                                   0


for some 0 = ss . We provide an analytical formula for the transition of the dis-
tribution {gt (n)}t=0 in the one-type model implied by the transition law given in
equations (5) and (6) given this initial distribution.

  To develop this analytical formula, we use the following notation. Let T be the
operator mapping distributions over nodes n of our grid to new distributions defined
by equations (5) and (6) for the one-type model. Let 0 be a vector corresponding
to the initial distribution g0 (n) = (1 - 0 )n
                                             0 . Let ss be the distribution to which


                                          19
the economy converges, gss (n) = (1 - ss )n  ss . Let 1 denote a distribution that places
weight 1 on the node n = 0 and weight 0 on every node n  1. That is, 1 corresponds
to the distribution of assets for a cohort of dynasties all starting with the minimum
level of assets. With this notation, we have the following result.

Proposition 1. Assume that the initial distribution at t = 0 of the idiosyncratic
component of assets across dynasties is given by 0 and that the transition probabili-
ties in equations (5) and (6) are constant at pd and pu = ss pd so that the stationary
distribution of the idiosyncratic component of assets across dynasties is given by ss .
Then the distribution at date t implied by equations (5) and (6) is given recursively
by
                  (gt+1 - ss ) = A (gt - ss ) + (1 - A) Tt (1) - ss                (9)

where A is a scalar given by

                                                 ss
                           A      pd (1 - 0 )(      - 1) + 1
                                                 0

Proof. Direct calculation gives that

                               T(0 ) = A0 + (1 - A)1

The operator T is linear and T(ss ) = ss . Repeated application of this operator to
gt+1 = T(gt ) starting from g0 = 0 then gives the result (9).

 We provide an extension of this result in the two-type version of our model in the
Appendix in section 7.

  Note that since 0 < 1, A = 1 when ss = 0 . We have A < 1 when ss < 0 ,
that is, when the the distribution of the idiosyncratic component of assets to which
the economy is converging is more equal than the initial distribution, and we have
A > 1 when the opposite is true.

   Consider now the implications of this result for the connections between the tran-
sition dynamics of the distribution of wealth and wealth mobility. Note that the term

                                           20
Tt (1) in equation (9) corresponds to the distribution of the idiosyncratic component
of assets in period t of a cohort of dynasties that all started with idiosyncratic assets
at the bottom of our grid at date 0. With this observation, we see that equation
(9) implies an intimate link between the speed of convergence of the distribution of
the idiosyncratic component of assets in our transition experiment and the extent of
wealth mobility starting from the bottom in the new economy that we are consider-
ing. That is, at any node n, the gap between gt (n) and gss (n) stops changing when
the conditional distribution of assets for a cohort of dynasties starting at the bottom
at that node n converges to the unconditional distribution of assets at that node in
the new steady-state.

  Which parameters govern the degree of wealth mobility from the bottom implied
by our model? Given that we have fixed ss , there is only the single parameter pd
that remains to influence the speed with which the distribution of the idiosyncratic
component of assets for a cohort of agents starting at the bottom of the support
of our grid converges to the steady-state distribution Tt (1)  ss . The speed of
this convergence is our measure of the degree of wealth mobility from the bottom.
From equations (3) and (4), we see that the larger is pd the larger are the mean and
variance of innovations to the logarithm of the idiosyncratic component of assets.
We now show numerically below that the larger are these moments, the faster is this
measure of wealth mobility from the bottom.


Wealth Mobility From the Bottom We now consider the quantitative impli-
cations of our model for the extent of wealth mobility from the bottom of the dis-
tribution of assets depending on the magnitude of the first and second moments of
innovations to the logarithm of the idiosyncratic component of assets. We proceed
as follows.

  We hold fixed the tail coefficient ss of the steady-state distribution of assets. In
the experiments below, we set this tail coefficient to ss = 1.5, which is a value
consistent with current estimates of that tail coefficient in the United States. We set
the time period t to a small value and choose the grid step size  accordingly. This

                                           21
procedure thus pins down ss , leaving only the single parameter pd to be chosen.
We consider two values for pd . The first corresponds to a standard deviation of
innovations to the logarithm of the idiosyncratic component of assets of  = 0.5.
The second corresponds to the smaller value of this standard deviation of  = 0.25.

   To illustrate the speed of wealth mobility from the bottom for these two specifica-
tions of our model, we compute time paths for Gt (n())/, where Gt is the CCDF
of the distribution of assets of the distribution Tt (1) evaluated at the node n()
on the grid of the idiosyncratic component of assets consistent with the percentile
 of the steady-state distribution of assets. This statistic converges to one as the
distribution of assets for a cohort of dynasties starting at the bottom converges to
the unconditional distribution of assets. We are particularly interested in the conver-
gence of this statistic for top percentiles of the distribution of wealth. In our plots,
we show the convergence of this statistic for percentiles  = 1%, 0.1%, 0.01%, 0.001%
and  = 0.0003%, which Gomez (2019) selects as the percentile corresponding to the
Forbes 400. We compute this process of convergence over 100 years.

   In Figure 3a we show this measure of wealth mobility from the bottom in our
economy with the standard deviation of the logarithm of the idiosyncratic component
of assets set to  = 0.5. In this figure, we see that it takes roughly 50-60 years for
the upper percentiles of the distribution of assets for a cohort starting from the
bottom of the support of assets to converge to levels close to those in the steady-
state distribution. This convergence is complete even for the highest wealth levels in
100 years.

   In Figure 3b, we show this measure of wealth mobility from the bottom in our
economy with the standard deviation of the logarithm of the idiosyncratic component
of assets set to  = 0.25. In this figure, we see that wealth mobility from the bottom
is much slower when  is lower. In particular, the convergence of this distribution
for the highest wealth levels has barely begun even after 100 years.




                                          22
               1                                                                                          0.9
                                                                                                                         top 1%
              0.9                                                                                                        top 0.1%
                                                                                                          0.8            top 0.01%
                                                                                                                         top 0.001%
              0.8                                                                                                        top 0.0003% (Forbes)
                                                                                                          0.7

              0.7
                                                                                                          0.6

              0.6
                                                                                                          0.5
G t (n( ))/




                                                                                            G t (n( ))/
              0.5
                                                          top 1%                                          0.4
              0.4                                         top 0.1%
                                                          top 0.01%
                                                          top 0.001%                                      0.3
              0.3                                         top 0.0003% (Forbes)

                                                                                                          0.2
              0.2


              0.1                                                                                         0.1


               0                                                                                           0
                    0   10   20   30    40    50     60   70       80       90   100                            0   10   20       30       40    50     60   70   80   90   100
                                             Years                                                                                              Years



                                  (a) High  = 0.5                                                                               (b) Low  = 0.25

                        Figure 3: Time paths for Gt (n())/ at top wealth percentiles , for a cohort starting at the
                        bottom of the asset distribution.  = 1%, 0.1%, 0.01%, 0.001%, 0.0003%. We see that the speed of
                        the transition is much slower when  is low.



                          This computational experiment indicates that the extent of wealth mobility from
                        the bottom is dramatically impacted by the magnitude of the volatility of innovations
                        to the idiosyncratic component of wealth.


                        The transition of the tail coefficient We now illustrate quantitatively the con-
                        nection between the extent of wealth mobility from the bottom and the speed of
                        transition of the distribution of assets to steady-state. To do so, we revisit the tran-
                        sition experiment considered in Gabaix et al. (2016) and described in Proposition 1.
                        Note that our results from Proposition 1 and in Figure 3 indicate that the transition
                        of the distribution of assets in this experiment is slowest at top wealth percentiles
                        as the time it takes for Tk (1) to converge to steady-state is longest at these top
                        wealth percentiles. As a result, we focus on the transition of the tail coefficient of
                        the distribution of assets at top wealth percentiles.


                                                                                       23
   Specifically, in our transition experiment, we start the economy with an initial
distribution of assets 0 with an initial tail coefficient of  = 2 and we compute the
transition of this distribution to the new steady-state distribution ss in which the
steady-state tail coefficient is  = 1.5. We display the evolution of the tail coefficient
of wealth at top wealth percentiles over a 100 year period of this transition. When
the distribution of assets has an exact Pareto tail, the slope of this graph is constant.
However, during the transition, the asset distribution will not be exactly Pareto and
hence the slope will depend on the wealth node at which it is computed. We therefore
compute this wealth-level dependent slope, t (n), in accordance with Equation 2 for
nodes n() corresponding to the top wealth percentiles  = 1%, 0.1%, 0.01%, 0.001%
and 0.0003%.

  We plot the results of this computation in Figure 4.


       2.1                                                                               2.05
                                                       top 1%
                                                       top 0.1%                            2
                                                       top 0.01%
        2                                              top 0.001%
                                                       top 0.0003% (Forbes)              1.95


                                                                                          1.9
       1.9

                                                                                         1.85


       1.8                                                                                1.8


                                                                                         1.75

       1.7
                                                                                          1.7


                                                                                         1.65            top 1%
       1.6                                                                                               top 0.1%
                                                                                                         top 0.01%
                                                                                          1.6            top 0.001%
                                                                                                         top 0.0003% (Forbes)
       1.5                                                                               1.55
             0   10   20     30   40     50       60   70       80       90   100               0   10   20       30       40     50       60   70   80   90   100
                                       in years                                                                                 in years




                           (a) High  = 0.5                                                                 (b) Low  = 0.25

Figure 4: Time paths for the tail coefficient of the asset distribution, t (n()). The tail coefficient
is computed at  corresponding to various top wealth percentiles.



   We see in Figure 4a that when the standard deviation of innovations to the log
of the idiosyncratic component of assets is set to  = 0.5, the transition of the tail
coefficient for top wealth percentiles is fairly rapid. It takes roughly 50-60 years to
transition from a tail coefficient of 2 to a coefficient of 1.5. The transition is slower

                                                                                    24
the further up in the distribution we look when computing the tail coefficient. In
contrast, we see in Figure 4b that when the standard deviation is set to a smaller
level,  = 0.25, the evolution of the tail coefficient has barely begun after 100 years.


The Dissipation of Great Wealth The computational experiments on wealth
mobility from the bottom that we have considered also have direct implications for
the speed with which dynasties that start with great wealth dissipate their fortunes.
Consider in particular the implications of equation (8). This relates the tail coefficient
of the steady-state distribution of wealth to the annualized moments of innovations
to the idiosyncratic component of assets. As the time period in our model becomes
small, the distribution of changes in the logarithm of the idiosyncratic component
of assets over a year for wealthy dynasties becomes Gaussian. Thus, the expected
change in the level of the idiosyncratic component of assets for wealthy dynasties
over the course of a year is given by exp(gW ) where gW = µ +  2 /2. Equation (8)
implies that
                                           2
                                    gW = (- + 1)
                                            2
Thus, with a tail coefficient of the distribution of assets in the steady-state of  = 1.5
and  = 0.5, we have that gW = -0.0625. That is, with these parameters, wealthy
dynasties decumulate assets in relative terms at over 6% per year. In contrast, when
 = 0.25, we have gW = -0.015625, so this dissipation of the relative wealth of great
dynasties is much slower.

   This dissipation of great wealth is illustrated in Figure 5. This figure depicts for
different values of  the evolution over time of the ratio of assets held by a cohort
of dynasties all starting with idiosyncratic component of assets at the node on our
grid corresponding to various top percentiles compared to average wealth. The speed
with which this ratio converges to one indicates the rate at which dynasties starting
out at top percentiles of the distribution of assets dissipate their wealth in relative
terms. We see in Figure 5a that top wealth is dissipated relatively rapidly when
 = 0.5 compared to what we find in Figure 5b when  = 0.25.


                                           25
                                           3000                                                                                                                     3000
                                                                                              top 0.1%                                                                                                          top 0.1%
                                                                                              top 0.01%                                                                                                         top 0.01%
                                                                                              top 0.001%                                                                                                        top 0.001%
                                           2500                                               top 0.0003% (Forbes)                                                  2500                                        top 0.0003% (Forbes)
       Ratio of wealth to average wealth




                                                                                                                                Ratio of wealth to average wealth
                                           2000                                                                                                                     2000




                                           1500                                                                                                                     1500




                                           1000                                                                                                                     1000




                                            500                                                                                                                      500




                                              0                                                                                                                        0
                                                  0   10   20     30   40    50     60   70      80       90         100                                                   0   10   20   30   40    50     60   70       80       90   100
                                                                            years                                                                                                                  years




                                                                (a) High  = 0.5                                                                                                      (b) Low  = 0.25

Figure 5: Time paths for the ratio of wealth held by cohorts starting at top percentiles relative
to average wealth.



  These results for the one-type version of our model establish that if the standard
deviation of innovations to the log of the idiosyncratic component of wealth is high
(on the order of  = 0.5), then our model can produce rapid transitions of top
wealth shares. This specification of our model necessarily also predicts a high degree
of wealth mobility from the bottom and relatively rapid dissipation of the relative
fortunes of cohorts of families starting out at top wealth percentiles.11

   This one-type model fails, however, as a full quantitative explanation of the evo-
lution of top wealth shares on two important grounds. First, it is obviously not
the case that every family runs its own business. Second, the evidence available in
Gomez (2019) on the standard deviation of log changes in wealth for the Forbes 400
indicates that it is not the case that the standard deviation of innovations to the
idiosyncratic component of assets is equal to 50% in recent years, even for the very
wealthy.

  To address these shortcomings of our one-type model, we now turn to an analysis of
  11
     Gabaix et al. (2016) considered the implications of this model for transitions for much lower
values of  than 0.5. This accounts for their conclusions that this model fails to account for the
transitions of top income shares.

                                                                                                                           26
a two-type model in which only a small minority of dynasties derive their wealth from
concentrated ownership of a single firm. We use this two-type model to reproduce
the transition of top wealth shares in the United States over the past 100 years.



5     Steady-State, Wealth Mobility and Transitions
      in The Two Type Model

We now consider the quantitative implications of our model with two types of dy-
nasties, j  {D, F }. We use the index j = F to denote a dynasty that currently has
its assets concentrated in the equity of one firm, which we term the family firm. We
assume that the standard deviation of innovations to the logarithm of the idiosyn-
cratic component of assets for this type of dynasty, denoted by F,t , is large. We use
the index j = D to denote a dynasty that currently has its assets diversified across a
broader range of investments. We assume that for this type of dynasty, the standard
deviation D,t is small. We choose parameters so that the fraction of dynasties with
a concentrated investment in a single firm is only a small minority of the overall
population.

  We now discuss the quantitative implications of this two-type model for the distri-
bution of assets in the steady-state, the volatility of innovations to log wealth, wealth
mobility from the bottom, the dissipation rate of great fortunes, and the evolution of
top wealth shares over the past 100 years in response to a change in the volatility F,t
consistent with the data on idiosyncratic equity volatility in Herskovic et al. (2016).


Steady-State In the two-type model, the steady-state distributions of the idiosyn-
cratic component of assets by type are given by

                         gj (n) = aj (1 - a )n              n
                                             a + bj (1 - b )b




                                           27
for j  {D, F }, where aj and bj are non-negative constants and a and b are the
two stable eigenvalues of the difference equation (5) stacked as a first order system
and imposing steady-state. By convention, we assume that a is the larger of the two
stable eigenvalues. Under this assumption, the tail coefficient for the distribution of
assets for high levels of assets converges to

                                           1
                                  ss = -     log(a ).
                                           

   Consider the fraction of dynasties of each type at the top end of the distribution
of wealth. We denote the fraction of the population of each type at node n of the
grid by j (h). These fractions of the population of each type at very high levels of
wealth converge to
                                              j aj
                               j (n)                                             (10)
                                         F aF + D aD
as n grows large.

  There is a sense in which there are dynasties of type D with low volatility at the
top of the wealth distribution only because these dynasties were of type F with high
volatility in the recent past. To illustrate this point, consider the implications of
the model as the rate at which type F dynasties switch type gets small (F  0).
We refer to this limiting case as the non-communicating types model. In this limit,
the two stable eigenvalues of the model are given as in the one-type model by j =
pu,j /pd,j and the weights aj and bj put weight only on one of the two eigenvalues for
each type. Since aD = 0 in this limiting case, we have that D (n) goes to zero as n
gets large.


Parameter Choices: Initial Steady-state We choose the parameters of the
initial steady-state of our two-type model (corresponding to 1920) as follows. We
discuss how we map these calibration moments to the parameters of the model in
the Appendix.

  We set the time period t = 1/1000 and choose the grid step size  consistent

                                           28
with the choice of max = 0.5.

  We set the overall fractions of dynasties of each type in the population to F = 0.05
and D = 0.95.12 We set the annualized rate at which dynasties switch from type F
to type D to F = 1/15, or 6.66% per year.

  We set the tail coefficient of the distribution of assets at high levels of wealth to
0 = 1.5.

  We set parameters so that 53% of the population of the Forbes 400 in our model
are of type F and 47% of type D.

  We set the initial values of the uncentered second moment of innovations to the
log of the idiosyncratic component of assets by type to 0.452 for type F and 0.152
for type D.

  To match the level of shares of net wealth held by top wealth percentiles, we choose
the debt parameter d = 1.1. Note that our minimum level of assets is 1, so the net
worth of those at the lowest level of assets is -0.1.

   With these parameters, the model implies that, in the initial steady-state of the
model (which we use for the distribution of wealth in 1920), the share of net worth
of the top 1% is 44%, while the shares of the top 0.1% and of the Forbes 400 (the
top 0.0003%) are 21% and 2.8% respectively. At the bottom end of the distribution
of net worth, we have that 37% of the population has negative net worth.


Wealth volatility for the very wealthy The distribution of changes in the
logarithm of the idiosyncratic component of assets for dynasties at node n of our grid
of assets over a one year period is well-approximated by a mixture of two normal
                                 2
distributions with moments µj , j  and weights j (n). For dynasties at the cutoff for
the Forbes 400 in our model, the standard deviation of changes in the the log of the
  12
     Cagetti and De Nardi (2009) find a fraction of entrepreneurs in the U.S. population is 7.6%.
Hurst and Pugsley (2009) argue that many of these entrepreneurs do not intend to grow their
businesses. We choose to set F = 5% as a balance between these two papers. Most relevant for
our results is the implications of our model the fractions of each type at top wealth levels.

                                               29
idiosyncratic component of assets is 34% and the excess kurtosis of this distribution
is 4.65. These numbers are roughly equal to the data shown in Gomez (2019) for the
standard deviation and excess kurtosis of log wealth for the Forbes 400 in the data.


Wealth Mobility Before conducting our analysis of the transition dynamics of
top wealth shares implied by the model, we consider the implications of our two-type
model for wealth mobility from the bottom and from the top in the initial steady-
state. As we did with the one-type model, we compute time paths for Gt (n())/,
where Gt is the CCDF of the distribution of assets of the distribution Tt (1) evaluated
at the node n() on the grid of the idiosyncratic component of assets consistent with
percentile  of the steady-state distribution of assets. We show this measure of wealth
mobility from the bottom over a period of 100 years in Figure 6. As with the one-
type model, the upper part of the CCDF of assets for a cohort of dynasties starting
from the bottom converges to the overall CCDF in the steady-state in roughly 50-70
years.




                                          30
                             1


                            0.9


                            0.8


                            0.7


                            0.6
              G t (n( ))/




                            0.5
                                                                       top 1%
                            0.4                                        top 0.1%
                                                                       top 0.01%
                                                                       top 0.001%
                            0.3                                        top 0.0003% (Forbes)


                            0.2


                            0.1


                             0
                                  0   10   20   30   40    50     60   70       80       90   100
                                                          Years




Figure 6: Time paths for Gt (n())/ at top wealth percentiles , for a cohort starting at the
bottom of the asset distribution.



   In Figure 7, we plot the path of the ratio of total wealth of a cohort of dynasties
starting at the cutoff level of wealth for various top wealth percentiles relative to
aggregate wealth over a 100 year period. We see that a great portion of that wealth
is expected to dissipate in relative terms over this time horizon.




                                                          31
                                                 3500
                                                                                             top 0.1%
                                                                                             top 0.01%
                                                                                             top 0.001%
                                                 3000                                        top 0.0003% (Forbes)
             Ratio of wealth to average wealth

                                                 2500



                                                 2000



                                                 1500



                                                 1000



                                                  500



                                                    0
                                                        0   10   20   30   40    50     60   70       80       90   100
                                                                                Years




          Figure 7: Transition of the ratio of top wealth shares to aggregate wealth.



100 years of Top Wealth Shares with Time-Varying Idiosyncratic Volatility
We now turn to the implications of our two type model for the evolution of top wealth
shares over the past 100 years in the United States when the volatility of innovations
to the value of family firms is assumed to follow the path estimated by Herskovic
et al. (2016) shown in Figure 2.

   To do so, we assume that the initial distribution of wealth corresponding to 1920 is
given by the initial steady-state considered above. We assume that the parameters
governing the time interval (t ), the grid step size (), the debt level (d), the
fractions of dynasties of each type (j ) and the rate at which dynasties switch types
(j ) remain constant over time and that the probabilities pu,D,t and pd,D,t governing
the innovations to the idiosyncratic component of wealth for dynasties of type D also
remain constant throughout the 100-year transition considered.


                                                                                32
   We set the probabilities pu,F,t and pd,F,t governing the innovations to the idiosyn-
cratic component of wealth for dynasties with concentrated investments in family
firms during the 100 year transition as follows. We assume that the standard devi-
ation of these innovations to the value of family firms, F,t , declines linearly from
0.45 to a low of 0.25 over the course of 30 years (from 1920 to 1950), then rises
linearly from 0.25 back up to 0.5 over the course of the next 50 years (from 1950
to 2000), and then remains constant at 0.5 over the final 20 years (from 2000 to
2020). We choose the path of µF,t so that the expected growth rate of the level of the
                                                     2
idiosyncratic component of assets gW,F,t = µF,t + F,t  /2 remains constant at its initial
value. We then use equations (3) and (4) to compute the corresponding probabilities
{pu,F,t , pd,F,t }.

  We show the transition path for top wealth shares from this experiment in Figure
8 and 9.13 The transitions for the wealth shares of the top 1% and 0.1% are shown
in Figure 8 along with the estimates of these wealth shares from Saez and Zucman
(2016). The transition for wealth shares for the Forbes 400 (the top 0.0003%) is
shown in Figure 9 along with the estimates of these wealth shares from Gomez
(2019) normalized so that the model and data coincide in 1982. For 2017 and 2018,
we complement the Forbes data from Gomez (2019) data with data from Zheng
(2019).




  13
     Note that we compute net worth shares at t using equation (1) at or above fixed nodes n()
on our grid corresponding to wealth cutoffs for wealth percentiles  in the initial steady-state
distribution.

                                              33
                55
                                                    top 1% model
                                                    top 0.1% model
                50
                                                    top 1% data
                                                    top 0.1% data
                45


                40


                35


                30


                25


                20


                15


                10


                 5
                 1920   1930   1940   1950   1960    1970    1980    1990       2000   2010   2020
                                  share of wealth held by top 1% and top 0.1%




Figure 8: 100 year transition of top 1% and top 0.1% share of wealth (in %). Model vs data.




                                                    34
                                  Wealth Share, Cumulative Growth
              450%


              400%


              350%


              300%


              250%


              200%


              150%
                                                               top 0.0003%, model
                                                               Forbes 400, data
              100%


               50%
                 1980   1985   1990   1995     2000     2005      2010       2015   2020
                                               Year




             Figure 9: Cumulative growth of Forbes 400 wealth. Model vs data.



   The model captures the U-shape of the transitions of top wealth shares well. The
fact that the distribution of assets changes from the bottom up implies that the time-
variation in idiosyncratic volatility is reflected in top wealth shares with a delay. In
particular, recall that the time-varying idiosyncratic volatility reaches its minimum
around 1950 whereas top wealth shares reach their minimum in the 1970s or later,
with the bottom for wealth shares occurring later the higher the percentile of wealth
considered. This delay in the dynamics of top wealth shares emerges endogenously
from the model.


Turnover in the Forbes 400 Gomez (2019) studies the turnover rate for the
households on the Forbes 400 list. He documents that less than ten percent of the
households that were on list in 1983 were still on the list in 2017. We compare
our model to the data in this dimension as follows. We consider the time paths

                                              35
of wealth for a cohort of dynasties starting with a wealth level in the top 0.0003%
(which Gomez (2019) takes as the cutoff for the Forbes 400) in the year 1983. We
subject this cohort of dynasties to the transition dynamics of the years 1983-2017
taken from the 100-year experiment above. Finally, we compute how many of them
are still above the top 0.0003% cutoff in 2017, and find that 9.66% are. Hence, the
model is fairly successful in accounting for the mobility out the Forbes 400, at least
according to this rough measure of turnover.


The Economics of Family Firms In our interpretation of our model and this
transition experiment, the phenomenon of long-lived and highly volatile family firms
is central not only to the highly skewed distribution of wealth in the United States
and many other countries, but also to the rapid evolution of top wealth shares over
time. In our model, family firms facing a large amount of idiosyncratic risk are also
central to high degrees of wealth mobility from the bottom of the wealth distribution.
Moreover, the observation that the wealth distribution is not more skewed than it is
suggests that if family firms are an important part of the wealth distribution, then
it must be the case that great fortunes are also relatively rapidly dissipated.

  These features of our model suggest that changes in the decisions of owners of
family firms to sell out and diversify their holdings may play a central role in the
evolution of the wealth distribution. To illustrate this point, we use our model to
consider the counterfactual distribution of wealth that would occur if family firm
owners were to choose to diversify their portfolios more rapidly. In the context of
the two type model presented above, changes in the propensity to diversify can be
modeled as changes in the type switching rate E .

  Consider, for instance, the effect on the steady state wealth distribution of an
increase in the rate at which entrepreneurs diversify their wealth. In particular,
take as a starting point the initial steady-state wealth distribution implied by the
dynamics from the previous transition experiment. How would that distribution
change if the switching rate was increased from our benchmark value of E = 1/15
to E = 1/5, while keeping the other parameters governing the evolution of assets

                                         36
for both family firms and diversified dynasties the constant? In Table 3 we compare
the steady state wealth shares implied by having dynasties diversifying at different
rates.

                               Steady State Wealth Shares
                   top 1%               top 0.1%                     top 0.0003% (Forbes 400)
    E = 1/15        44%                   21%                                  2.8%
    E = 1/5         35%                   10%                                  0.9%
 Table 3: Model implied steady state wealth shares for different values of the switching rate E



   Increasing the rate at which dynasties diversify reduces steady state top wealth
shares dramatically and does so in a progressive fashion: the fall in the share of
wealth held by the Forbes 400 is more dramatic than the fall for the top 0.1% which
in turn is more pronounced than the fall for the top 1%.

  We interpret this experiment as indicating that the economics of family firms and
the reasons for which wealthy families do or do not diversify their holdings more
rapidly would be fruitful for understanding extremes of wealth inequality in the
United States.14



6        Conclusion

In this paper, we have shown that the evolution of top wealth shares in the United
States over the past 100 years can be understood as being driven by the evolution of
the idiosyncratic volatility of firm values over the past century as long as one allows
"family firms" to play an important role in the model.

   Throughout our paper, we take the moments of innovations to the value of family
firms as a primitive. As discussed in Piketty (2014) and Saez and Zucman (Forth-
coming), the moments of after-tax returns for families owning family firms is also
    14
     See Peter (2019) for a discussion of differences in the extent of diversification of firm onwnership
across European countries and top wealth shares in those countries.

                                                   37
impacted by tax policies. See also Aoki and Nirei (2017) and Hubmer et al. (Forth-
coming). We have made no effort to disentangle to what extent this evolution of top
wealth shares was driven in fact by changes in the volatility of firm values versus tax
rates or some other aspect of the economy. We leave this for future research.

   We do conjecture, however, that it may be fruitful going forward to put the eco-
nomics of family firms front and center in the analysis to deepen our understanding
of the drivers of wealth inequality in the United States and likely many other coun-
tries. We have shown in our model that wealth is much more equal if entrepreneurs
and their heirs sell out and diversify shortly after founding their firms. Why do
families maintain their concentrated stakes in family firms over several generations?
Why do these families resolve the tension between control of their firms and access
to broad sources of capital available in public markets in favor of concentrated own-
ership? Could one implement policies that would tilt this choice in favor of rapid
diversification by founding families? Would such a policy intervention result in a
more equal distribution of wealth? We suggest that it would be worthwhile to think
harder about the economics of family firms in the process of considering policies to
reduce the degree of wealth inequality in the United States.




                                          38
7     Appendix

In this appendix, we present an extension Proposition 1 to the two-type version of
our model. We show in particular that the degree of wealth mobility from the bottom
of the distribution is critical in determining the speed of transition implied by our
model. We then discuss how we map our calibration moments to the parameters of
the two-type model.

  As discussed in Section 5 the distribution of assets by type in the steady-state of
our two type model has the form

                          gj (n) = aj (1 - a )n              n
                                              a + bj (1 - b )b


for j = F, D. Using the notation of Proposition 1, we write the distributions i (n) =
(1 - i )ni for i = a, b and n  0, and we use 1 to denote a distribution that puts
weight one on the node n = 0 and zero on every other node.

   In the two-type model, the operator T defined by equations (5) and (6) maps a
pair of distributions by type at t, [gF,t , gD,t ] to a pair of distributions by type at
t + 1, [gF,t , gD,t ] . Define Tj to be the operator which maps pairs of distributions at
t, [gF,t , gD,t ] to the distribution for type j at t + 1. With these definitions

                    T [gF,t , gD,t ] = TF [gF,t , gD,t ] , TD [gF,t , gD,t ]


  The transition experiment we consider is as follows. Fix the parameters of the
operator T given by {pu,j , pd,j , j }. Let the initial distribution of assets by type be
given by
                                   gj,0 = aj,0 a + bj,0 b

with aj,0 + bj,0 = 1 for arbitrary nonnegative weights aj,0 , bj,0 and arbitrary a , b
defined by a , b  [0, 1). The distributions of assets by type converges over time to

                                gj,ss = aj,ss a,ss + bj,ss b,ss

                                               39
with new weights aj,ss and bj,ss on new vectors a,ss = a and b,ss = b .

   Extension of Proposition 1 We then have the following extension of our transi-
tion result in Proposition 1. Specifically, we have that, in this transition experiment
in the two-type model, the distributions of assets by type at date t are given by

                                                       t-1
                    gF,t   aF,t a   bF,t b          cF,t-k 1
                         =        +        +     Tk          .                      (11)
                    gD,t   aD,t a   bD,t b   k=0
                                                    cD,t-k 1

where aj,0 , bj,0 are give by the initial distributions at t = 0,

                      aF,t+1       F AF   (1 - F )AD                aF,t
                             =                                                      (12)
                      aD,t+1   (1 - D )AF     D AD                  aD,t

and
                      bF,t+1      F BF    (1 - F )BD                bF,t
                             =                                                      (13)
                      bD,t+1   (1 - D )BF    D BD                   bD,t
where
                                          1 - a
                          Aj = 1 + pu,j         - pd,j (1 - a )                     (14)
                                            a
                                          1 - b
                          Bj = 1 + pu,j         - pd,j (1 - b )                     (15)
                                            b
and cF,0 = cD,0 = 0 and

          cF,t+1 = F (aF,t + bF,t ) + (1 - F )(aD,t + bD,t ) - (aF,t+1 + bF,t+1 )

          cD,t+1 = D (aD,t + bD,t ) + (1 - D )(aF,t + bF,t ) - (aD,t+1 + bD,t+1 )

  In comparing this result to that in Proposition 1, we see that the transition dy-
namics of the distribution of assets in the two-type model is similar to those in the
one-type model in that the distribution of assets in the transition at time t is a
weighted average of the initial distributions a and b and distributions of assets
built up by repeated application of the operator T to cohorts of agents all starting


                                             40
at the bottom of the distribution of assets (with initial distribution 1). Thus, the
speed with which the tail coefficient of the distribution of assets depends on how
fast distributions of assets built up from cohorts of agents starting at the bottom
converge to the steady-state distributions based on a,ss and b,ss .

  We prove this result regarding the distribution of assets in the transition as follows.

  Note that the operator T is linear in acting on pairs of distributions. Direct
calculation gives that

                         aF,t a
                  TF            = [F AF aF,t + (1 - F )AD aD,t ] a +
                         aD,t a

                    [F (1 - AF )aF,t + (1 - F )(1 - AD )aD,t ] 1 =

                       aF,t+1 a + [F aF,t + (1 - F )aD,t - aF,t+1 ] 1

                   bF,t b
             TF           = bF,t+1 b + [F bF,t + (1 - F )bD,t - bF,t+1 ] 1
                   bD,t b

                  aF,t a
            TD           = aD,t+1 a + [D aD,t + (1 - D )aF,t - aD,t+1 ] 1
                  aD,t a

                  bF,t b
            TD           = bD,t+1 b + [D bD,t + (1 - D )bF,t - bD,t+1 ] 1
                  bD,t b

  These results imply that when the operator T is applied to the initial distribution
at t = 0, the pair of distributions that results at t = 1 is given by

                         gF,1   aF,1 a   bF,1 b   cF,1 1
                              =        +        +
                         gD,1   aD,1 a   bD,1 b   cD,1 1


  Now consider applying the operator T to a pair of distributions at t of the form in




                                            41
equation (11). We get

                    gF,t+1    gF,t   aF,t+1 a   bF,t+1 b
                           =T      =          +          +
                    gD,t+1    gD,t   aD,t+1 a   bD,t+1 b

                                         t-1
                             cF,t+1 1            cF,t-k 1
                                      +     Tk+1             =
                             cD,t+1 1   k=0
                                                 c D,t - k 1
                                                    t
                      aF,t+1 a   bF,t+1 b          cF,t+1-k 1
                               +          +     Tk
                      aD,t+1 a   bD,t+1 b   k=0
                                                   cD,t+1-k 1

  This proves the result.

   Characterizing the Steady-State Distribution We take as given the parame-
ters of the two-type model F , D , pu,F , pd,F , pu,D , pd,D . The steady state distribution
is given by six parameters a , b  (0, 1) and aF , aD , bF , bD  [0, 1]. These six pa-
rameters have to satisfy the following conditions. The weights aF , aD , bF , bD have to
satisfy
                                     aF + bF = 1

                                       aD + bD = 1

and be a stationary solution to equations (12) and (13) with the coefficients Aj and
Bj given by equations (14) and (15). These equations imply that

                            aF   (1 - F )AD    (1 - D AD )
                               =             =                                         (16)
                            aD   (1 - F AF )   (1 - D )AF

The second of these equations implies

                    0 = 1 - (1 - F - D )AF AD - D AD - F AF                            (17)

Since AF and AD are both quadratic in  (powers -1, 0, and 1), equation (17) is
a fourth order polynomial when (1 - F - D ) = 0. To have a unique stationary
distribution, one must check that only two of the roots of this polynomial lie in the

                                               42
interval (0, 1). By convention, a is the largest root of this polynomial that lies in
the interval (0, 1) and b is the smaller of the two roots in this interval. We have
that bF and bD solve the analogous equation to (16) with b being the smaller root
in (0, 1) of the analog to equation (17) defined by BF and BD in place of AF and
AD .

 Calibrating the Two-Type Model We calibrate the parameters of the two-type
model as follows.

 We fix the time interval t = 1/1000 representing 1/1000 of a year and max = 0.5.
The step size of the grid of assets is given by

                                   = max        2t


   We have the following calibration moments for the initial steady-state distribution
of assets.


  1. The unconditional fractions of each type in the population are given by j for
     j = F, D. This sets these parameters directly at F = 0.05 and D = 0.95.

  2. The switching rate per unit time from F to D given by F = 1/15 or 6.66%
     per year. This condition and the unconditional fractions of each type in the
     population give us
                                    F = 1 - F t
                                          F
                                D = 1 -     (1 - F )
                                          D
          400
  3. Let j    denote the fractions of each type in the limit as wealth gets large.
                                                                  400
     The superscript 400 here refers to the Forbes 400. We set F      = 53% and
      400
     D    = 47%. To match these fractions, from equation (10) the ratio of the
     parameters aF /aD must satisfy

                                                      400
                                              F - F F
                                  aD /aF =        400
                                                D F

                                         43
     Note that with this solution for aF /aD , the equations (16) can then be solved
     for AF and AD .

  4. The limiting tail coefficient for the Pareto distribution of assets is denoted by
     a . We set a = 1.5. To match this limiting tail coefficient, we must have

                                     a = exp(-a )


  5. We set the two uncentered second moments of innovations to the log of assets
     by type to
                              (pu,F + pd,F )2 = 0.452 t

     and
                                (pu,D + pd,D )2 = 0.152 t

     Given our solutions for Aj in step 3 together with our calibrated value of
     a , these equations together with the equations (14) imply solutions for these
     probabilities pu,j , pd,j for j = F, D.


  We finish solving for the parameters of the model as follows.

  The second stable eigenvalue b has to be a root of

                  0 = 1 - (1 - F - D )BF BD - D BD - F BF

with Bj given from equations (15) using the probabilities solved for in step 5. Once
we find this second stable eigenvalue, we have that bF /bD must satisfy the analog to
equation (16), which, together with the restrictions that aj + bj = 1 for j = F, D,
gives us the four coefficients aj , bj .

  Finally, we choose the level of debt d = 1.1 to match the share of net worth held
by the top 0.1% using equation (1).




                                         44
References

Ronald C. Anderson and David M. Reeb. Founding-family ownership and firm per-
formance: Evidence from the S&P 500. Journal of Finance, 58(3):1301­1328, June
2003.

Shuhei Aoki and Makoto Nirei. Zipf's law, pareto's law, and the evolution of top
incomes in the United States. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(3):
36­71, 2017.

Laurent Bach, Laurent E. Calvet, and Paolo Sodini. Rich pickings? Risk, return,
and skill in the portfolios of the wealthy. December 2018.

Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Mi Luo. Earnings inequality and other determi-
nants of wealth inequality. American Economic Review, 107(5):593­97, May 2017.

Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin, and Mi Luo. Wealth distribution and social mobility
in the U.S.: A quantitative approach. American Economic Review, 109(5):1623­47,
May 2019.

Marianne Bertrand and Antoinette Schoar. The role of family in family firms. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 20(2):73­96, Spring 2006.

Marco Cagetti and Mariacristina De Nardi. Estate taxation, entrepreneurship, and
wealth. American Economic Review, 99(1):85­111, March 2009.

D. G. Champernowne. A model of income distribution. The Economic Journal, 63
(250):318­351, June 1953.

Andreas Fagereng, Martin Blomhoff Holm, Benjamin Moll, and Gisle Natvik. Saving
behavior across the wealth distribution: The importance of capital gains. December
2019.

Andreas Fagereng, Luigi Guiso, Davide Malcrino, and Luigi Pistaferri. Heterogeneity
and persistence in returns to wealth. Econometrica, 88(1):115­170, January 2020.

                                        45
Xavier Gabaix, Jean-Michel Lasry, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Benjamin Moll. The
dynamics of inequality. Econometrica, 84(6):2071­2111, 2016.

Raymond William Goldsmith. The distribution of ownership in the 200 largest non-
financial corporations. Monograph no. 29 of the Temporary National Economic
Committee, 78th Congress 3d session, 1940.

Matthieu Gomez. Displacement and the rise in top wealth inequality. Working Paper,
2019. URL https://www.matthieugomez.com/files/topshares.pdf.

Bernard Herskovic, Bryan Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. The
common factor in idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications.
Journal of Financial Economics, 119(2):249­283, February 2016.

Joachim Hubmer, Per Krusell, and Anthony Smith. Sources of U.S. wealth inequality:
Past, present, and future. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2020, April Forthcoming.

Erik Hurst and Benjamin Pugsley. What do small businesses do? Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 43:73­142, Fall 2009.

Charles I. Jones and Jihee Kim. A Schumpeterian model of top income inequality.
Journal of Political Economy, 126(5):1785­1826, October 2018.

Eugene Klerk, Richard Kersley, Maria Bhatti, and Brandon Vair. The CS Family
1000 in 2018. Credit Suisse Research Institute, Zurich, Switzerland, September 2018.

Ferdinand Lundberg. America's 60 Families. The Vanguard Press, New York, 1937.

Erzo G.L. Luttmer. Further notes on micro heterogeneity and macro slow conver-
gence. June 2016.

Alessandra Peter. Owning up: Closely held firms and wealth inequality. January
2019.

Thomas Piketty. Capital in the Twenty First Century. Harvard University Press,
2014.

                                        46
Vincenzo Quadrini. Entrepreneurship in macroeconomics. Annals of Finance, 2009.

Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman. Wealth inequality in the United States since
1913: Evidence from capitalized income tax data. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics, 131(2):519­578, May 2016.

Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman. Progressive wealth taxation. Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, Forthcoming.

Matthew Smith, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. Capitalists in the
twenty-first century. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4):1675­1745, 2019.

Matthew Smith, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. Top wealth in the United States: New
estimates and implications for taxing the rich. April 2020.

Philip Vermuelen. How fat is the top tail of the wealth distribution? The Review of
Income and Wealth, 64(2):357­387, June 2018.

Belen Villalonga and Raphael Amit. How do family ownership, control and man-
agement affect firm value? Journal of Financial Economics, 80(2):385­417, May
2006.

Annette Vissing-Jørgensen and Tobias J. Moskowitz. The returns to entrepreneurial
investment: A private equity premium puzzle? American Economic Review, 92(4):
745­778, September 2002.

Geoffrey Zheng. Wealth shares in the long run. December 2019.




                                        47
