                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     LABOR MARKET SCREENING AND SOCIAL INSURANCE PROGRAM DESIGN
                          FOR THE DISABLED

                                        Naoki Aizawa
                                         Soojin Kim
                                         Serena Rhee

                                      Working Paper 27478
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27478


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We are grateful to Peter Arcidiacono, Richard Blundell, Eric French, Piero Gottardi, John
Kennan, Philipp Kircher, Dirk Krueger, Rasmus Lentz, Ben Lester, Maarten Lindeboom, Jeremy
Lise, Joel McMurry, Guido Menzio, Corina Mommaerts, Giuseppe Moscarini, José Víctor Ríos
Rull, Yongseok Shin, Dan Silverman, Jon Skinner, Chris Taber, Aleh Tsyvinski, Ronald
Wolthoff, and participants at ASSA, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Connecticut, Dale T.
Mortensen Conference on Labour Markets and Search Frictions, Delaware, Econometric Society
Meetings, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Georgetown/
UCL Conference, IZA, GRIPS, KAIST, SNU, KAEA-KEA, NBER Aging and Health, NBER
Summer Institute (Macro Perspectives; Macro Public Finance), SAET, SED, Tokyo, and Yale for
helpful comments. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Naoki Aizawa, Soojin Kim, and Serena Rhee. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Market Screening and Social Insurance Program Design for the Disabled
Naoki Aizawa, Soojin Kim, and Serena Rhee
NBER Working Paper No. 27478
July 2020
JEL No. E61,H21,H51,I18,J32

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the optimal design of social insurance programs for disabled workers by
developing and estimating an equilibrium labor search model with screening contracts. In the
model, firms may strategically use employment contracts, consisting of wage and job amenities,
to screen out the disabled. The optimal structure of disability policies depends on firms' screening
incentives, which may distort employment rates and contracts. By exploiting policy changes on
the labor demand side for the disabled in the United States, we identify and estimate our
equilibrium model to explore the optimal joint design of disability policies, including disability
insurance (DI) and subsidies to firms accommodating disabled workers. We find that firm
subsidies mitigate screening distortions; at the same time, they interact with DI by reducing the
labor supply disincentives it generates. The optimal policy structure leads to a considerable
welfare gain by simultaneously making firm subsidies and DI benefits more generous.

Naoki Aizawa                                      Serena Rhee
Department of Economics                           Korea Development Institute
University of Wisconsin-Madison                   263 Namsejong-ro
1180 Observatory Drive                            Sejong-City 30149
Madison, WI 53706                                 Republic of Korea
and NBER                                          srhee.econ@gmail.com
naizawa@wisc.edu

Soojin Kim
Economics Department
Purdue University
403 W. State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
soojink@purdue.edu
1     Introduction
Today, one in seven people in the working-age population of OECD countries regard
themselves as having a disability (OECD, 2010). Various social insurance policies have
been implemented to support individuals with disabilities. First, public disability in-
surance (DI) programs provide income support to disabled individuals who are unable
to work. Second, labor market policies for the disabled, such as the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) in the United States, aim to provide better job opportunities for
disabled workers by prohibiting firms from discriminating against workers based on dis-
ability and by mandating the provision of reasonable accommodations. Recently, there
has been growing interest in reforming social insurance programs for disabled workers,
especially due to concerns about the financial sustainability of the DI program, which has
become one of the largest government expenditure programs.1 This interest has spurred
discussions among economists and policy makers to consider more actively utilizing la-
bor market policies to incentivize firms to employ the disabled, which may reduce DI
expenditures. These discussions suggest the need to understand the interactions between
policy instruments for devising social insurance programs. Specifically, how should we
jointly design DI and labor market policies for the disabled?
    To address this question, it is essential to understand how these policies affect both
labor supply and labor demand of the disabled. Although an extensive literature inves-
tigates the impact of the DI program on individual labor supply and welfare, only a few
studies have investigated the response of firms to policies on either the labor demand side
or the labor supply side. Several studies argue that the introduction of the ADA substan-
tially raised the cost of hiring disabled workers, thereby lowering the labor demand for
these workers.2 These findings indicate that firms may have incentives to screen out (or
avoid hiring) possibly costly disabled workers. However, to date, little is known about
whether and how firms screen out disabled workers when they cannot explicitly dis-
criminate against workers based on disability status. Consequently, there are no existing
studies that examine the design of disability policies by accounting for both labor-supply
and labor-demand responses.
    This paper studies the optimal design of social insurance programs for the disabled
in an equilibrium labor search model with screening employment contracts. We posit
that firms strategically choose the provision of the option to reduce working hours, via
paid or unpaid leave for example, to screen out the disabled. This job amenity (or non-
    1 Currently,  the U.S. government spends $140 billion annually for cash benefits to DI recipients. On
average, the OECD countries spend 2.1% of their GDP on disability- and incapacity-related social policy
programs (OECD, 2016).
    2 See, for example, DeLeire (2000), Acemoglu and Angrist (2001), and Kim and Rhee (2018). Also, Kon-

ing and Lindeboom (2015) discusses that the Dutch reform, which increased the financial responsibility of
employers with disabled workers, could strengthen employers' screening incentives.

                                                   1
pecuniary benefit) provides a specific form of flexibility and accommodation that could
be particularly valuable to the disabled, who occasionally needs to stay at home or re-
ceive medical care. Because firms are not necessarily mandated to provide this amenity
under existing U.S. regulation (e.g., the ADA), they may under-provide it to avoid hiring
the disabled without violating regulations.3 '4 We develop an equilibrium search model
with this screening mechanism and show analytically how labor market policies and DI
should be designed to address screening distortions. Then, by exploiting disability policy
changes in the United States, we estimate our model and find that the screening distortion
is quantitatively substantial. Our counterfactual policy experiments show that providing
subsidies to firms accommodating the disabled mitigates their screening incentives; at the
same time, these subsidies interact with DI by reducing DI's work disincentive effects.
Thus, the optimal policy structure prescribes a simultaneous increase in the generosity of
firm subsidies and DI benefits, resulting in a considerable welfare gain.
    We first theoretically characterize the optimal disability policies. Our model extends
labor market screening models (e.g., Akerlof, 1976; Guerrieri et al., 2010; and Stantcheva,
2014) by incorporating worker heterogeneity in disability and skill. A worker's disability
status affects his disutility from work, net output, and preference for job amenities. In a
frictional labor market, workers optimally choose whether to search for a job and what
type of job to search for (i.e., the search process is directed). Firms choose wages and
job amenities to maximize their profits, but their contracts cannot explicitly depend on
a worker's disability status. Thus, firms design contract terms to screen out a specific
type of worker, exploiting preference heterogeneity in job amenities. We show that the
optimal structure of disability policies, such as DI and subsidies to firms to accommo-
date the disabled (as one of labor market policies), depend not only on redistributive and
distortionary effects in the labor market, but also on the strength of firm's screening in-
centives. Both policies mitigate firm's screening incentives but in different mechanisms:
the subsidy to firms directly reduces the differences in the ex-post profit between a job
matched with a disabled worker and one with a non-disabled worker, while DI lessens
the distortion by reducing disabled job applicants.
    Next, we estimate our equilibrium model using the Health and Retirement Study
(HRS). In our data, disabled workers tend to work at jobs that provide the option to
reduce working hours.5 We also provide suggestive evidence that firms may use the op-
tion to reduce working hours as a tool for screening out the disabled. Then, we estimate
   3 There are various accommodations (e.g., work place modifications or special equipment) that the ADA

mandates firms to provide to meet the needs of disabled workers, but the option to reduce working hours
is not one of them.
    4 We do not necessarily interpret that having the option to reduce working hours is equivalent to work-

ing part time, nor that the disabled prefers part-time jobs. We clarify this point in Section 3.
    5 In a related context, Ameriks et al. (2019) also show empirically that the work incentives of older

workers depend on whether the job offers flexible working hours.

                                                    2
the model through an indirect inference procedure. The main identification challenge in
estimation is that the degree of labor market screening is endogenously determined in
equilibrium, affected by parameters governing both the labor supply side (the worker
utility from job amenities) and the labor demand side (the cost of providing job ameni-
ties). To separately identify these parameters, we utilize variation in the data induced
by the policy change on the labor demand side for the disabled, the amendment to the
Work Opportunity Tax Credit program in 2004. Based on our estimates, the inefficiencies
in job amenities arising from firms' screening contracts can be sizable: in the estimated
screening model, the share of employees with the option to reduce working hours is 13%
(between 5.5% and 21%) lower on average than the share if firms are allowed to offer
disability-dependent contracts (i.e., in the economy without screening contracts). As a
model validation exercise, we also show that the model produces an empirically plausi-
ble employment effect of DI, similar to those in the literature exploiting quasi-experiments
(e.g., Maestas et al., 2013 and French and Song, 2014).
    Then, we use the estimated model to find the optimal combination of DI and firm sub-
sidies to provide the option to reduce working hours. This job amenity subsidy, which
accommodates working disabled individuals, fits into active labor market policies for the
disabled that are now widely adopted in many OECD countries.6 First, we find that this
job amenity subsidy provides better consumption insurance among the employed while
ameliorating screening distortions in the labor market. Therefore, it increases the welfare
of all workers, highlighting the benefits of adopting such a labor market policy in the U.S.
Second, compared to the benchmark economy, we find that the optimal policy structure
features both generous amenity subsidies and higher DI benefits. Although more gen-
erous DI may distort the labor supply incentives of the disabled, it also reduces firm's
screening incentives. Moreover, the amenity subsidy complements DI by mitigating em-
ployment distortion generated by DI. Thus, the optimal combination of these policies
provides consumption insurance and reduces screening distortions, while balancing the
level of employment. Overall, it increases the social welfare by 1.6% in terms of consump-
tion, suggesting a potential benefit from systematic reforms of disability policies.

Related Literature. First, this paper contributes to the growing literature that studies,
both theoretically and quantitatively, the welfare impacts of disability and health poli-
cies.7 A seminal contribution is Golosov and Tsyvinski (2006) which solves a mechanism
   6 According    to OECD (2010), many OECD countries (e.g., Sweden, Norway, and Great Britain) have
gradually expanded labor market policies for the disabled to increase their employment rates. As an ex-
ample, the Netherlands' DI reform of 2006 included partial DI payments with wage subsidies (Koning and
Lindeboom, 2015). The partial DI program helps reduce labor supply distortions by smoothing disabil-
ity benefits across employment statuses. However, it may not be as effective in addressing the screening
problem, which is the focus of our paper (we discuss this issue further in Section 2).
    7 There is also an extensive empirical literature studying disability and DI. Please refer to Bound and

Burkhauser (1999) for the survey of this literature.

                                                    3
design problem, where the government cannot observe the worker's disability status. The
authors theoretically and numerically characterize the optimal DI system and its imple-
mentation. More recently, Kitao (2014), Low and Pistaferri (2015), French and Song (2017),
and Michaud and Wiczer (2018) evaluate the welfare impacts of the U.S. DI program by
developing rich structural models, mainly focusing on the worker side responses. In a
similar vein, De Nardi et al. (2016), Braun et al. (2017), Braun et al. (2019), Cole et al. (2019),
and Aizawa and Fang (2020) use structural models to evaluate various health policies.
Our main contribution is to provide an analysis of disability policy designs that incorpo-
rate both firm- and worker-side responses in a rich equilibrium labor market model. We
show that accounting for firms' screening incentives is crucial in determining the optimal
structure of policies for the disabled.
    Moreover, this paper contributes to the large macro public finance and macro labor
literature analyzing social insurance programs using equilibrium labor search models.
From a theoretical standpoint, Acemoglu and Shimer (1999) and Blanchard and Tirole
(2008), and more recently Golosov et al. (2013), analyze the determinants of optimal so-
cial insurance policies that incorporate their distortionary effects in frictional labor mar-
kets. From a quantitative standpoint, Mitman and Rabinovich (2015), Lise et al. (2016),
Chodorow-Reich et al. (2019), and Braxton et al. (2020) study equilibrium labor market
implications of unemployment insurance systems. Our contribution is to develop a quan-
titative framework to assess the optimal joint design of worker- and firm-side policies in
the labor market with both search and screening frictions.8
    There is a large theoretical literature concerning screening problems in the labor mar-
ket. A pioneering work is the rat-race model developed by Akerlof (1976). Stantcheva
(2014) theoretically shows that a screening channel has an important qualitative effect
on optimal income taxation. More recently, Guerrieri et al. (2010), Auster and Gottardi
(2019), and Lester et al. (2019) develop various models that integrate search frictions with
screening problems.9 Importantly, the literature on labor market screening remains highly
theoretical. We contribute to the literature by quantitatively examining the relevance of
labor market screening for policy designs.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present a frictional labor
market model with screening and establish several theoretical results. Then, we discuss
the main dataset and descriptive evidence on screening instruments in Section 3. Section
4 explains our estimation and findings. In Section 5, we conduct counterfactual policy
experiments. Finally, Section 6 concludes.


   8A    related contribution is Corbae and Glover (2020), who study the impact of restricting pre-
employment credit screening in a search and bargaining model of the labor market with adverse selection.
    9 See also Davoodalhosseini (2019) that theoretically studies the efficiency property of the directed

search equilibrium with adverse selection.

                                                   4
2     An Equilibrium Labor Market Screening Model

2.1     Model Environment
Workers. The economy is populated by a unit measure of workers, who are heteroge-
neous in their disability status h  H  {1, 2, · · · , H } and skill type x  X . The share
of each type i  (h, x )  I is i > 0. The least healthy (most severely disabled) type is
denoted by h = 1, and the healthiest type by h = H . Workers value consumption and
leisure, and decide whether to look for a job (extensive margin) and which job to apply for
(intensive margin) given the menu of employment contracts. When employed, a worker
produces net output f h,x with f h+1,x  f h,x . The heterogeneity in net output by health
status may be from productivity differences driven by health or due to the expected costs
of mandated accommodation under the ADA.10
    Workers' preferences are represented by the utility function

                                 u(c) - (h -  h  ( a)) I(employed),

where c denotes consumption and h -  h  ( a) captures the disutility from work given
the amount of job amenities a. The utility from consumption satisfies u > 0 and u  0.
The disutility from work consists of a type-dependent fixed utility cost h and utility from
job amenity  h  ( a). The job amenity a lowers the disutility from work through function
 ( a), where  > 0 and  < 0 for a  R+ . Furthermore, preference on amenity  h
differs by health type, where we assume  h >  h+1 so that unhealthy workers value a
more than healthier types.11 If an individual does not work, he produces bx at home.


Firms. Ex ante homogeneous and risk-neutral firms produce output f h,x when matched
with a type-(h, x ) worker. To hire a worker, a firm pays  and posts a contract, which
consists of wage w and job amenity a. Firms can observe the worker's skill x and are
allowed to post x-dependent contracts. However, the contract cannot be contingent on
a worker's disability type h, either because they are prohibited from doing so under the
ADA regulation or because of information frictions (h is unobservable).12 A matched

    10 We can also interpret output as firm's perceived output and firms may discriminate against less healthy

workers for taste reasons as in Becker (1971).
   11 If there is multi-dimensional heterogeneity in individuals that are unobserved or not conditioned by

firms, and that leads to a violation of monotonicity assumption in firm's payoff (discussed in Section 2.2),
then it creates a number of complications in equilibrium analysis (see Azevedo and Gottlieb, 2017 and
Chang, 2017 for their theoretical analyses). While we choose to model one-dimensional heterogeneity, we
control for the potential bias from this modeling assumption in our empirical analysis. See footnote 48 in
Section 4.1 for details.
   12 We consider the ADA as given and take f
                                                 h,x as a primitive of the model, but f h,x itself could be en-
dogenous to the ADA depending on its interpretation. Strictly speaking, the ADA does not force firms
to explicitly offer the same contract to workers with different disability statuses if their true productivities

                                                       5
firm's payoff is the residual of net output after paying wage w and the costs of providing
job amenities C ~ ( a), which satisfies C
                                        ~ > 0 and C~  0.13 Firms' payoff of not posting a
vacancy is normalized to zero.


Labor Market. The labor market is frictional and search is directed. We specify the
order of decisions in the labor market as follows: first, firms decide to post contracts;
then workers decide whether to enter the labor market and which contracts to apply
to. Each submarket is defined by a contract y x  (w, a)  Yx , where Yx is the set of
feasible contracts. The market tightness (vacancy-to-applicants ratio) in each submarket
is denoted by  (y x ). A worker in a y x -submarket finds a job with probability µ ( (y x ))
regardless of his disability type. Similarly, a firm in a y x -submarket finds its employee
with probability  ( (y x )). Assuming a constant returns to scale matching function, we
have  ( ) = µ ( ).14 Let gh (y x ) be the share of type-h workers among the applicants
in a y x -submarket. Then the probability of hiring a type-h worker in a y x -submarket is
 ( (y x )) gh (y x ).


Government Policies. The government can choose three sets of policy instruments: (i)
DI benefit amounts Dx , (ii) subsidies to firms T (w, a) for accommodating the disabled,
and (iii) wage tax (subsidy)  (w). We assume that the government imperfectly verifies
the true type of workers (similar to Low and Pistaferri, 2015) when providing DI benefits
and firm subsidies. The probability of identifying type h as disabled is denoted by h .
We assume h  h+1 so that the verification probability is increasing in one's severity of
disability. Therefore, both DI and firm subsidies are effectively disability-dependent from
the perspective of workers and firms. The effective subsidy amount h T (w, a) is higher
for disabled workers, and therefore it is intended to incentivize firms to create a more
accommodating work environment for disabled workers. This imperfect verification as-
sumption is empirically plausible and has been widely accepted in the disability litera-
ture.15 It also allows us to investigate an interesting policy design problem by excluding

differ after the provision of mandated accommodations. In this case, one may consider such a produc-
tivity difference as skill heterogeneity, and thus firms are allowed to offer differential contracts based on
the health status even under the ADA. However, empirical evidence suggests that firms' ability to offer
differential contracts in health became more limited after the ADA: more workers filed lawsuits claiming
discrimination based on the ADA, and the ADA is strictly enforced if differential treatments are purely due
to firms' misperception or discrimination (Acemoglu and Angrist, 2001).
   13 There might be ex ante heterogeneity among firms in terms of the efficiency in providing job amenity.

While this might lead to heterogeneity in the degree of screening incentives across firms, it does not elimi-
nate all screening incentives and the main qualitative findings from the simple model hold.
   14 We assume standard properties on µ (  ) and  (  ) hold: µ : [0,  ]  [0, 1] satisfies µ > 0 and µ  0,

and  : [0, ]  [0, 1] satisfies  < 0.
   15 We assume that the verification probability  is exogenous and focus on DI and firm subsidies as
                                                      h
policy instruments. However, h can be considered as another policy instrument, for example, in a model
with costly verification in which the government decides how much resources to expend to correctly verify

                                                     6
the obvious solution: if the government perfectly identifies the true disability type, it can
undo all labor market distortions by providing h-dependent lump-sum transfers.


2.2    Competitive Search Equilibrium (Given Policy Parameters)
Let the government policies be denoted by p  { Dx , T (w, a) ,  (w)}. Given the policies
p, a type-(h,x) individual's expected utility from not working is

                          N
                         Uh , x ( b x , D x ) = h u ( b x + D x ) + ( 1 - h ) u ( b x ) .


Although our model abstracts from the DI application decision, the DI status is still en-
dogenously determined by the (extensive margin) labor supply decision and the proba-
bility of finding a job, the latter of which depends on firms' labor demand.16 Similarly,
the utility while employed is

                            E
                           Uh ,x ( w, a ) = u ( w -  ( w )) - (  h -  h  ( a )) .


A firm matched with a worker with disability status h receive a subsidy with probability
h . As a result, the expected subsidy given to a firm with a type-h worker is Th (w, a) =
h T (w, a). The firm's payoff from hiring a type-(h, x ) worker is

                                      v h , x ( w , a ) = f h , x - Ch ( w , a )

where Ch (w, a)  w + C ~ ( a) - Th (w, a) is the net cost of hiring a worker.
    We now define the competitive equilibrium in our search model. For brevity, we omit
the dependence of equilibrium objects on policy parameters p. First, in the equilibrium,
firms maximize their profits and the free-entry condition holds,

                                   ( (y x ))  gh (y x ) vh,x (y x )   ,
                                                  h
                              p              p
with equality if y x  Yx , where Yx is the set of active submarkets for type-x workers
and  : Yx  [0, ] represents a function of the market tightness over the set of feasible
contracts Yx . Second, conditional on the contracts posted and the search behaviors of
others, each type-(h, x ) worker maximizes expected utility by searching in the optimal
submarket by solving



workers' true disability statuses.
   16 In Section 4.1, we show that the estimated model is able to generate empirically plausible predictions

on the number of DI beneficiaries and employment effects of DI, which are important margins for counter-
factual experiments.

                                                          7
           ¯ h,x  max U N (bx , Dx ) , max                       E
                                                    µ ( (y x )) Uh                                    N
           U           h, x                     p                  ,x ( w, a ) + (1 - µ (  ( y x ))) Uh,x ( bx , Dx )   .   (1)
                                     (w,a)Yx


                                                                        gh ( y x )
Finally, the market clears; that is, (h, x ),                       p   (y x )
                                                                                   d ({y x })    h,x is satisfied, with
                                                                   Yx
equality if U¯ h,x > U N (bx , Dx ).17
                       h, x
    One can show that a unique, fully separating equilibrium exists, following Guerrieri
et al. (2010).18 In the equilibrium, given the same skill x, workers with different disability
statuses apply to distinct submarkets that are characterized by a unique employment con-
tract. As the contract is separating in skill x, the model can give rise to the heterogeneity
in observed employment contracts between workers of the same disability status. This
possibility of generating rich predictions make the model suitable for an empirical appli-
cation. Moreover, as shown in Section 3, we observe that workers with different disabil-
ity statuses tend to sort into jobs with distinctive features in their employment contracts,
even after conditioning on many observed characteristics. These empirical observations
suggest that the separating equilibrium is a plausible feature in our context.


2.3        Characterizing Equilibrium Allocations
The equilibrium contract of type-(h, x ) solves the following problem:

                       N                              E                            N
  ( P1) max           Uh ,x ( bx , Dx ) , max µ (  ) Uh,x ( w, a ) + (1 - µ (  )) Uh,x ( bx , Dx )
                                        w, a,
              s.t.   (FE)   µ ( ) { f h,x - Ch (w, a)} = 
                                    E                               N                  ¯
                     (IC)   µ (  ) Uh -1,x ( w, a ) + (1 - µ (  )) Uh-1,x ( bx , Dx )  Uh-1,x                               (2)
                                                                        ~ -1 ( f h,x + Th (w, a)) .
                              [0, ] , w  [0, f h,x + Th (w, a)] , a  0, C

The worker's utility is maximized subject to a free-entry condition (FE) and the incen-
tive compatibility constraint (IC). Note that the (IC) constraint is irrelevant for the least

   17 In this model, we also need to specify reasonable beliefs about the market tightness off the active
submarkets (Y p ) in equilibrium. Note that the market tightness function  is defined over Yx , the set of
                                                                                               p
feasible contract space for each type x, unlike the distribution of active contracts  over Yx . This distinction
comes from the fact that our equilibrium concept requires workers to have reasonable beliefs about the
payoffs of potential deviations from the equilibrium outcome.
   18 We relegate the formal definition of the equilibrium of the economy to Appendix A.1. One can prove

the uniqueness and existence by following Guerrieri et al. (2010) and thus is omitted. The key conditions
for the proof are (i) the monotonicity of the firm's payoff in worker's disability status and (ii) the single-
crossing condition on workers' preferences. The former, i.e., that vh,x (y x ) increases in h for any y x  Y  ¯ x , is
satisfied under our assumption on monotonicity of net output in health: f h+1,x  f h,x . When we incorporate
policies, this constrains the possible range of firm subsidies (T (w, a)) as they directly affect the firm's profit
from hiring a disabled worker. We take these constraints into account in our counterfactual analysis that
follow. The single-crossing condition is satisfied, as the marginal rate of substitution is increasing in health.

                                                               8
healthy workers (h = 1).19 Thus, these workers receive the same contract as what they
would have received if firms were allowed to write health-dependent (no-screening, " NS")
contracts.20 The amenity and the employment levels for the least healthy equalize the
marginal benefit and marginal cost,

                               E
                  h, x  u     ch , x · {  Ch ( w , a ) /  a } -  h  ( a ) ,                                   (3)
                                                                                            h,x
                                                                                       
                                   E               N                          E           µ (  h, x )
                 h,x  -µ (h,x ) u(ch , x ) - u ( c h, x ) - µ (  h, x ) u ( c h, x )                    ,     (4)
                                                                                          h,x

setting both  h,x = h,x = 0, in which ch  E and c N denote consumption for the employed
                                           ,x     h, x
and non-employed workers, respectively.
    However, contracts for healthier types (h  2) need to ensure that less-healthy workers
have no incentive to mimic a healthier type: the (IC) constraint states that the utility of a
type-(h - 1, x ) worker entering the submarket for type-(h, x ) should be less than or equal
to the utility he receives from entering his own submarket. The indirect utility of the least
healthy type entering a submarket with contract w1,    NS , a NS is
                                                        x 1,x


     ¯ 1,x  U N (bx , Dx ) + µ  NS                NS              NS                      N
     U       1,x               1,x             u c1, x - 1 -  1  a1,x                  - U1, x (bx , Dx ) .


Then we can solve this problem sequentially for higher types. These (IC) constraints
therefore generate distortions (relative to the equilibrium health-dependent contracts) in
both the amenity and employment rates of workers for whom the (IC) constraint is bind-
ing, and thus  h,x and h,x are no longer zero.
    One can establish various theoretical properties in the environment with risk-neutral
workers. By assumption on the preference parameter  h and concavity of , we have
  NS         NS
ah +1,x < a h,x . Using the optimality conditions, we can show that if the (IC) binds for
type-(h, x ), his job amenity in the screening contract is inefficiently low: aS        NS 21
                                                                               h, x < a h, x .
This is a standard result in adverse selection models (even without search frictions), and
it is designed to keep the less healthy from entering the healthy workers' submarkets.

   19 Assume,    for ease of exposition, that the least healthy workers (h = 1) participate in the labor market.
Depending on the value of the outside option and the labor market opportunities, the least healthy workers
in the labor market might not coincide with the least healthy worker type in the economy.
    20 This terminology is meant to emphasize that when firms are not allowed to write health-dependent

contracts (or workers have private information), firms strategically use contracts to "screen" certain types
of workers. We acknowledge, however, that in a broader sense, one can say that firms may screen workers
at no cost (i.e., without using contracts as screening tools) under the "no-screening" economy.
    21 In practice, firms can, without violating the ADA, offer lower wages if individuals take leaves of ab-

sence due to disability. We capture this with a in a reduced-form way. Alternatively, we can interpret
the contract as a combination of wages {w N , wS }, where w N is the salary if the individual works without
any absences and wS if he experiences absences. Firms may offer low wS to screen out disabled workers,
yielding the same economic intuition as offering lower a.

                                                        9
A useful feature of a search-frictional labor market is the equilibrium determination of
the market tightness, and thus the employment rate. By imposing certain parametric
assumptions, we can further show that h       S >  NS and wS > w NS if (IC) binds for type-
                                               ,x   h, x       h, x    h, x
(h, x ). These results are proved in Appendix A.2.
    Lastly, we emphasize that if the contract that satisfies the zero-profit condition for
                                                                                    N (b , D ) >
firms is less attractive than the outside option for the least healthy type (i.e., U1, x x  x
 ¯
U1,x ), he prefers to stay out of the labor force completely. In this case, the worker type that
receives the no-screening contract may not be the lowest type in the health status space.


2.4      Optimal Policy Design in a Simplified Model
Given welfare weights {i }iI for type i  (h, x ) and the government's verification tech-
nology {h }hH , the government maximizes the social welfare subject to the budget con-
straint:

        max  i U
               ¯i
         p
              i I

 s.t.    i [(1 - µ (i ( p))) h Dx + µ (i ( p)) h T (wi ( p) , ai ( p))] =  i µ (i ( p))  (wi ( p)) ,
        i I                                                                   i I


where U  ¯ i is the indirect utility of worker of type i defined in Equation (1); and wages
wi ( p), amenities ai  ( p ), and job finding rates µ   ( p ) are derived from labor market
                                                     i  i
equilibrium conditions. We assume that the government sets and commits to the poli-
cies, after which workers and firms make their decisions.22 Note that firms' profits do
not directly enter into our welfare criteria because firms earn zero profit in equilibrium.
However, firms still affect welfare through their choices of wages and job amenities that
determine their profitabilities.
    To understand the determinants of optimal policies, we theoretically characterize them
following the approach by Saez (2001) and Chetty (2006). First, we consider a propor-
tional job amenity subsidy to firms, that is T (w, a) = S · C ( a), where S denotes the sub-
sidy rate. Second, we consider the optimal DI benefit amounts of Dx , and assume that
both policies are financed by lump-sum taxes on employed workers.
    In this environment, the policies affect not only the equilibrium employment rates,
but also the levels of wages and job amenities, all of which are subject to firms' screen-
ing incentives. We consider the amenity subsidy as a potential tool to address screening
distortions because it directly affects the firm's relative profits from hiring a worker of
   22 Although the government commits to the policy ex ante, it can possibly learn the worker's health status

ex post, because employment contracts are perfectly separated by health types in equilibrium. As the model
is static, we do not consider such a case. However, even in a dynamic framework, if the workers' disability
types change over time and the employment contract in the previous period does not fully predict the
realization of disability status this period, the government cannot implement disability-dependent policies.
This is similar to the intuition in the dynamic public finance literature.

                                                     10
specific type. It is possible to incorporate other policy instruments, especially partial dis-
ability insurance, which provides financial benefits to disabled workers even when they
are employed. However, its effect on screening distortions is quite limited.23 We therefore
consider a firm-side disability policy intervention, which is a more direct policy instru-
ment in our context that explicitly incorporates the demand-side responses.
    For an expositional purpose, we describe the main theoretical result in the following
proposition by assuming that workers are risk neutral and there are two health types and
one skill type (so that Dx = D). Although it implies that there is no insurance benefit
of these policies, these policies still serve as a redistribution tool. In Appendix A.3, we
present the proof of the proposition which allows risk-aversion and many worker types.

Proposition 1.

Optimal Policies.
The optimal amenity subsidy rate satisfies

                                  S    1 - C ( a, )          2 ·  1- S
                                     =              +                           ,
                                 1-S      E1- S       C ( a, ) · (1 - S) · E1-S

where E1-S  C(a),1-S + µ(),1-S and 1-S  µ (2 ) a2                                 a2 ,1-S   ( -  2 ) + 2       2 ,1-S   (-2 ) ( 2
and 2 are defined in Equations (3) and (4));

and the optimal DI benefit satisfies

                                                                               2 ·  D
                                     E () =          ~ (), D
                                                     E         +1 +                                ,
                                                                           E () · D ·    ~ (), D
                                                                                         E


where  D  µ (2 ) a2              a2 , D   ( -  2 ) + 2   2 , D   (-2 ).

   The optimal amenity subsidy is determined by three factors.24 First, it depends on
the redistributive motive (insurance role) of the government, captured by C ( a, ), the
concentration of amenity spending per employed worker relative to the redistributive
preference. Second, the optimal subsidy depends on the magnitudes of its distortionary
("behavioral") effects on amenities costs (contracts of employed workers) and employ-
ment rates with respect to the amenity's effective (net-of-subsidy) marginal cost (1 - S),

    23 To
        see this point, we can refer back to Equation (2). Suppose that the government provides the partial
DI benefits to employed disabled workers. Then as long as the job-finding probability is higher in healthier
worker's submarket (h > h-1 ), the partial DI benefit incentivizes disabled workers to enter the non-
disabled's submarket. Overall, introducing the partial DI Program is effective in mitigating the labor supply
disincentive effects of DI, but may not be able to mitigate the screening distortions in the labor market.
   24 The terms are defined as: C ( a, ) =  j  j µ( j )j C ( a j ) ; C ( a, ) = i i µ(i )i C ( ai ) /C ( a, ); all elasticities
                                               j  j µ( j )                         i i µ (  i )
            d log y                                            i µ ( i )                i µ(i )i C ( ai )
 y, x   =   d log x ; ·,1-S    i i   ·,1-S        ¯ ( i ) 
                                             with µ            k k µ(k )
                                                                           ; and i =   k k µ(k )k C ( ak )
                                                                                                           .


                                                                   11
captured by their elasticities C(a),1-S and µ(),1-S (E1-S ). Due to the screening incen-
tives of firms, there is an additional channel (the second term) to be considered, analogous
to the "rat-race" effect in the environment of Stantcheva (2014) driven by screening. Un-
like in Stantcheva (2014), there are two margins of adjustment: its impact on amenities
and employment, magnitudes of which are captured in Equations (3) and (4). Intuitively,
higher subsidies make it more profitable for firms to hire disabled workers who value job
amenities more and thus receive larger job amenities, relaxing the (IC) constraint. Thus,
the presence of screening distortions may generate an additional rationale for increasing
subsidies. Under the utilitarian welfare function, the optimal subsidy rate is zero without
screening.
    Similar effects are present in the optimal determination of DI.25 The optimal DI is set
in order to balance the redistributional (insurance) channel E () with the distortionary
behavioral effect E  ~ (), D . The additional screening channel captures the DI's effect on con-
tract distortions. Higher DI increases the value of the outside option for the disabled, low-
ering the net benefit from entering the non-disabled worker's submarket. Subsequently,
the (IC) constraint is relaxed and screening distortions decrease. Finally, it should be
noted that these economic forces can be strengthened if we also endogenize the labor
force participation decision of workers. Higher DI makes the disabled more likely to
leave the labor market, amplifying the employment distortion. However, such an effect
may relieve the contract distortions on other workers, as they are less likely to enter the
labor market intended for other types.
    It is important to point out the differential roles of job amenity subsidies and DI. First,
their redistributive effects are distinct from each other. The job amenity subsidies induce
redistribution from employed workers to the "employed" disabled. On the other hand,
the DI benefit redistributes resources from employed workers to the "non-employed" dis-
abled. Second, they have different employment effects: while job amenity subsidies may
increase the employment of disabled workers, the DI benefits may decrease it.26 These
considerations highlight the fact that optimal policy design requires the joint analysis of
these two policy instruments.
    Moreover, Proposition 1 underscores the need for recovering the full structure of the
model for quantitative evaluations of the optimal policies. If screening is present, optimal
policies depend not only on easily measurable sufficient statistics, but also on other eco-
nomic variables, such as the marginal utility from job amenities, among others. Our goal
in the remainder of the paper is to conduct a quantitative optimal policy analysis.
   25 The                                  j  j (1-µ( j ))j                i i (1-µ(i ))i
            terms are defined as E () =                       and E () =      i i µ (  i )
                                                                                             / E ().
                                              j  j µ( j )
   26 In an environment in which the verification probability of disability status is interior, subsidizing the
                                                                                   i
firm can potentially be welfare enhancing compared to DI. Since firms are risk-neutral, they can insure the
risk of imperfect verification when they determine employment contracts. On the other hand, risk-averse
workers face the full risk of verification errors when they are offered the DI benefit.

                                                          12
3       Data and Descriptive Evidence

3.1     Data Set
3.1.1    The Health and Retirement Study (HRS)

Our primary data source is the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS is a biennial
panel survey developed in 1992 and consists of more than 20,000 individuals represent-
ing the U.S. population over the age of 50. Among readily available datasets, the HRS
is an appealing one for our purposes for the following two reasons. First, it covers rel-
atively older individuals, who are more likely to be disabled compared with younger
individuals. Second, it provides a wealth of information on disability and job amenities
that are offered to employed workers. Our main empirical analysis considers individuals
between ages 51 and 64 to focus on the population whose labor market outcomes are less
affected by other social insurance programs such as Medicare and Social Security. For
those who work, observations are limited to paid workers in private sectors. We catego-
rize the degree of disability based on two variables: the self-reported work limitation and
the self-reported health evaluation. We consider an individual as non-disabled if he does
not have a work limitation and reports his health status as good, very good, or excellent.
On the other hand, an individual is defined as severely disabled if he has a work limita-
tion and reports his health status as fair or poor. We define all others, those who either
have a work limitation but report being healthy (good, very good, or excellent) or do not
have a work limitation but report being relatively unhealthy (fair or poor), as moderately
disabled. According to our categorization, 15% of workers are severely disabled, 18% are
moderately disabled, and the rest (67%) are non-disabled. In Appendix B, we provide the
disability categories in detail and show that our disability measures are highly positively
correlated with a variety of objective health variables in the HRS.


3.1.2    Screening Tools in the Data

Although there are potentially many screening tools that firms can exploit to screen out
the disabled, we focus on firms' provision of the option to reduce working hours as a
possible screening tool for the following reasons. First, disabled workers may prefer to
have such an option, via paid or unpaid leave, as they face the occasional needs of staying
at home or taking medical care. Moreover, it is easier for firms to adjust this option at
each individual worker-job level to screen out certain workers, in contrast to most stan-
dard non-wage benefits such as employer-based health insurance, which is determined
at the firm level. Crucially for our purposes, this job amenity is not necessarily mandated
under the ADA. Although the ADA requires employers to provide "reasonable" accom-
modations for their employees with disabilities, firms are exempted from this accommo-

                                            13
dation clause if the provision of the accommodation would impose undue hardship on
their business operations (Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 1992).27 In re-
cent court cases, providing the option to reduce working hours or extensive sick leaves
has not been deemed as a reasonable accommodation.28 Thus, compared with other man-
dated accommodations (such as special equipment), it is likely that there are fewer legal
restrictions that prevent firms from using the option to reduce working hours to screen
out disabled workers.
    One may wonder what precisely the option to reduce working hours captures in our
analysis, as there are other similar job characteristics, such as part-time work and flexible
working hours. We think that these are distinct in important dimensions from the option
to reduce working hours. First, it is plausible to hypothesize that longer working hours
yields greater disutility on the disabled, and that part-time work can be interpreted as
the amenity in our framework. However, that workers have the "option" to reduce hours
does not necessarily imply that they are part-time workers, whose contracts are often as-
sociated with wage penalty and fewer fringe benefits. Indeed, in the data, workers with
high (full-time) hours report having the option to reduce working hours.29 Conceptually,
therefore, we interpret the option to reduce working hours as being more consistent with
the notion of job amenity (or non-pecuniary benefit), rather than the actual number of
hours worked. Secondly, having the option to reduce working hours is a specific form
of flexibility at the job that is different from flexible working hours. Usually, jobs with
flexible working hours allow workers to choose when to start and end work, but not nec-
essarily the option to reduce hours through, for example, more generous leave policies.
Thus, we consider the option to reduce working hours as a job amenity that can better ac-
commodate disabled workers at their jobs. Of course, certain non-disabled workers may
also prefer to receive this job amenity to some degree. Ultimately, whether it works as a
screening tool depends on preference heterogeneity between disabled and non-disabled,
which is an empirical question.30
   27 The term "undue hardship" is an action that is "requiring significant difficulty or expense" determined

based on factors including "the type of operation ... including the composition, structure, and functions of
the workforce." (The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-336, § 1, 104 Stat. 331,
retrieved from the U.S. House Library in November 2018)
   28 Recently, several court decisions--e.g., The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission v. Ford Mo-

tor Company (2015) and Williams v. AT&T Mobility Services LLC (2017)--ruled that regular and in-person
attendance is an essential function for the job, and in those decisions, disabled workers' requests for addi-
tional breaks, medical leaves, flexible starting or ending times for medical reasons, or telecommunication
were not considered as reasonable accommodations under the ADA.
   29 Among workers reporting more than 40 hours of work per week, about 29% of them report having the

option to reduce working hours. If we do not condition on hours and consider all employed workers, the
share with the amenity is 32%.
   30 For example, workers with childcare responsibilities may also have a preference for the option to re-

duce working hours. We address this issue by showing that disabled workers prefer the option to reduce
working hours even after controlling for individual-level characteristics. Moreover, we exploit the varia-
tion in the data induced by policy changes that affected firm's profitability of hiring disabled workers to

                                                     14
   The HRS reports several specific amenities related to the workers' ability to reduce
their working hours, such as the option to change from full- to part-time and the avail-
ability of paid sick leaves. Among them, we use the variable "option to reduce work-
ing hours" partly because we suffer from statistical issues if we use other job attributes
available due to a significant missing variable problem.31 . Moreover, it broadly captures
various practices that firms can use, as opposed to more specifically defined amenity vari-
ables.


3.1.3     Summary Statistics

Table 1 documents descriptive statistics for our sample by disability statuses. On average,
while the ages are similar across disability statuses, those with severe disabilities are less
educated. Their labor market performance, as measured by employment, hours worked,
and hourly wage, is worse than their healthier counterparts.

                             Table 1: Descriptive Statistics by Disability Status

                                                                                            Disability status
 Category              Variable                                                                 Moderately               Severely
                                                                                  Non-disabled
                                                                                                  disabled               disabled
 Fraction of population                                                                  0.67               0.18            0.15
 Demographics Age                                                                        58.1               58.6            58.6
                  Female (%)                                                             54.5               56.5            56.8
                  Years of schooling                                                     13.7              12.1            11.4
 Labor market     Employment rate (%)                                                    73.6              47.9             14.3
                  Working hours per week                                                40.6               39.2            37.0
                  Hourly wage ($2014)                                                   17.8               14.5            13.7
                  Weekly earnings ($2014)                                               744.1              582.8           524.7
 Job amenities    Option to reduce working hours (%)                                     32.6              32.6            38.2
                  Available paid sick leave (days)                                      14.2               14.0            18.85
                  Option to change from full- to part-time (%)                           57.5              69.2            67.2
                  Employer-sponsored DI coverage (%)                                    53.2               42.0            42.2
Note: This table reports the summary statistics by disability status, weighted by the individual-level survey weight. Observations are
limited to individuals between ages 51 and 64 from 1996 to 2008, employed in the private sector, which leaves us 42,352 observations
overall. The hourly wage rate is written in 2014 U.S. dollars using the CPI. Wage rates lower than $4 are dropped, and the top 5%
of wage observations are truncated. Earnings are constructed using the individual-level information on hourly wage and working
hours.


    Importantly, we find that workers with different disability statuses sort into jobs with
different job amenities. Disabled workers tend to work at jobs that provide the option to
discipline firm's screening incentives specific to disabled workers.
   31 We focus on job amenities that could be related to the work preferences of the disabled but are not

mandated under the ADA. The HRS also asks employed respondents with a reported work limitation
whether they receive any types of accommodations from their employers. These accommodation measures
include, but are not limited to, access to special equipment, special transportation, help in learning new
skills, and changes in job duties or tasks. However, individuals who do not report a work limitation are not
asked whether they receive these accommodations.

                                                                 15
modify or reduce work schedule. For example, disabled workers are more likely to work
at jobs that provide the option to reduce working hours, that allow them to change from
full- to part-time positions, or that offer more sick leaves. They are, however, less likely
to work at jobs providing employer-sponsored disability insurance. Although these sum-
mary statistics do not control for worker or firm characteristics, we view the correlation
between job amenities and disability status as indicative of the preference heterogeneity
between disabled and non-disabled workers. In the next section, we also show that this
relationship becomes stronger after we control for worker and firm characteristics.


3.2    Descriptive Evidence
Before implementing the structural estimation of our model, we provide suggestive ev-
idence that the option to reduce working hours may be used as a screening tool. The
basic idea is to exploit plausibly exogenous policy variations that affect firms' relative
profits from hiring a disabled worker compared with a non-disabled worker. Then, we
derive testable predictions of the policy effects from screening models that are distinct
from those from models without screening contracts. As such policies influence firms'
screening incentives, the provision of the screening amenity would change in response.
    We specifically consider two labor-demand-side policy changes in the U.S. Our first
policy variation is the 2004 amendment to the Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC)
program. This policy provides a lump-sum tax credit to firms hiring workers from tar-
get groups, which include disabled workers. Employers receive an annual tax credit,
which usually amounts to $2,400, approximately the annual wage difference between
the severely disabled and moderately disabled.32 We exploit changes in eligibility for
disabled workers, which were implemented in 2004 and subsequently increased employ-
ment certificates for the disabled by 35%. As detailed in Appendix C.1, this policy can
have a meaningful impact on firms' profitabilities from hiring disabled workers, espe-
cially among old-age new hires. Our second policy variation is the ADA Amendments
Act of 2008 (ADAAA), which broadens the definition of disabilities that are subject to
the ADA. After 2008, individuals with health conditions such as mental illness, cancer,
diabetes, and HIV/AIDS became eligible to claim protection under the ADA.33 Although
these policy changes may not provide perfect experimental settings, as discussed in Ap-
pendix C.2, they are exogenous variations that affected firms' relative profits from hiring
disabled workers so as to potentially change their behaviors.
    Now, we discuss the main testable predictions from the standard screening models
(e.g., Akerlof, 1976, Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976, and ours) that are distinct from models
  32 Given  the the statistics reported in Table 1, their annual wage difference is approximately $2,900 (
($582.8 - $524.7) × 50) if we assume that both work full-time.
   33 Our sample years for the ADAAA analysis are from 2004 to 2014.



                                                   16
without screening contracts. The expansion of the WOTC in 2004 increased the chance for
firms to receive lump-sum transfers when they hire severely disabled workers.34 Firms
then face higher relative profits from hiring severely disabled workers, thereby increasing
the equilibrium provision of moderately disabled workers' job amenities because there is
less incentive to screen out severely disabled workers (i.e., the (IC) constraint for moder-
ately disabled worker's contract is relaxed). The impact on the job amenity level of the
most severely disabled can be negligible because lump-sum transfers do not affect the
marginal benefit or cost of amenities, and the (IC) is unaffected.35 '36 On the other hand,
the expansion of eligibility for the ADA in the ADAAA can adversely affect firms' profits
from hiring workers with disabilities, thereby increasing firms' incentives to screen out
the disabled. In this case, one would expect that job amenities for healthier workers af-
ter 2008 would decline in order to screen out disabled workers in response to the policy
change. Importantly, both predictions are specific to screening models. In the standard
competitive equilibrium without screening contracts, we should not expect any effects for
those workers who are not directly affected by these policy changes.
    Building on these predictions, our main empirical specification for testing whether
firms use the option to reduce working hours to screen out the disabled is given by

       yit =  1 IPost +                    2h Ih +                  3h IPost Ih +  X it +  Z t +  it .   (5)
                            h{mod, sev}              h{mod, sev}


The dependent variable (yit ) is whether the job provides the option to reduce working
hours for an individual i in year t, which is a binary variable in our data (yit  {0, 1}).
The individual-level control variables in X it include employees' demographics, objective
health measures (e.g., disease prevalence and body mass index), and firm and occupation
characteristics. The vector Z t is the set of control variables for macroeconomic condi-
tions. We control for these individual and firm characteristics to account for many factors
affecting the variation in job amenities unrelated to disability. In particular, by includ-
ing health-related measures, we are able to control for the heterogeneities within each
disability group. Although we include many individual characteristics as possible (see
Appendix C.3), we do not include the individual fixed effect despite the panel structure
of the HRS. We refrain from using a fixed effect because the disability status of an indi-

  34 We   view that this interpretation is plausible because the WOTC expansion is available to individuals
who were already identified by the government as disabled.
   35 In particular, if workers are risk-neutral, the lump-sum transfer from the WOTC does not affect the

magnitude of equilibrium job amenities of the most severely disabled type (see Equation (3)). If individuals
are risk-averse, the marginal benefit from additional job amenities depends on the marginal utility from
consumption that may be affected by the WOTC. As long as this effect is small (i.e., if individuals are not
too risk averse or if the consumption increase from the WOTC is small), the prediction still holds.
   36 This implication is true based on our assumption that workers cannot privately purchase these job

amenities outside the labor market.

                                                     17
vidual is highly persistent with limited variations.
    Our parameter of interest is  3h , which is the coefficient on the interaction term be-
tween the disability status dummy (Ih ) and the post-policy-change dummy (IPost ). The
coefficient captures the disability-specific impact of the policy relative to non-disabled
workers, after controlling for the post-amendment effect (  1 ) and disability effect (  2h ).
Importantly, in the presence of screening, all workers in the labor market may be impacted
by the policy change.
    Table 2 summarizes our regression results on the option to reduce working hours for
the WOTC amendment.37 We use the observations between the years 1996 and 2008 to
avoid the confounding effects of ADAAA which became effective in 2009.38 Column (1)
reports the main estimates from the linear probability model of Equation (5) based on all
employed workers. First, there are significant differences in the provision of the option
to reduce working hours across disability statuses (coefficient  2h ). This pattern is much
more significant compared with that in Table 1, which documents the raw correlation
without controlling for any other characteristics. Second, we find that the coefficient of
the moderately disabled interacted with post-amendment (coefficient  3h ) is positive and
statistically significant, while it is small and insignificant for severely disabled workers. 39
Column (2) reports the results from the analysis after restricting the sample to newly em-
ployed workers, whose compensation packages may be more affected by firms' screening
incentives. Interestingly, we find that the change in job amenities among the moderately
disabled arising from the WOTC is much larger among these newly hired workers.40


    Table 2: Effects of the WOTC Amendment on the Option to Reduce Working Hours
                                                                         Option to reduce working hours
            Coefficients
                                                                     (1) All employed       (2) New hires
            Post-amendment (  1 )                                    -0.014      (0.058)         0.032      (0.069)
            Disability status (  2h )             Severe             0.206       (0.056)         0.215      (0.082)
                                                  Moderate           0.080 (0.031)               0.048      (0.046)
            Disability status                     Severe             0.014       (0.064)         0.025      (0.103)
            × Post-amendment (  3h )              Moderate           0.068       (0.034)         0.126      (0.055)
            Sample size                                                     8,541                      3,329
Note: We estimate Equation (5) with the linear probability model using samples between 1996 and 2008. The additional covariates used
in the regression are age, age-squared, years of education, annual growth rate of GDP, annual employment rates, firm-size category
dummies, and health outcomes. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

   37 See Appendix C.1.4 for evidence that workers with different disability statuses experienced similar
trends on their amenities before the WOTC amendment.
    38 Our empirical results are robust when we use sample years of up to 2006 (to avoid the early effects of

the Great Recession) as shown in Appendix C.
    39 Note that our estimated coefficients for severely disabled tend to have a large standard error due to the

small observations of those who are severely disabled and employed in our data. However, the magnitudes
of the point estimates are robust with respect to many different specifications, as reported in Appendix C.1.
    40 We define a subsample of newly hired workers as workers with less than two years of employment

tenure for the same employer.

                                                                18
    In Appendix C.1, we further document the impact of policies on other labor market
outcomes and other job amenities. We find that there are no statistically significant im-
pacts on employment for both severely and moderately disabled, mitigating a concern for
selection effects. The wage of the severely disabled marginally increases, consistent with
predictions of the screening model.41 We conduct a number of robustness analyses to
examine whether these results are driven by additional compositional changes (selection
effects) in disabled workers; the particular categorization of disability; the gender-based
preference heterogeneity; and the trends in DI enrollment. In Appendix C.1, we show
that our results are robust with respect to these concerns.
    In the case of the ADAAA, we find that the provision of the option to reduce work-
ing hours decreases for the moderately disabled after the policy implementation, as the
screening incentives of firms increased. We describe these details in Appendix C.2. Over-
all, these findings suggest that firms might be strategically using the option to reduce
working hours as a screening tool.


4     Estimation

4.1     Identification and Estimation
We now discuss the identification and estimation of our equilibrium screening model.
Given the suggestive evidence in the previous section, we use the option to reduce work-
ing hours in the data as the measure of job amenity in the model. The key challenge in our
estimation lies in separately identifying the cost of providing the job amenity (C ( a)) and
its utility value to workers ( ( a)). We address this challenge by exploiting the variation
in data induced by the demand-side policy change introduced in Section 3.2. We then
estimate the model through an indirect inference procedure.
    It should be emphasized that our structural estimation does not necessarily impose the
presence of screening in the labor market. Depending on model parameters, the model
may predict that the equilibrium contracts are equivalent to those in the absence of screen-
ing; that is, the equilibrium health-dependent contracts can be incentive compatible for
all types of workers in the economy. Our goal is, therefore, to find the parameters that
best fit the data, allowing for screening contracts to arise in equilibrium.


Functional Forms. The production function of a worker with health type h and skill
type x is represented by f h,x = f h × x, which assumes complementarity between health

    41 While the studies of the WOTC are very limited, Hamersma (2008) reports similar impacts on employ-
ment and wages as ours, using Wisconsin data on a subset of the WOTC-eligible target groups (welfare
recipients).

                                                   19
and skill. Consistent with our empirical analysis, there are three health types of workers,
where h = 1 denotes severely disabled workers and h = 3 denotes non-disabled workers.
We assume that the skill types, which are assumed to be observable by firms, are assumed
to be unobservable by econometricians. The skill type x is drawn from a log-Normal dis-
tribution with mean -h   2 /2 and health-dependent variance 2 .42
                                                               h
    We assume that workers' preferences over consumption are represented by a log util-
ity function u (c) = log c. To specify the primitives related to job amenities, we first
assume that each firm chooses a probability to offer an option to reduce working hours,
implying a  [0, 1]. This makes the moments from the model comparable to those in the
data: while the model treats a as a continuous variable, the option to reduce working
hours in the data is based on the respondents' answers to a binary question. Utility from
                                                                 
job amenities is specified by  ( a) = 1 - ( a - 1)2 with   (0, 1), which is concave
and satisfies lima0  ( a) =  and lima1  ( a) = 0. The cost function for amenities is
represented by C ~ ( a) = c0 + c1 a (1/ (1 - a) - 1)c2 , in which the parameter c0 represents
the fixed cost of providing the job amenities,43 c1 , the scale, and c2 , the convexity of the
cost function. Under this parametric assumption, the marginal cost of amenities satisfy
lima0 C ~ ( a) = 0 and lima1 C  ~ ( a) = . We assume a constant elasticity of substitution
(CES) function for the job-finding rate with parameter , so that µ ( ) =  (1 +   )-1/ .


Externally Calibrated Parameters. The health distribution in the economy (h ) is 15%,
18%, and 67% for severely, moderately, and non-disabled workers, respectively. The
health-skill type distribution of workers is determined jointly by h and h       2 , the latter

of which is estimated within the model. We set the parameter  in the job-finding rate to
0.4 to produce an empirically reasonable job-finding elasticity.44
    Following Low and Pistaferri (2015), we set the government's disability verification
probability (h ) to be 0.62 for the severely disabled, 0.18 for the moderately disabled, and
0.075 for non-disabled workers.45 We assume that DI benefit amounts are determined as
   42 We discretize the distribution into the support with five grid points, Nx = 5, implying that there are
up to 3 × Nx submarkets in the labor market.
   43 Note that the parameter c can also be interpreted as a fixed hiring cost by imposing boundary condi-
                                0
tions. We incorporate this parameter to improve the model fit, as discussed in footnote 47.
   44 Given our choice of , the weighted average of the elasticities across health types is around 0.2, which

is within the range of values used in the literature. Menzio and Shi (2011) adopts the same CES function
in a directed search environment and calibrates the parameter  by targeting the empirical elasticity of
the unemployment-to-employment transition with respect to the vacancy-to-unemployment ratio ( ). In a
model with no search by employed workers (which is a similar environment to ours, among the models
considered in their paper), their calibrated value for  is 0.25. Alternatively, using the Cobb-Douglas func-
tion, Shimer (2005) calibrates the elasticity parameter to the estimated coefficient 0.28 from a regression of
(log) job-finding probability on (log)  .
   45 Low and Pistaferri (2015) structurally estimates these parameters as the DI receipt probability using

the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. We use their values estimated for old workers (ages 45­62). They
categorize disabled workers using the work limitation and the degree of limitation, among which the latter
is missing in the HRS. More recently, Low and Pistaferri (2019) estimate the error rates in DI award process

                                                     20
a constant fraction d of the average productivity among workers of the same skill level, as
they depend on the average of the worker's previous earnings in the U.S. We use d = 0.6
as the benchmark replacement rate.46 There are also two parameters that affect the value
of not working: the value of home production (bx ) and the health-dependent fixed costs
of work (h ). The existing literature usually does not estimate them separately, especially
in models with linear utility function as it is impossible to do so. Instead, following the
literature, we externally set bx to be 10% (b = 0.1) of the average productivity of the
worker's skill level. We choose the value lower than those typically used in search and
matching literature (e.g., b = 0.4 in Shimer, 2005 and b = 0.7 in Lise and Robin, 2017),
as we also model other components affecting the value of non-employment, such as the
DI benefit and the disutility of work. Under these parameters, the expected consumption
of non-employed severely disabled individual is 47% (b + h d = 0.1 + 0.62 × 0.6) of the
average productivity of his skill.

Identification. The parameters to be estimated within the model are the net output
levels by health statuses perceived by firms { f h }; the health-specific preferences for job
amenities {  h }; the curvature of the amenity utility function ; the health-specific fixed
disutility from work {h }; the health-dependent variance of the skill ( x) distribution
  h 2 ; the parameters governing the level and curvature of the cost of providing job

amenities {c0 , c1 , c2 }; and the vacancy posting cost  . We normalize non-disabled work-
ers' fixed disutility from work to zero (3 = 0) and their preference for amenities to one
(  3 = 1), leaving 15 parameters to be estimated.
     The key parameters related with screening are the worker-side preference parameters
on job amenities ({  h } and ) and the firm-side job amenity cost parameters ({c0 , c1 , c2 }).
As discussed in Section 2.3, the magnitude of the job amenity is set to reflect the (IC)
constraint if it binds (Equation (2)); and if not, it is determined by the marginal utility
and the marginal cost of job amenities (Equation (3)). To separately identify worker-side
and firm-side parameters, we exploit the variation in data induced by the policy change
of the 2004 WOTC amendment, as discussed in Section 3.2. Importantly, the lump-sum
tax credit given to firms only affects the firm's profitability of hiring disabled workers.
by merging the HRS with administrative data. The authors find that false rejections occur 55% among the DI
applicants, which is similar in magnitude of our calibrated parameters. Although not perfect, these are the
most relevant estimates for the parameter in the literature. Further, while we take these values exogenously,
they yield empirically reasonable DI recipient rates; in 2016, DI recipients in the U.S. ranged between 6.4%
and 14.5% among workers aged 50­64 (Social Security Advisory Board), and our model predicts that 11%
of workers receive DI.
   46 We do not explicitly model the DI benefit as a function of equilibrium wages because it requires solv-

ing a fixed point problem, as the DI benefits are determined endogenously as equilibrium objects, and
would be computationally demanding. Khan et al. (2017) use the HRS to find a large variation in effective
replacement rates; the average replacement rate of SSDI is between 55 and 77%, with the standard devi-
ation between 17 and 57%. Using a lower replacement rate d does not affect our overall qualitative and
quantitative results.

                                                     21
Thus, it induces changes in job amenities driven by the labor demand side through a
screening mechanism.47 '48 The remaining parameters are identified in a straightforward
manner. The cross-sectional variations in wages and employment rates across workers
                              2 . Our normalization of the fixed cost of work for the non-
identify parameters f h , h , h
disabled allows us to identify the vacancy posting cost  , the parameter that also affects
employment rates.


Estimation Strategy. We estimate these parameters via indirect inference by consider-
ing the following set of moments in the auxiliary model: (i) the mean and coefficient
of variation of wages by disability status; (ii) employment rate by disability status; (iii)
the proportion of individuals with the option to reduce working hours; and (iv) regres-
sion coefficients on the option to reduce working hours presented in Section 3.2 (i.e., the
coefficients reported in Column 1 of Table 2). These moments are chosen to reflect our
identification discussion. We form the objective function for our estimation as

                              ^ = arg max 
                                          ^ () -  W ^ () -  ,
                                          


where W is the weighting matrix,  is a vector of auxiliary model parameters computed
from the data, and   ^ () is a vector of the corresponding auxiliary model parameters
obtained from simulating datasets from the model (parameterized by a particular struc-
tural parameter vector ).49 To simulate model-based moments, we need to model the
WOTC amendment. We assume that a firm hiring a severely disabled worker, after be-
ing qualified with probability h , receives a lump-sum transfer amounting to 30% of the
income of severely disabled workers, consistent with the average amount of transfers al-
lowed to firms.50 This implies that any post-amendment changes in the job amenities of

   47 We  can identify the parameter c0 through this variation because changes in job amenities due to the
WOTC in the model are affected by the marginal utility of consumption (due to risk aversion) and the
incentive compatibility constraints.
   48 In practice, the provisions of the option to reduce working hours may be affected by several factors,

such as additional (unobserved) worker heterogeneity, which we do not explicitly model. Without explicitly
accounting for these heterogeneities, our estimates of the cost of job amenity provisions may be biased.
However, importantly, the main source of the variation in the data we use to identify the cost parameters is
the labor-demand-side policy change for disabled workers. Therefore, as long as we focus on policy design
exercises similar to the actual policies used in the estimation, the impact of the misspecification is likely to
be minimal.
   49 Our weighting matrix on the estimators W is essentially based on the inverse of the variance-

covariance matrix of empirical moments, assigning zero to all the off-diagonal elements. As there are
substantial differences between the weights on moments from the regression analysis and weights on cross-
sectional moments, we put additional weights on cross-sectional moments to ensure similarity in their mag-
nitudes. Finally, we assign the weight of one to the coefficient of variation of earnings. Because of the small
sample size concern, we do not use the optimal weighting matrix in our estimation (Altonji and Segal,
1996).
   50 The minimum hours worked to qualify for $2,400 tax credit is 400 hours, and the average annual

working hours in the U.S. is 1,780 hours. Given the hourly wage of severely disabled workers from the

                                                      22
workers who are not severely disabled are driven solely by screening in our model.51 We
obtain the standard errors of our estimators based on the asymptotic variance, following
Gourieroux et al. (1993).52


4.2    Estimation Results



                          Table 3: Parameters Estimated within the Model
                                      Estimate (Std. Err.)   Estimate   (Std. Err.)   Estimate   (Std. Err.)
 (a) Health-dependent worker-side parameters
                                       Severely Disabled     Moderately Disabled         Non-Disabled
 Net output: f h                       2.343      (0.016)     2.700     (0.035)        3.107     (0.043)
 Preference for job amenities:  h      8.712      (0.227)     2.892     (0.395)        1.0 (normalized)
 Fixed cost of work: h                 5.313      (0.139)     2.325     (0.226)        0.0 (normalized)
 Variance of skill distribution: h  2  1.773      (0.105)     0.361     (0.004)        0.417     (0.068)
 (b) Other worker-side parameters
 Curvature in utility
                                       0.762      (0.134)
 from job amenities: 
 (c) Firm-side parameters
 Const. in the cost C ( a): c0         1.341      (0.128)
 Coeff. on a in the cost C ( a): c1    1.115      (0.062)
 Curvature in the cost C ( a): c2      2.031      (0.596)
 Vacancy cost:                         0.001     (0.0003)


    The estimated structural parameters are summarized in Table 3 and the model fit is
presented in Table 4. Our estimates indicate that disability affects worker productivities
and their preferences for job amenities. For example, we find that there is a 25% (1 -
2.343
3.107 ) net output loss perceived by firms for the severely disabled relative to the non-
disabled, conditional on the skill type x. Moreover, the severely disabled have a higher
fixed cost of work and have a greater preference for job amenities compared to the non-
disabled. Thus, in order for severely disabled workers to participate in the labor market,

data, $2,400 is between 10% and 40% of their income.
    51 Although this may be a stronger assumption on the policy than the one in Section 3.2, we make this

assumption for the following reasons. First, we can avoid overestimating the role of screening in our coun-
terfactual experiments. By explaining all the variation of amenities for these workers through the screening
mechanism, the estimated degree of preference heterogeneities, the key driver of screening contracts, is
smaller. Thus, our counterfactual experiments will be implemented with a lower bound on the role of
screening. Second, it makes the mapping between the model and data clearer, as elaborated in Section 4.1.
    52 We calculate the variance-covariance moments of  through bootstrapping. Note that our equilibrium

model is not necessarily globally smooth with respect to the structural parameters because of the discrete-
ness of outcomes induced by labor force participation decisions and incentive compatibility constraints in
the optimal employment contracts. We do, however, find that our objective function is locally smooth near
the estimated parameters and thus decide to obtain the standard errors by calculating the score function of
 ^ () numerically.


                                                    23
it is essential for them to receive sufficient amounts of job amenities. From the firm's
perspective, the cost of providing additional job amenity is reasonably important. Based
on our estimates, the difference in amenity costs between firms hiring an average-skill
severely disabled worker and firms hiring an average-skill moderately disabled amounts
to 16% of the average wage among employed.
    The model is able to fit the most salient qualitative features in both the cross-sectional
heterogeneity of wage and employment and the regression coefficients on job amenities
documented in Table 2. Importantly, the auxiliary model generates an insignificant ef-
fect of the WOTC amendment on severely disabled workers' job amenities (coefficient
Post × Severe), but a significant change in the provision of amenities for moderately dis-
abled workers (coefficient Post × Moderate), consistent with the results from the empiri-
cal analysis. Other coefficients also lie within the ranges of the confidence intervals from
the empirical analysis.


                                                  Table 4: Model Fit
   (a) Labor market outcomes by disability                                (b) Job amenities
   Statistics                       Data                 Model            Statistics            Data              Model
   Employment                                                             Average job amenities
   Severely disabled                0.143                0.148            All workers           0.329              0.338
   Moderately disabled              0.479                0.508
   Non-disabled                     0.736                0.740            WOTC coefficients on job amenities
   Average wage                                                           Post                 -0.014      0.010
   Severely disabled                1.000                0.916            Severe               0.206       0.218
   Moderately disabled              1.111                1.215            Moderate             0.080       0.092
   Non-disabled                     1.418                1.330            Post × Severe        0.014      -0.010
   Coefficient of wage variation                                          Post × Moderate      0.068       0.046
   Severely disabled                0.703                0.258
   Moderately disabled              0.646                0.366
   Non-disabled                     0.611                0.530
Note: This table compares the model-generated statistics to their empirical counterparts. We normalize the average wage of the
severely disabled to 1.



External Validation of the Model. While our model is able to match the targeted mo-
ments well, it is important to ensure that the model also generates an empirically plausi-
ble response to policy changes. In particular, as one of our key policies of interest is the
generosity of DI, we first evaluate the employment effects of DI in the estimated model
(which were not targeted) and compare the results to those in the empirical studies.
   Recent developments in the DI literature have uncovered the size of labor supply dis-
incentive effects of DI using exogenous variations in the DI application processes. Among
them, Maestas et al. (2013) finds that marginal applicants are 28 percentage point ( pp)
more likely to work in the absence of the DI program. Further, these effects are het-


                                                             24
erogeneous across DI applicants and range from no effect to 50 pp. Given the estimated
parameters, we simulate the economy without DI and compare the employment effects
of the model to empirical estimates from Maestas et al. (2013).
    In our simulated model, the removal of DI leads the overall employment rate to in-
crease by 1.36 pp. In Appendix D, we conduct a back-of-the-envelope calculation to es-
timate the overall employment effect of DI implied from the estimates of Maestas et al.
(2013) and find that the average employment in the economy without DI is 2.68 pp higher.
Furthermore, depending on the skill and health statuses, the employment effects in our
model also similarly range between 0.3 pp and 47 pp. This result thus shows the model's
ability to generate empirically plausible DI impacts on the employment rate.


4.3   Mechanisms
Without screening, contracts are independently determined for each skill and health type
in equilibrium. However, labor market composition affects type-specific contracts when
firms screen. In Table 5, we illustrate this by comparing the equilibrium outcomes in
the economy with and without screening contracts under the estimated parameters. As
predicted by the model, in the screening economy, job amenities are under-provided to
moderately disabled and non-disabled workers. Instead, these workers are compensated
with higher employment rates and wages than in the economy without screening.


Table 5: Equilibrium in the Model without Screening (No-Scr.) and with Screening (Scr.)
                              Job amenities               Wage          Employment
                             No-Scr.     Scr.        No-Scr.   Scr.    No-Scr.  Scr.
      Severely disabled       0.506     0.506        0.916     0.916   0.148    0.148
      Moderately disabled     0.432     0.400        1.144     1.215   0.506    0.508
      Non-disabled            0.347     0.283        1.269     1.330   0.738    0.740


    While Table 5 documents the outcomes by health statuses averaged over the skill dis-
tribution within the health status, the degree of distortions may vary with a worker's skill
level and participation decisions of disabled workers. In Table 6, we report job amenity
levels by skill and health statuses. Given our estimates, we find that both severely and
moderately disabled workers near the bottom tail of the skill distribution (labeled as
Lowest-skilled worker in Table 6) choose not to participate in the labor market. In this
case, non-disabled workers are the lowest type in the labor market. However, even in
such case, they receive fewer job amenities to deter the moderately disabled workers
from entering the non-disabled workers' labor market.




                                                25
                             Table 6: Skill Heterogeneity and Screening
                                                              Job amenities
                               Lowest-skilled worker        Average worker            Highest-skilled worker
                               No-Scr.        Scr.          No-Scr.      Scr.         No-Scr.         Scr.
    Severely disabled             -              -           0.460       0.460         0.523        0.523
    Moderately disabled           -              -           0.414       0.384         0.469        0.429
    Non-disabled                0.285          0.269         0.351       0.276         0.402        0.316


     On the other hand, workers may decide to work regardless of their disability statuses
if their market productivities are sufficiently high. For these skill groups (labeled Average
worker and Highest-skilled worker in Table 6), firms' incentives to screen disabled work-
ers are higher, and the equilibrium contract distortions are larger; moderately disabled
workers receive between 3 pp (7%) and 4 pp (9%) fewer amenities relative to workers in the
economy without screening. These heterogeneous effects on moderately disabled work-
ers further trickle down to non-disabled workers. While low-skilled non-disabled work-
ers receive 1.6 pp (5.5%) fewer amenities than the amount they would have received in
the no-screening economy, the distortionary effect is larger for workers with higher skills
that ranges between 7.5 pp (21%) and 8.6 pp (21%). These results suggest the presence of
heterogeneity in the labor market effects of screening frictions across worker types, which
depends on the participation decisions of disabled workers.53


5      Quantitative Policy Experiments
Using the estimated structural model, we conduct counterfactual policy experiments.
Given the exogenous disability verification technology (h ), we consider the effects of
two policies--the generosity of DI replacement rate (d) and the (proportional) subsidy
to firms for the costs of providing amenities (S)--by varying these policy parameters
jointly and independently. The policy parameters under the benchmark economy are a
60% DI replacement rate and a 0% amenity subsidy rate. We ensure that our counter-
factual policy experiments are implemented as budget-neutral policy reforms (relative to
the benchmark economy) within similar skill groups by allowing the government to use
a proportional wage tax (subsidy). This approach better captures the role of policies in
providing redistribution across workers of different disability statuses, rather than pro-


    53 This may have differential implications on policy design across skill types.
                                                                                 Since high-skilled, severely
disabled workers are more likely to work regardless of DI benefits, firm subsidies may be more effective in
addressing screening distortions among high-skilled workers. On the other hand, for low-skilled individ-
uals, the joint choice of DI and firm subsidies matter because their extensive labor supply margins may be
more responsive to DI, which affects the extent of screening distortions. In our optimal joint policy design
analysis, we therefore focus on low-skilled workers.

                                                       26
viding redistribution across disability statuses and skills.54 As discussed in Section 2.4,
some of the key determinants of optimal policy structure are the policy impacts on the
employment rate and the level of amenity, as well as the screening incentives. In the fol-
lowing, we first discuss equilibrium effects of policies and then characterize the welfare
effects of the policy reforms.


5.1    Equilibrium Effects of Policies
Allocative Effects. In Figure 1, we plot labor market equilibrium allocations for severely
disabled workers under different policy combinations. The x-axis represents the DI re-
placement rate (d), and the three lines in each plot correspond to subsidy rates (S) of
0%, 5%, and 15%.55 Under the amenity subsidy rate of S, the firm's net cost of provid-
ing amenities equals (1 - S) C ( a), effectively lowering the marginal cost of amenities.
In the left panel of Figure 1, we plot the amount of job amenities provided to severely
disabled workers under the joint policy parameters, and in the right panel, we plot the
employment rates of severely disabled workers. We observe, first, that as the subsidy
rate increases, severely disabled workers' contracts feature higher job amenities, increas-
ing their value of employment. Consequently, the employment rates of severely disabled
workers increase, as shown in the right panel of Figure 1. On the other hand, as DI
becomes more generous, the labor supply disincentives increase, which reduces employ-
ment rates and sometimes drives severely disabled workers completely out of the labor
force at high replacement rates. Importantly, the cutoff level of DI above which severely
disabled workers do not participate in the labor market is lower when the amenity sub-
sidy rate is smaller. This employment effect suggests a possible complementarity be-
tween these disability policies. Simultaneous expansion of amenity subsidy and DI can
undo distortionary employment effects by the other.
    Figure 2 illustrates the equilibrium job amenities for moderately disabled (left panel)
and non-disabled (right panel) workers. As the amenity subsidy directly lowers the
marginal cost of amenities (albeit at lower expected rates due to verification probabilities),
healthier workers in the labor market are also likely to benefit from higher amenities.56
   54 We group the two lowest skill types (among five) together, totaling about 48% of workers in the model.

We focus on the results from the low-skill groups as they are more likely to be affected by disabilities and
related policies, which is often the approach taken in the disability literature (e.g., Low and Pistaferri, 2015).
The qualitative results are consistent with our benchmark findings when we use all workers.
   55 In the current model under the benchmark policy, firms have the incentives to screen out disabled

workers. If subsidies for disabled workers are very generous, however, it is possible that firms might
prefer hiring disabled workers over non-disabled workers, which may not be plausible. Also, in such a
case, the monotonicity assumption discussed in Section 2.2 is violated, and the existence and uniqueness
of the equilibrium cannot be guaranteed. Therefore, we restrict the amenity subsidy parameter in the
counterfactual analyses to meet necessary conditions for equilibrium analysis, so that firms' incentives (to
screen out disabled workers) are similarly aligned with those in the benchmark economy.
   56 Note that the monotonic relationship between amenities and subsidy rates (for a fixed DI) may not



                                                       27
                Figure 1: Labor Market Equilibrium for Severely Disabled Workers
                                               Severely Disabled                                                             Severely Disabled
                               0.5                                                                         0.025
                                                                                                                                                 Subsidy 0%
                                                                                                                                                 Subsidy 5%
                                                                                                                                                 Subsidy 15%
                               0.4                                                                          0.02




                                                                                         Employment Rate
               Job Amenities
                               0.3                                                                         0.015


                               0.2                                                                          0.01


                               0.1                                                                         0.005
                                                                    Subsidy 0%
                                                                    Subsidy 5%
                                                                    Subsidy 15%
                                 0                                                                             0
                                 0.3   0.4     0.5    0.6    0.7      0.8         0.9                          0.3   0.4     0.5    0.6    0.7     0.8         0.9
                                             DI Replacement Rate                                                           DI Replacement Rate



Further, as DI becomes more generous, the combination of a higher outside option and
the relaxation of the (IC) constraint induces an increase in job amenities (for a fixed sub-
sidy rate). These equilibrium changes are driven by both the skill-compositional effects
and intensive responses of contracts to policy reforms. For example, under 15% subsidy
rate, moderately disabled workers of all skill types decide to work if DI replacement rate
is lower than 45%. However, as DI becomes more generous (higher than 45%), lower-
skilled workers decide to drop out of the labor force. As the relatively higher-skilled
workers remain in the labor market, the average job amenities of moderately disabled
workers increases. Similar effects are present for non-disabled workers.

     Figure 2: Labor Market Equilibrium for Moderately and Non-Disabled Workers
                                              Moderately Disabled                                                              Non-Disabled
                            0.36                                                                            0.29


                            0.35                                                                            0.28

                                                                                                            0.27
                            0.34
            Job Amenities




                                                                                                            0.26
                            0.33
                                                                                                            0.25
                            0.32
                                                                                                            0.24

                            0.31                                    Subsidy 0%
                                                                                                            0.23
                                                                    Subsidy 5%
                                                                    Subsidy 15%
                               0.3                                                                          0.22
                                 0.3   0.4     0.5    0.6     0.7     0.8         0.9                          0.3   0.4     0.5    0.6    0.7     0.8         0.9
                                             DI Replacement Rate                                                           DI Replacement Rate




Effects on Screening Distortions. In the presence of screening contracts, the decisions
of disabled workers impact the equilibrium outcomes of other workers in the labor mar-

hold for moderately disabled workers. Several factors are in play for the determination of the equilibrium
job amenity on top of its marginal cost, which include the marginal utility of consumption (due to risk
aversion in the utility function) and the firm's incentives to screen (the strength of the (IC) constraint).
These combined effects lie behind the job amenities of workers in the economy.

                                                                                        28
ket. Here, we discuss how policies affect the screening incentives of firms, and thus the
degree of distortions in the contracts of moderately and non-disabled workers in equilib-
rium.
    In Figure 3, we plot the equilibrium job amenities in an economy without screening
along with those in the screening economy, for moderately disabled workers (left panel)
and non-disabled workers (right panel) of the higher skill type.57 The amenities with-
out screening are plotted as a dashed line, and with screening, a solid line. We observe
that when the DI replacement rate is low, the contract distortions for moderately disabled
workers are high: the difference between the level of amenities in an economy without
screening and with screening is substantial. Fixing the subsidy rate, the distortionary ef-
fects on amenities decrease as DI becomes more generous. While DI reduces the work
incentives of severely disabled workers (as shown in Figure 1), it simultaneously relaxes
the (IC) constraint on moderately disabled workers' contracts. Put differently, severely
disabled workers have less of an incentive to mimic healthier workers because they have
a higher outside option with more generous DI. Thus, DI affects contracts for the mod-
erately disabled, not only by increasing their own outside option, but also through the
change in the contracts and labor force participation incentives of severely disabled work-
ers.58 This effect of DI on the labor market is novel in our framework because we specifi-
cally incorporate and estimate the role of screening in equilibrium.

        Figure 3: Labor Market Equilibrium: Without Screening and With Screening
                                             Moderately Disabled                                            Non-Disabled
                              0.4                                                         0.34


                                                                                          0.32
                             0.38

                                                                                           0.3
             Job Amenities




                             0.36
                                                                                          0.28
                             0.34
                                                                                          0.26
                                                     Sub. 0%, Screening
                             0.32                    Sub. 0%, w/o Screening               0.24
                                                     Sub. 15%, Screening
                                                     Sub. 15%, w/o Screening
                              0.3                                                         0.22
                                0.3   0.4    0.5     0.6    0.7     0.8        0.9           0.3   0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7     0.8   0.9
                                            DI Replacement Rate                                          DI Replacement Rate


    Now, we study the effect of increasing job amenity subsidies by setting the amenity
subsidy rate to be 15%. In this case, the contract distortions on moderately disabled work-
ers are smaller. For a fixed DI replacement rate (e.g., 30%), the difference between screen-
ing and no-screening lines is smaller under a 15% subsidy rate compared to a no-subsidy
   57 The labor market contracts of severely disabled workers are equivalent in the presence and absence of
screening upon participation.
   58 For the lowest skill type, the effects of policies on screening distortions are larger. In the absence of

amenity subsidies, even the moderately disabled workers drop out of the labor force as DI becomes more
generous, removing all distortions on non-disabled workers' employment contracts within that skill group.

                                                                                     29
rate. When the amenity subsidy rate is high, the utility that the severely disabled ob-
tain from working under their own contract increases, relaxing the (IC) constraint in the
moderately disabled worker's problem. From the firm's perspective, a generous amenity
subsidy for disabled workers lowers its screening needs, resulting in fewer distortions
in other workers' contracts. We observe similar effects on the job amenity provision for
non-disabled workers in the right panel of Figure 3: the size of the distortions is smaller
with higher DI (left to right) and higher subsidy rates (-line to ×-line).
    Overall, we observe two ways in which the screening distortions are affected by poli-
cies. First, if DI becomes more generous, severely disabled workers' outside option in-
creases, lowering their labor force participation and reducing their incentive to mimic
healthier workers. Second, if the amenity subsidy is high, severely disabled workers' con-
tracts are attractive enough that they have fewer incentives to enter the market designed
for moderately disabled workers (firms' relative profits from hiring disabled workers in-
crease). Both policy interventions therefore affect the degree of screening distortions in
equilibrium, but through different mechanisms with heterogeneous equilibrium effects.
In the next section, we analyze the welfare implications of these policy designs.


5.2   Optimal Joint Policy Design
In this section, we consider the welfare effects of the joint policy reforms. To understand
the quantitative results, we first show the equilibrium budget-balancing tax rate, the wel-
fare effects by health statuses, and the average welfare implications of the reforms. We
use the utilitarian social welfare as a welfare criteria.
                        Figure 4: Fiscal Effects of Policy Reforms

                                                         0.1
                            Budget-Balancing Tax Rate




                                                        0.05


                                                           0


                                                        -0.05

                                                                                          Subsidy rate 0%
                                                         -0.1                             Subsidy rate 5%
                                                                                          Subsidy rate 15%

                                                            0.3   0.4    0.5        0.6   0.7     0.8        0.9
                                                                        DI Replacement Rate




   In Figure 4, we plot the equilibrium wage tax rate. As is evident, the tax rate is in-
creasing in the generosity of DI and the amenity subsidy. However, as DI becomes more
generous, the expansion of the amenity subsidy requires a smaller increase in the tax rate.
Under a 30% DI replacement rate, the tax rate needs to increase by 2 pp to introduce a

                                                                               30
15% amenity subsidy, whereas an increase of 0.5 pp is sufficient under a 90% replacement
rate. The provision of amenity subsidies is costly as the government's expenditures on
employed workers increase. At the same time, employment subsidies induce more dis-
abled workers to participate in the labor force by increasing the value of work. This latter
effect may add to subsidy expenditures, but it simultaneously lowers DI expenditures as
there are fewer non-employed individuals. In the model, increasing the amenity subsidy
in the presence of generous DI has negligible fiscal consequences (or may even reduce
the financial burden of the government), as it attracts more workers, thus alleviating the
fiscal burden from the DI program.
    We now evaluate the welfare consequences measured by the consumption equivalent
variation (CEV)--the percentage of consumption in the benchmark economy necessary
for a worker to be indifferent between the benchmark economy and the counterfactual
economy--for each worker of a certain skill and health type.59 Figure 5 displays the
CEVs by health statuses, and Figure 6 displays the average CEVs.

                                                        Figure 5: Welfare Effects of Policy Reform by Health Status
                                                           Severely Disabled                 Moderately Disabled                 Non-Disabled
                                                 0.3                                0.06                              0.06
              Consumption Equivalent Variation




                                                 0.2                                0.04                              0.04

                                                                                                                      0.02
                                                 0.1                                0.02
                                                                                                                         0
                                                   0                                   0
                                                                                                                      -0.02
                                                 -0.1                               -0.02
                                                                                                                      -0.04

                                                 -0.2            Subsidy rate 0%    -0.04
                                                                 Subsidy rate 5%                                      -0.06
                                                                 Subsidy rate 15%
                                                 -0.3                               -0.06                             -0.08
                                                    0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9         0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9       0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                                                                            DI Replacement Rate



    First, we note that there are large differences in preferences for a generous DI policy.
While severely disabled workers are willing to give up 24% of their consumption in the
benchmark economy for a 90% DI replacement rate, non-disabled workers need to receive
around 7% of consumption to be indifferent. The welfare of moderately disabled workers
is increasing in the DI replacement rate, although the magnitudes are smaller relative to
those of severely disabled workers. Thus, the benefit of DI, mostly enjoyed by severely
disabled workers, is largely achieved at the expense of non-disabled workers who pay
higher taxes. On the other hand, introducing job amenity subsidies benefits workers of
all types. In particular, even though firms hiring moderately disabled or non-disabled

                 let V BM c BM , a BM ,  BM and V CF cCF , aCF ,  CF denote the values in the benchmark and
   59 Specifically,

counterfactual economy that depend on equilibrium outcomes {c, a,  }. Then, we define CEV such that
V BM c BM (1 + CEV ) , a BM ,  BM  V CF cCF , aCF ,  CF . Under the log-utility specification of ours, we have
CEV = exp V CF cCF , aCF ,  CF - V BM c BM , a BM ,  BM - 1.

                                                                                                  31
workers receive amenity subsidies with low probabilities, worker welfare increases with
amenity subsidies. This is driven by both a direct effect (from the lower marginal cost of
amenities) and an indirect effect through the relaxation of screening incentives (as shown
in Figure 3), the mechanism highlighted in Proposition 1.
    The average welfare effects of the policy reforms are plotted and summarized in Figure
6. The CEV's range lies between -3%, when DI becomes less generous than the bench-
mark economy, and around 2%, when both DI and amenity subsidies are more generous.
In general, we observe that introducing amenity subsidies improves welfare on average,
as is consistent with the health-specific welfare results. Making DI more generous is also
welfare-improving initially, but starts to become too costly at higher replacement rates.
A noticeable feature is the interdependence between DI and amenity subsidies. We find
that it is not necessarily the case that optimal DI is lower when the subsidy rate increases:
with a 5% or 15% amenity subsidy, the optimal DI is constant at 65%.60 The government
finds it optimal to implement generous policies in both DI and amenity subsidies. As
shown in Figure 1, the amenity subsidy complements DI by mitigating the labor supply
disincentive effects of DI. Moreover, as in the table in the right panel of Figure 6, while
these policies benefit disabled workers more, non-disabled workers may also be better
off when policies are jointly implemented. Under a 15% amenity subsidy rate and a 65%
replacement rate, the average CEV is 1.6%, indicating a significant welfare gain.

                                                                    Figure 6: Welfare Effects of Policy Reforms
                                     0.02
                                                                                               Amenity subsidy                   0%            5%          15%
  Consumption Equivalent Variation




                                     0.01                                                      DI Rep. rate                     70%           65%          65%
                                                                                               Tax rate                         3.9%          2.2%         3.0%
                                        0
                                                                                               Sev. disabled                   0.086         0.045         0.051
                                     -0.01                                                     Mod. disabled                   0.015         0.014         0.031
                                                                                               Non-disabled                    -0.021        -0.005        0.004
                                     -0.02                         Subsidy rate 0%
                                                                   Subsidy rate 5%             Average                         0.002         0.006         0.016
                                                                   Subsidy rate 15%
                                     -0.03                                                  Note: For each amenity subsidy rate, the DI replacement rate is the aver-
                                         0.3   0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7     0.8        0.9   age welfare-maximizing rate, and the tax rate, the budget-balancing tax
                                                     DI Replacement Rate                    rate.



   Overall, our counterfactual results show that the optimal combination of policies fea-
tures generous amenity subsidy and higher generosity of the DI benefit relative to the
benchmark economy. Both policies provide not only consumption insurance but also
contribute to reducing the contract distortions. Importantly, these two policies counteract
employment effects of each other. Thus, they can mitigate the possible excessive employ-
          60 When
            we conduct policy reforms with workers of all skill levels, the optimal DI replacement rate is
higher, as the government uses DI as a means of redistributing resources across workers of heterogeneous
skills as well as health statuses. Further, we find that the optimal DI is higher when the subsidy rate is
higher.

                                                                                                32
ment effects generated by amenity subsidies as well as excessive non-employment effects
generated by DI. As a result, the optimal combination of the policies is set to balance
insurance and redistributional benefits, screening distortions, and employment effects,
which are the key factors determining the optimal policy as highlighted in Section 2.4.


5.3    Effects of Screening on Optimal Policy Design
Lastly, we discuss how the presence of screening contracts affects the optimal policy struc-
ture in the economy. To do so, we conduct the same counterfactual analyses, but now
assuming that firms can offer health-dependent contracts, and we compare the welfare
effects under the two economies.

  Figure 7: Welfare Effects of Policy Reform in Economies with and without Screening
                                                           Aggregate                      Moderately Disabled                 Non-Disabled
                                               0.02                              0.05                              0.08
           Consumption Equivalent Variation




                                                                                 0.04                              0.06
                                              0.015
                                                                                 0.03                              0.04
                                               0.01
                                                                                 0.02                              0.02

                                              0.005                              0.01                                 0

                                                                                    0                              -0.02
                                                  0
                                                                                 -0.01                             -0.04
                                              -0.005
                                                           Screen., Sub. 15%     -0.02                             -0.06
                                                           w/o Scr., Sub. 15%
                                               -0.01                             -0.03                             -0.08
                                                   0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9       0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9       0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                                                                         DI Replacement Rate



    In Figure 7, we plot the welfare consequences of policy reforms when the subsidy rate
is 15% for varying generosity levels of DI, on average (left panel), for moderately dis-
abled workers (middle panel), and for non-disabled workers (right panel).61 The optimal
DI replacement in the no-screening economy is 55%, 10 pp lower than the optimal DI re-
placement rate in the screening economy.62 This difference mostly stems from the welfare
benefits enjoyed by moderately disabled workers. As discussed, moderately disabled
workers are those whose contracts are most affected by firms' screening incentives. In the
screening economy, a generous DI policy provides more insurance, just as it does in the
no-screening economy, and reduces screening incentives, giving more benefits to health-
ier workers. These factors make "more" generous DI optimal in the presence of screening
relative to the economy without screening contracts, as shown in the left panel of Figure 7.

   61 As severely disabled workers receive no-screening contracts even in the screening economy, their wel-
fare differences between the two economies are only due to tax rate differences and are negligible. Further,
for brevity, we report results under the 15% subsidy rate, but the results are qualitatively similar under 0%
or 5% subsidy rates.
   62 We also find a similar magnitude of differences in optimal policies in the no-screening and screening

economies in counterfactual analyses with workers of all skill levels.

                                                                                               33
This quantitative result is consistent with the intuition from our theoretical analysis of op-
timal policy discussed in Proposition 1. As policies not only impact the equity-efficiency
trade-off but also the screening incentives of firms, the optimal policies are to incorpo-
rate the latter factor if screening is present in equilibrium. Within our framework, the
screening (or the rat race) effect is quantitatively operative, suggesting the importance of
taking into account the firms' screening incentives in the labor market for optimal policy
analyses.


6    Conclusion
In this paper, we study the design of social insurance programs for disabled workers. We
develop an equilibrium labor search model where firms may strategically use the option
to reduce working hours to screen out disabled workers. We estimate our equilibrium
model by exploiting labor-demand-side policy changes for the disabled. The counterfac-
tual policy experiments suggest a potential benefit from providing job amenity subsidies,
which is effective in reducing the screening distortion in the labor market and increas-
ing welfare. Moreover, we find that the optimal policy structure achieves a considerable
welfare gain by simultaneously making firm subsidies and DI benefits more generous.
Our joint policy design analysis suggests the benefit of systematic reforms of disability
policies.
    This research topic offers several promising avenues for future work. First of all, it
would be worthwhile to explore the effectiveness of other disability policies, such as
regulating or mandating certain employment contracts, in our framework. Second, the
model could also be extended considerably. One interesting area is to consider a firm's
dynamic employment contract problem in an environment in which workers' health sta-
tuses change over time and workers choose consumption and savings over their life cycle.
We leave these interesting extensions for future research.



References
Acemoglu, D. and Angrist, J. D. (2001). Consequences of employment protection? the case of the
  Americans with Disability Act. Journal of Political Economy, 109(5):915­957.
Acemoglu, D. and Shimer, R. (1999). Efficient unemployment insurance. Journal of Political Econ-
  omy, 107(5):893­928.
Aizawa, N. and Fang, H. (2020). Equilibrium labor market search and health insurance reform.
  Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Akerlof, G. (1976). The economics of caste and of the rat race and othe woeful tales. The Quartely
  Journal of Economics, 90(4):599­617.

                                               34
Altonji, J. G. and Segal, L. M. (1996). Small-sample bias in GMM estimation of covariance struc-
  tures. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 14(3):353­366.

Ameriks, J., Briggs, J. S., Caplin, A., Lee, M., Shapiro, M. D., and Tonetti, C. (2019). Older Amer-
 icans would work longer if jobs were flexible. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 12(1):174­209.

Auster, S. and Gottardi, P. (2019). Competing mechanisms in markets for lemons. Theoretical
 Economics, 14(3):927­970.

Azevedo, E. and Gottlieb, D. (2017). Perfect competition in markets with adverse selection. Econo-
  metrica, 85(1):67­105.

Becker, G. (1971). The Economics of Discrimination. University of Chicago Press.

Blanchard, O. J. and Tirole, J. (2008). The joint design of unemployment insurance and employ-
  ment protection: A first pass. Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(1):45­77.

Bound, J. and Burkhauser, R. V. (1999). Economic analysis of transfer programs targeted on people
  with disabilities. Handbook of Labor Economics, 3.

Braun, R. A., Kopecky, K. A., and Koreshkova, T. (2017). Old, sick, alone, and poor: A welfare
  analysis of old-age social insurance programmes. The Review of Economic Studies, 84(2):580­612.

Braun, R. A., Kopecky, K. A., and Koreshkova, T. (2019). Old, frail, and uninsured: Accounting for
  features of the U.S. long-term care insurance market. Econometrica, 87(3):981­1019.

Braxton, C., Herkenhoff, K., and Phillips, G. (2020). Can the unemployed borrow? implications
  for public insurance. NBER working paper series, No.27026.

Chang, B. (2017). Adverse selection and liquidity distortion. Review of Economic Studies, 85(1):275­
  306.

Chetty, R. (2006). A general formula for the optimal level of social insurance. Journal of Public
  Economics, 90(10):1879 ­ 1901.

Chodorow-Reich, G., Coglianese, J., and Karabarbounis, L. (2019). The macro effects of unem-
  ployment benefit extensions: a measurement error approach. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  134(1):227­279.

Cole, H. L., Kim, S., and Krueger, D. (2019). Analysing the effects of insuring health risks: On the
  trade-off between short-run insurance benefits versus long-run incentive costs. The Review of
  Economic Studies, 86(3):1123­1169.

Corbae, D. and Glover, A. (2020). Employer credit checks: Poverty traps versus matching effi-
  ciency. Working Paper, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Davoodalhosseini, S. M. R. (2019). Constrained efficiency with adverse selection and directed
  search. Journal of Economic Theory, 183:568­593.

De Nardi, M., French, E., and Jones, J. B. (2016). Medicaid insurance in old age. American Economic
  Review, 106(11):3480­3520.

DeLeire, T. (2000). The wage and employment effects of the Americans with Disability Act. Journal
  of Human Resources, 35(4):693­715.

                                                35
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (1992). A technical assistance manual on the em-
  ployment provisions (Title 1) of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Technical report, Equal
  Employment Opportunity Commission, Washington, D.C.

French, E. and Song, J. (2014). The effect of disability insurance receipt on labor supply. American
  Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2):291­337.

French, E. and Song, J. (2017). The effect of disability insurance receipt on labor supply: A dynamic
  analysis. Working paper, University of College London.

Golosov, M., Maziero, P., and Menzio, G. (2013). Taxation and redistribution of residual income
  inequality. Journal of Political Economy, 121(6):1160­1204.

Golosov, M. and Tsyvinski, A. (2006). Designing optimal disability insurance: A case for asset
  testing. Journal of Political Economy, 114:257­279.

Gourieroux, C., Monfort, A., and Renault, E. (1993). Indirect inference. Journal of Applied Econo-
  metrics, 8:S85­S118.

Guerrieri, V., Shimer, R., and Wright, R. (2010). Adverse selection in competitive search equilib-
  rium. Econometrica, 78(6):1823­1862.

Hamersma, S. (2008). The effects of an employer subsidy on employment outcomes: A study of the
 Work Opportunity and Welfare-to-Work Tax Credits. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
 27(3):498­520.

Khan, M. R., Rutledge, M. S., and Sanzenbacher, G. T. (2017). Social Security and total replacement
  rates in disability and retirement. Center for Retirement Research at Boston College Working Paper,
  (6).

Kim, S. and Rhee, S. (2018). Measuring the effects of employment protection policies: Theory and
  evidence from the americans with disabilities act. Labour Economics, 54:116­134.

Kitao, S. (2014). A life-cycle model of unemployment and disability insurance. Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 68:1­18.

Koning, P. and Lindeboom, M. (2015). The rise and fall of disability insurance enrollment in the
  Netherlands. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2):151­172.

Lester, B., Shourideh, A., Venkateswaran, V., and Zetlin-Jones, A. (2019). Screening and adverse
  selection in frictional markets. Journal of Political Economy, 127(1):338­377.

Levine, L. (2005). The Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) and the Welfare-to-Work (WtW) Tax
  Credit. Technical Report Order Code RL30089, Congressional Research Service, Washington,
  DC.

Liebman, J. B. (2015). Understanding the increase in disability insurance benefit receipt in the
  United States. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2):123­50.

Lise, J., Meghir, C., and Robin, J.-M. (2016). Matching, sorting and wages. Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 19:63 ­ 87.

Lise, J. and Robin, J.-M. (2017). The macrodynamics of sorting between workers and firms. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 107(4):1104­35.


                                                 36
Low, H. and Pistaferri, L. (2015). Disability insurance and the dynamics of the incentive-insurance
  tradeoff. American Economic Review, 105(10):2986­3029.

Low, H. and Pistaferri, L. (2019). Disability insurance: Error rates and gender differences. NBER
  Working Paepr Series, No.26513.

Maestas, N., Mullen, K. J., and Strand, A. (2013). Does disability insurance receipt discourage
 work? using examiner assignment to estimate causal effects of SSDI receipt. American Economic
 Review, 103(5):1797­1829.

Menzio, G. and Shi, S. (2011). Efficient search on the job and the business cycle. Journal of Political
 Economy, 119(3).

Michaud, A. and Wiczer, D. (2018). Occupational hazards and social disability insurance. Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 96:77 ­ 92.

Mitman, K. and Rabinovich, S. (2015). Optimal unemployment insurance in an equilibrium
 business-cycle model. Journal of Monetary Economics, 71(C):99­118.

OECD (2010). Sickness, Disability and Work: Breaking the Barriers. A Synthesis of Findings across OECD
 Countries. Paris.

OECD (2016). OECD Social Expenditure Update 2016. Paris.

Rothschild, M. and Stiglitz, J. (1976). Equilibrium in competitive insurance markets: An essay on
  the economics of imperfect information. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4):629­649.

Saez, E. (2001). Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates. The Review of Economic Studies,
  68(1):205­229.

Schimmel, J., Stapleton, D., Mann, D. R., and Phelps, D. (2013). Participant and provider outcomes
  since the inception of ticket to work and the effects of the 2008 regulatory changes. Technical
  report, Mathematica Policy Research.

Scott, C. (2013). The Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC). Technical Report CRS 7-5700, Con-
  gressional Research Service, Washington, D.C.

Shimer, R. (2005). The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. American
  Economic Review, 95(1):25­49.

Social Security Administration (2018). Annual statistical report on the Social Security Disability
  Insurance Program, 2017. SSA Publication No. 13-11826, Social Security Administration, 500 E
  Street, SW, 8th Floor, Washington, DC 20254.

Stantcheva, S. (2014). Optimal income taxation with adverse selection in the labour market. Review
  of Economic Studies, 81:1296­1329.




                                                  37
              Online Appendix (Not for Publication)


A      Theoretical Appendix
A.1     Competitive Search Equilibrium
We formally define the equilibrium of the economy below following Guerrieri et al. (2010).
                                                           ¯ = {Uh,x }  R, a measure  on Yx
Definition 1. A competitive search equilibrium is a vector U
                p
with support Yx , a function  : Yx  [0, ], and a function G : Yx   H that satisfy the following
conditions for all x:

    1. Firms' Profit Maximization and Free Entry: For any y x  Yx ,

                                         ( (y x ))  gh (y x ) vh,x (y x )   ,
                                                        h

                                 p
      with equality if y x  Yx .

    2. Workers' Optimal Job Search: Let

      ¯ h,x = max U N (bx , Dx ) , max µ ( (y x )) U E (w, a) + (1 - µ ( (y x ))) U N (bx , Dx )
      U            h, x               p             h, x                           h, x
                                           (w,a)Yx

                p                                                   E
      where Yx is the set of active submarkets for type-x workers, Uh ,x ( w, a ) is the utility from
      working at job with (w, a), given by
                                   E
                                  Uh ,x ( w, a ) = u ( w -  ( w )) - (  h -  h  ( a )) ,

           N b ,D
      and Uh ,x ( x x ) is the utility from not working, given by

                                  N
                                 Uh , x ( b x , d x ) = h u ( b x + D x ) + ( 1 - h ) u ( b x ) .

          p
      If Yx = , U
                ¯ h,x = U N (bx , Dx ). For any contract y x = (w , a )  Yx and (h, x ),
                         h, x

         ¯ h,x  max U N (bx , Dx ) , µ  y x
                                                                ,x w , a + 1 - µ  y x
                                                              E                                      N
         U           h, x                                    Uh                                     Uh ,x (bx , Dx ) ,


      with equality if  (y x ) <  and gh (y x ) > 0. If Uh
                                                         E
                                                           ,x ( w, a ) < Uh,x ( bx , Dx ), either  ( y x ) = 
                                                                          N

      or gh (y x ) = 0.

    3. Market Clearing: For (h, x )  I ,

                                                   gh ( y x )
                                                              d  ( { y x } )   h, x
                                               p
                                              Yx    (y x )

                       ¯ h, x > U N ( b x , D x ).
      with equality if U         h, x




                                                            38
A.2     Equilibrium Characterizations under Risk-Neutral Preferences
We compare properties of the equilibrium contracts with and without screening. To simplify no-
tation, without loss of generality, we assume that the number of observable types x = 1. For
simplicity, we also assume  (w) = 0 and T (w, a) = 0 and denote the expected DI benefits by
D~ i = i D. We show the main result for type h = 2, but the result can be generalized for h > 2.
The problem of the screening economy then reads

                          max                                                   ~2
                                       µ ( ) [c - (2 -  2  ( a))] + (1 - µ ( )) D
                            ,w, a
                     s.t. (FE) µ ( ) { f 2 - w - C ( a)} = 
                           (IC)                                                ~1  U
                                      µ ( ) [c - (1 -  1  ( a))] + (1 - µ ( )) D   ¯ 1.

Let the Lagrange multipliers with respect to (FE) and (IC) be  and . Then, from the FOC with
respect to the wage rate (w), we get 1 -  = . From the FOC with respect to amenity a, we also
              2  ( a) - C ( a)
obtain  =                      . Combining the two optimality conditions,
              1  ( a) - C ( a)

                                                  1  ( a) -  2  ( a)
                                            =                        .
                                                  1  ( a) - C ( a)

Since  1 >  2 , the numerator of  is always positive. Thus, for  to be positive, the denomina-
tor must be positive too. This implies that for  to be positive, the numerator must be positive:
 2  ( a) > C ( a). Note that in the no-screening economy, the optimality condition for a NS reads
 2  a NS = C a NS . Thus, by concavity of the  function (and weak convexity of the C (·)
            S < a NS when  > 0 (that is, when (IC) is binding).
function), a2     2
    Lastly, we take the FOC with respect to  . In the no-screening economy, the following optimal-
ity condition holds:

                                    NS        NS       ~2                      
                           f 2 - C a2  +  2  a2  - 2 - D                 =      NS
                                                                                   .                       (6)
                                                                             µ 2

Note that the expression within the bracket is equivalent to the standard definition of match sur-
plus, where the level of job amenity is determined by the FOC,  2  a NS = C a NS , so that
the match surplus can be maximized. In this no-screening economy, the equilibrium market tight-
ness 2NS is determined in socially efficient level in the sense that the expected gain of additional

vacancy is equivalent to its cost,  . In contrast, the FOC in the economy with screening reads
                                                S
                                 S           C a2            S           D
                                                                         ~
                                                                                ~2 1 -     2  D~
                   =    f 2 - C a2 +                     2  a2 - 2            -d                     ,     (7)
         µ 2S                               2      S
                                                  a2                                       ~ 2 
                                                                                           D

where     1 -  2 and  D       ~  D ~1 - D ~ 2 . The difference between the two FOC illustrates that
there exist opposite forces on the match surplus with the presence of screening effectively shifts
                                                                                                   S
                                                                                              C ( a2 )
down the utility from amenity by  2 
                                      ~
                                      D
                                        , and   the marginal  utility is also rescaled with
                                                                                              2  ( a2S   < 1.
                                                                                                       )
On the other hand, reduction in costs for providing a2   S < a NS increases the surplus.
                                                              2
                    S
    To know how 2 should adjust in the economy with screening in net, we apply the implicit
function theorem on Equation (7) and find the relationship between 2        S and of aS . Since a NS > aS
                                                                                       2
                             S
                           d 2
           NS <  S if
when  > 0, 2                        < 0:
                2            S
                           da2

                                                  S  aS - C aS                S          S      2
        S
      d 2                  S       D
                                   ~         C   a2   2      2               a2        µ 2
             = -          a2     -                                                ×                 < 0.
        S
      da2                                                     S
                                                             a2
                                                                   2
                                                                                       µ    S
                                                                                            2

                                                       39
                             S <                 D
                                                 ~
This inequality holds when  a2                    .   We solve for the equilibrium wage using the (FE):

                                           2S
          S                    S
         w2 =         f 2 - C a2 -           S
                                          µ 2
                                S µ S                 S
                                2   2              C a2               S            D
                                                                                   ~
                                                                                           ~ 2 1 - 2  D
                                                                                                        ~
                 =      1-                       -                   a2 -                +D
                                      S
                                    µ 2     µ 2S    a2S                                            d~2  
                                             S
                       1 -  µ,            C a2      D
                                                    ~     S              ~2           2  D ~
                                      +               -  a2             +D         1-          .
                             S
                           µ 2              S
                                           a2                                         d~2  

Note that the wage compensates the decline in amenity (second term). If 2  S >  NS , then wS > w NS
                                                                               2           2    2
as long as the matching function elasticity ( µ, ) is non-increasing in  .


A.3     Proof of Proposition
In this appendix, we provide a general proof of the Proposition 1. Compared to the restricted
environment in Proposition 1, we relax the following assumptions. First, we allow that workers
may be risk averse. Second, we analyze the case with I types of workers, as opposed to two types.

A.3.1    Proof of Optimal Job Amenity Subsidies
Without Labor Market Screening. We first discuss the optimal policy in the absence of labor
market screening (when firms can offer health-dependent contracts). The government's problem
is written as:

                     max  i (1 - µ (i )) UiN (b, D ) + µ (i ) (u(wi - T ) - (i -  i  ( ai )))
                       s
                            i
                     µ ( i )                                             µ (i ) Si C ( ai )
          s.t.               ( f i - wi - (1 - Si )C ( ai )) =  and T = i i                 .
                       i                                                  i i µ ( i )

Now, we incorporate these two constraints into the objective function:

                                                                               i         j  j µ  j Sj C ( a j )
 i      (1 - µ (i )) UiN (b, D ) + µ (i ) u       f i - (1 - Si )C ( ai ) -
                                                                              µ ( i )
                                                                                      -
                                                                                            j j µ j
                                                                                                                  - (i -  i  ( ai ))   .
 i

We can apply the first order condition and characterize the optimal policy, exploiting the envelope
condition (Chetty, 2006). To provide intuition, we apply the perturbation approach following Saez
(2001) and decompose the effects of optimal policy into three components.
    First, the government takes into account the standard mechanical revenue effect from a S
change in the subsidy rate, which is determined as

                                                     j  j µ  j j C ( a j )
                  M = -   i µ (  i ) u ( c e ,i )                           S  -U
                                                                                ¯ (ce ) C ( a, )S,
                                i                      j j µ j

where ce,i is the consumption of the employed worker, U     ¯ (ce ) = i i µ (i ) u (ce,i ) is the welfare-
weighted marginal utility of consumption of employed workers, and C ( a, ) is the average ex-
pected (i.e., incorporating eligibility probabilities j ) job amenity cost per employed worker (the
                                                                                                   j µ( j )j C ( a j )
total expected job amenity cost divided by the measure of employed workers): C ( a, ) = j                              .
                                                                                                    j  j µ( j )
The term in the denominator reflects that the tax is imposed only on employed workers. If for ex-
ample, all workers are subject to the tax regardless of their employment statuses, the value of the


                                                            40
denominator would be one.
   Second, an increase in the subsidy rate has a welfare effect, which is expressed as

                            W =             i µ (i ) u (ce,i )i C(ai )S                    ¯ (ce ) C ( a, )C ( a, )S,
                                                                                         = U
                                           i

where C ( a, ) is the concentration of job amenity (subsidy) spending among the subsidy-eligible
disabled population relative to the redistributive preference, captured by the welfare weights and
                                                                              i i u (ce,i )µ(i )i C ( ai )
                                                                                 i  i u ( c e ,i ) µ (  i )
the marginal utility of consumption: C ( a, ) =                                   i i µ(i )i C ( ai )
                                                                                                              . Note that if i = i u (ce,i ), which
                                                                                    i i µ ( i )

is the case under the utilitarian social welfare function and risk-neutral individuals, C ( a, ) = 1.
     Finally, we have the behavioral effect:

                                                                                   C ( a j )µ( j )
                                                                                  
                  B = -   i µ (  i ) u ( c e ,i )   j  j S                           k k µ(k )
                                                                                                     S
                                       i
                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                           ( )
                                                                                                                                     j µ j
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                 SC(a j ) j µ( j )                                    SC ( a j ) j µ( j )
                                                                                    C ( a j )                                     
                                                                                                                                     k k µ(k )
                                                   µ( )                                                k k µ(k )
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                     (1- S )                                          (1- S )
                          = U ( ce )  1 ( j =1)  k k k
                            ¯                                                                    +                                               S
                                                                                                                                                
                                     j
                                                 1-S                                C(a j )                   1-S                      j µ( j ) 
                                                                                     1- S                                           k k µ(k )
                                                                                                                                        1- S
                                                            SC ( a j ) j µ( j )
                            ¯ (ce )  1                       k k µ(k )
                          = U          (  j =1 )                                     C ( a j ),1-S   +        µ( j ),1-S           S
                                               j
                                                                1-S
                                                                   C ( a j ) j µ( j )
                                  S ¯                   1 (  j =1 )   µ (  )
                                     U (ce ) C ( a, ) 
                                                                       k k       k
                          =                                                                                   C ( a j ),1-S      +       µ( j ),1-S     s
                                 1-S                  j         C ( a,  )
                                  S ¯
                          =          U (ce ) C ( a, )   j                     C ( a j ),1-S   +      µ( j ),1-S           S
                                 1-S                  j
                                  S ¯
                          =          U (ce ) C ( a, )                C ( a),1-S   +      µ( ),1-S         S,
                                 1-S

                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                          ( )
                                                                                                                               C ( a j ) j µ  j

                                                                                                                   (  j =1 )    k k µ(k )              j µ( j )j C ( a j )
where  j is the contribution of amenities costs by type j:  j =                                                                                   =   k k µ(k )k C ( ak )
                                                                                                                                                                           ;
                                                                                                                          C ( a,)

                                                                d log
                                                                             ( )
                                                                          j µ j

                     d log C ( a j )                                    k k µ(k )

 C ( a j ),1-S   =   d log(1-S)
                                       and     µ( j ),1-S   =       d log(1-S)
                                                                                         are elasticities of total cost of amenities and
employment with respect to the net-of-subsidy marginal cost of amenities, (1 - S); and                                                                        C ( a),1-S , µ( j ),1-S
are the  j -weighted sums of these elasticities. Note that this channel clarifies the two margins in
which the subsidy rate can affect the equilibrium outcomes: its effect on the provision of amenities
in the employment contract and its effect on the employment level of workers.
    The optimal subsidy rate is determined by the sum of these three effects: importantly, we do
not need to consider any changes in other endogenous variables, such as labor market tightness
or job amenities because of the envelope condition (Saez, 2001). Then, the optimal subsidy rate is

          ¯ (ce ) -C ( a, ) + C ( a, )C ( a, ) +                          S
          U                                                                  C ( a, )                   C ( a),1-S      +        µ( ),1-S             S = 0,
                                                                         1-S




                                                                              41
or

                                        S                   1 - C ( a, )
                                                 =                           .
                                       1-S             C ( a),1-S + µ( ),1-S

Note that if the government is utilitarian and workers are risk-neutral, one can easily show that
the optimal subsidy should be zero.

With Labor Market Screening. Importantly, we now need to consider the incentive com-
patibility constraint in the firm's problem, which affects the optimal employment contracts. An
immediate implication is that the envelope theorem no longer applies: that is, the optimal contract
must not only maximize the worker's utility subject to the free-entry condition but also satisfy the
incentive compatibility constraint. This requires some modification in the perturbation argument.
    First, we have the identical mechanical revenue effect and behavioral effects, as in the case in
the absence of labor market screening discussed above. The mechanical revenue effect is denoted
by  M = -U   ¯ (ce ) C ( a,  )S, and the behavioral effect is denoted by

                                     S ¯
                         B =            U (ce ) C ( a, )         C ( a),1-S   +   µ( ),1-S       S.
                                    1-S
The inability to apply the envelope condition leads to a different form of welfare effect:

           W = U
               ¯ (ce ) C ( a, )C ( a, )S
                                     a                              C ( ai )  i  ( ai )
               +  i IiIC µ (i ) i -u (ce,i )(1 - Si )                        +                   S
                 i
                                       S                               ai            ai
                                                                                                
                                                                                         i
                                  µ   (     )                                          
               +  i IiIC i                i                                             µ ( i )
                                              (u(ce,i ) - u(cu,i )) - µ (i ) u (ce,i )           S.
                 i
                              S         i                                                   i


The screening effects on worker utility are given by

                                                              C ( ai )  i  ( ai )
                        a,i = - -u (ce,i )(1 - Si )                   +                      ;
                                                               ai         ai
                                                                                                 i
                                  µ (i )                                           µ( )
                                                                                     i
                        ,i    = -        (u(ce,i ) - u(cu,i )) - µ (i ) u (ce,i )       ,
                                   i                                               i

both of which are zero in an equilibrium without screening. They are non-zero when firms' incen-
tive compatibility constraint is binding, that is, when µ (i ) UiE                               N
                                                                 -1 ( wi , ai ) + (1 - µ ( i )) Ui -1,x ( b, D ) =
U¯ i -1 .
      The optimal subsidy rate is now determined by summing these three effects and can be ex-
pressed as

                                                                  da               d
           S            1 - C ( a, )         i i IiIC µ (i ) dSi  a,i + dSi  ,i
              =                           +
          1-S      C ( a),1-S + µ( ),1-S            ¯ (ce ) C(a),1-S + µ( ),1-S
                                            C ( a, )U
                                                                                                             
                                                               ai ai ,1-S                i i ,1-S
                        1 - C ( a, )                  µ (  i )            ( -  a , i ) +          ( -  , i )
                                          +  i IiIC              1- S                     1- S        
                 =                                                                                           ,
                   C ( a),1-S +  µ( ),1-S   i                    ¯
                                                      C ( a, )U (c )          e            +
                                                                                     C ( a),1-S       µ( ),1-S


where ai ,1-S = d log ai /d log (1 - S) and i ,1-S = d log i /d log (1 - S). We can obtain the results
in Proposition 1 when we assume that workers are risk neutral and that there are two type of


                                                         42
workers.

A.3.2       Proof of Optimal Disability Insurance
Without Labor Market Screening. The government's optimal disability insurance (DI) ben-
efit problem reads (assume S = 0 for simplicity):

        max  i ((1 - µ (i )) (i u ( D + b) + (1 - i ) u (b)) + µ (i ) (u(wi - T ) - (i -  i  ( ai ))))
            d    i
        µ ( i )                                  (1 - µ (i )) i D
s.t.            (yi - wi - C ( ai )) =  and T = i i               .
          i                                         i i µ ( i )

Substituting these constraints into the objective function, we obtain:
                                                                                                                                  
                                (1 - µ (i )) (i u (d + D ) + (1 - i ) u (b))
          i +µ (i ) u yi - C(ai ) - i - j j (1-µ(j ))j D - i + i  (ai )
                                                                                                                                  .
          i                                   µ ( i )     j  j µ( j )


Similar to the case for amenity subsidies, we can characterize the optimal DI benefit by intro-
ducing (i) a mechanical revenue effect, (ii) a welfare effect, and (iii) a behavioral effect. First, the
mechanical effect is

                                                                         j j 1 - µ j               j
                 M = -   i µ (  i ) u ( c e ,i )                                                            ¯ (ce ) E ()  D,
                                                                                                       D = -U
                                       i                                   j j µ j

                        j  j (1-µ( j ))j
where E () =                                                is the ratio of DI enrollees over the employed. Second, the welfare
                            j  j µ( j )
effect is

                                W =                  i (1 - µ (i )) u (cu,i )i D
                                                        i
                                                    i i (1-µ(i ))u (cu,i )i
                                                       i  i µ (  i ) u ( c e ,i )               j j 1 - µ j         j
                                               =                                    ¯ (ce )
                                                                                    U                                   D
                                                             j  j (1-µ( j ))j                     j j µ j
                                                                j  j µ( j )
                                                ¯ (ce ) E () E () D,
                                               =U
                       i i (1-µ(i ))u (cu,i )i
                           i  i µ (  i ) u ( c e ,i )
where E () =                     is the concentration of DI spending relative to the redistributional
                           ( ))j(
                          j  j 1- µ  j

                     j  j µ( j )

preference of the government. Finally, the behavioral effect is

                                                                               j  j (1-µ( j ))j
                                                                          
                                                                                  j  j µ( j )
                 B = - D   i µ (  i ) u ( c e ,i )                                                D = -                  ¯ (ce ) D,
                                                                                                               E, D E ( ) U
                                           i
                                                                                    D

where E,D is the elasticity of the fraction of DI recipients over the employed with respect to DI
benefits. The optimal DI benefit is such that the sum of these three effects equals zero:

                                        ¯ (ce ) - E () + E () E () -
                                        U                                                         E, D E ( )   D = 0,

or E () =       E, D   + 1.


                                                                                     43
With Labor Market Screening. With labor market screening, the mechanical revenue effect
and the behavioral effect are identical to those in the absence of screening; however, the welfare
effect now includes a screening effect. The welfare effect is expressed as

             W =           i µ (i ) u (ce,i )E () E () D
                            i
                                                  ai                       C ( ai )  i  ( ai )
                          +  i IiIC µ (i )              - u ( c e ,i )             +                      D
                                i
                                                 D                          ai         ai
                                                                                                                           
                                         i  µ (i )                                                                 µ i

                          +  i IiIC                                                          i                      ( )
                                                   (u(ce,i ) - u(cu,i )) - µ (i ) u (ce,i )     D
                                i
                                         D   i                                              i

where IiIC is defined as in A.3.1. Thus, the optimal DI policy is determined by

                                                                                                    dai               d i
     ¯ (ce ) - E () + E () E () -
     U                                           E, D E ( )      -  i IiIC                µ ( i )        a ,i     +        ,i D = 0
                                                                       i
                                                                                                    dD                dD

                                                                                                                         j  j (1-µ( j ))j
where ( a,i ,  ,i ) are defined as in the case of amenity subsidies, and E () =                                                             . By
                                                                                                                            j  j µ( j )
rearranging terms, we have

                                                             ai                    i
                                                   µ ( i )   D a i , D  a ,i   +   D i , D  ,i
                          E () +  i IiIC                                                            =     E, D   + 1,
                                     i
                                                          ¯ (ce ) E ()
                                                          U                        E, D

with ai ,D = d log ai /d log D and i ,D = d log i /d log D, which completes the proof. We can
obtain the results in Proposition 1 when we assume that workers are risk neutral and that there
are two type of workers.


B       Data: Health and Retirement Study
Table 7 summarizes the work limitation and self-reported health status of individuals in our sam-
ple, which we use to categorize workers for our empirical analysis.


                    Table 7: Work Limitation and Self-reported Health Evaluation
                                                                                   Work limitation
                                                                                                                   Total
                                                                                    No         Yes
                     Self-reported health         1 (excellent)                 5,881               244            6,125
                                                  2 (very good)                11,872             1,141           13,013
                                                  3 (good)                      9,730             2,899           12,629
                                                  4 (fair)                      3,372             3,901            7,273
                                                  5 (poor)                        479             2,833            3,312
                                         Total                                 31,334            11,018           42,352
Note: This table reports the number of observations by the work limitation and health evaluation variables. The sample is limited to
individuals between ages 51 and 64 from 1996 to 2008.


    Because the degree of disability status is constructed based on the two subjective measures
relying on the respondent self-evaluation, one may be concerned that our disability measure may
not correctly capture the respondent health conditions. To examine how accurately our disability

                                                                   44
measure reflects the health status of an individual, we looked into the relationship between the
disability measure and other objective health variables available in the HRS, as listed in Table 8.
We confirm that our disability measure is indeed positively correlated with the severity of health
conditions in various types of health outcomes.

               Table 8: Descriptive Statistics of Other Health Measures in the HRS

                                                                                                  Moderately       Severely
 Health measures                                                              Non-disabled
                                                                                                   disabled        disabled
 Body Mass Index                                                                    27.6              29.4           30.4
 Missed work due to health issues (days)                                            3.9               9.3            21.7
 Hospital utilization during the past 12 months
  Out-of-pocket medical spending ($2014)                                           1,819              3,142          4,367
  Any doctor's visit (%)                                                           88.2                91.1           96.2
  Any overnight stay in hospital (%)                                               11.9                24.3           44.2
 Doctor's diagnoses (%)
  Experiencing back problems                                                        23.4              46.7           65.4
  Arthritis or rheumatism                                                           37.8              63.5           75.8
  High blood pressure or hypertension                                               37.7              55.2           65.7
 Emotional, nervous, or psychiatric problems                                        10.3              23.3           44.9
  Diabetes or high blood sugar                                                       8.9              22.3           33.1
  Heart attack, congestive heart failure, or other heart problems                    8.9              20.1           37.4
  Cancer or a malignant tumor of any kind (except skin cancer)                       6.5              10.5           13.8
  Chronic lung disease (except asthma)                                               3.5              10.5           24.1
  Stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA)                                          1.3               4.7           12.2
 # of observations                                                                 27,483             8,135          6,734
Note: This table documents the sample mean of objective health measures by the degree of disability. The nominal out-of-pocket
medical expenditure is adjusted using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in 2014 U.S. dollars.




C      Suggestive Evidence from the U.S. Policy Changes
C.1      The 2004 WOTC Amendment
The Work Opportunity Tax Credit is a federal tax credit program that was implemented in 1996 in
an effort to improve the labor market outcomes of economically disadvantaged individuals (Scott,
2013). Under the WOTC, firms can receive tax credits when they hire workers from certain "target
groups." These target groups include workers with disabilities who are hired through state-run
vocational rehabilitation agencies and former disabled Social Security Income (SSI) recipients. For
eligible hires with disabilities, employers receive an annual tax credit, which usually amounts
to $2,400. This amount is comparable to the wage difference between the severely disabled and
moderately disabled: if we assume that both work full-time, their annual wage difference is ap-
proximately $2,900 ( ($582.8 - $524.7) × 50), given the statistics reported in Table 1.
    In 2004, the WOTC expanded the eligibility criteria for people with disabilities. Importantly,
the WOTC certificates are issued to firms hiring the disabled through Employment Networks,
non-government entities providing job training and referral services, instead of restricting quali-
fication to disabled workers who receive job referrals through state-run vocational rehabilitation
agencies. The amendment has a meaningful impact on the utilization of hiring subsidies not only


                                                             45
because of a direct effect that expanded the eligibility of the program,63 but also because of an
indirect effect that increased the visibility of the program. As a result, the average number of
the WOTC certificates for the disabled increased by 35% after 2004.64 Our preliminary analysis
suggests that the existence of the WOTC is relevant for firms hiring relatively older and severely
disabled workers. We combine the data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Social Security
Administration, and the HRS to conduct a back-of-the envelope calculation. The number of cer-
tificates issued to disabled workers (both vocational rehabilitation referrals and SSI recipients)
amounts to between 10% and 40% of severely disabled, newly hired workers, when we consider
the number of workers with tenure less than a year and tenure between 1 and 2 years, respectively.

C.1.1      Robustness Analyses
Controlling for Worker Composition              One potential concern with our analysis is that our
results may be driven by changes in worker composition in each disability category. That is, there
may be heterogeneity in health status within each disability category, and marginally disabled
individuals (with more preference for the option to reduce working hours) in the moderate group
started working in jobs with the amenity after the expansion of the WOTC in 2004. If this is the
driver of the above result, the prediction is consistent with a competitive labor market equilibrium
without screening contracts (or an equilibrium with health-dependent contracts). We include in-
teraction terms of health outcomes with the 2004 WOTC amendment as additional covariates to
the benchmark analysis. With this, we can check whether our findings of changes in job amenities
after the 2004 WOTC amendment are explained by health heterogeneity within each disability
group. As reported in Table 9, the main findings reported in the benchmark analysis are not
affected, including the significant increase in the option to reduce working hours among the mod-
erately disabled after the 2004 WOTC amendment. Thus, this finding indicates the robustness of
our results with respect to the potential compositional effects induced by heterogeneity in health
status within each disability.

Alternative Categorization of Workers Another potential concern is whether our main find-
ings are robust to alternative choices of disability measures. In this section, we introduce an alter-
native measure of disability and examine how sensitive our estimation results are with respect to
the classification of disability. We construct our alternative disability measure by combining the
work limitation measures with the number of reported diagnoses. In the HRS, respondents are
asked if they have been diagnosed with any of eight major disease categories since the last survey:
(i) arthritis or rheumatism, (ii) high blood pressure or hypertension, (iii) emotional, nervous, or
psychiatric problems, (iv) diabetes or high blood sugar, (v) heart attack, congestive heart failure,
or other heart problems, (vi) cancer or a malignant tumor of any kind (except skin cancer), (vii)
chronic lung disease, and (viii) strokes or transient ischemic attacks. Based on these variables, we
construct the number of diagnoses as an index ranging from zero to eight (See Table 10).
  63 The  disabled workers who newly became qualified after the WOTC amendment are essentially SSI
or SSDI beneficiaries participating in the Ticket-to-Work (TtW) program. The participant rate in the TtW
program gradually increased from 2004, reaching at about 6.4% in 2010 (Schimmel et al., 2013). Although
whether the TtW program successfully increases the disabled workers' labor market attachment is still
debated, the expansion of the eligibility of the WOTC seemed to have made it more accessible for firms to
receive subsidies by hiring disabled workers.
   64 The average number of the WOTC certificates for the disabled remained stable in 2002 and 2003

(Levine, 2005). After the 2004 amendment, the issued certificates for disabled groups increased by 32%
(from 44,200 to 58,400 annually). These post-amendment averages were calculated using years 2005 and
2007 because the data for years 2004 and 2006 do not reflect the accurate size of the program due to 9-
month and 13-month hiatuses, respectively (data source: the Employment and Training Administration,
WOTC Certifications by Target Group).

                                                   46
                                    Table 9: Results of Robustness Analyses
                                                                                   Type of robustness exercise
 Coefficients                                                                  (1)               (2)             (3)
                                                                        Health outcomes Measure with           Gender
                                                   Benchmark
                                                                         ×post-WOTC        # of diagnoses ×post-WOTC
 Post amendment (  1 )                                  -0.014               0.014                 0.038                -0.025
                                                       (0.058)              (0.098)                (0.019)              (0.060)
 Disability status (  2h )          Severe            0.206                0.145                   0.134               0.204
                                                       (0.056)              (0.054)                (0.082)              (0.056)
                                    Moderate          0.080                0.050                   0.053               0.078
                                                       (0.031)              (0.029)                (0.024)              (0.031)
 Disability status                  Severe               0.014               0.079                  -0.003               0.012
 × Post amendment (  3h )                              (0.064)              (0.082)                (0.127)              (0.063)
                                    Moderate          0.068                0.118                   0.072               0.068
                                                       (0.034)              (0.048)                (0.037)              (0.034)
 # of observations                                       8,541               8,280                   8,258               8,541
Note: Dependent variable is the option to reduce working hours. Robustness exercises (1) and (3) contain the covariates with that of
the benchmark and also include interaction terms with dummy variables for health outcomes and gender, respectively. Robustness
exercise (2) uses the same covariates as in the benchmark, which include age, age-squared, years of education, annual growth rate
of GDP, annual employment rates, firm-size categories, and health outcomes. For all analyses, standard errors are clustered at the
individual level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



                        Table 10: Summary Statistics: The Number of Diagnoses
        Share (%)                                                       Number of diagnoses
                                                                                                                      Total
                                                     0        1         2   3     4    5    6             7      8
        Work limitation         no limitation      19.0     23.9    17.6     9.2    3.3    1.0    0.2    0.0    0.0    74.2
                                 limitation        0.9      3.4     5.9      6.3    4.6    2.8    1.3    0.5    0.1    25.8
Note: This table reports the share of observations by the number of reported diagnoses and the work limitation measure. The statistics
are computed using the individual-level survey weight.



    Similar to the benchmark case, non-disabled workers are those who report less than four diag-
noses and no work limitation. We define severely disabled workers as those who have more than
four diagnoses and have work limitations. The rest are labeled as moderately disabled. Under this
specification, 4% are severely disabled, 25% are moderately disabled, and 71% are non-disabled.
Thus, we are applying tighter criteria for being severely disabled compared to the benchmark
case. Table 9 documents the results. Results suggest that the estimation outcomes are robust to
the choice of disability measures.65

Controlling for Gender-Specific Effects One might be concerned that the increase in ameni-
ties among the moderately disabled after the 2004 WOTC amendment could be driven by certain
characteristics of workers that are independent from their disability status. In particular, it has
been often argued that female workers may have a different preference for work schedule com-
pared to their male counterparts. If the changes in the option to reduce working hours were mainly
driven by the compositional change of female workers among the moderately disabled, our result

   65 We find that regression analyses on other amenity measures and labor market outcomes also deliver
similar coefficients when we apply the disability measure instead of the benchmark measure. These results
are available upon request.

                                                                   47
would not be relevant to firms' response in screening the disabled. To address this concern, we
introduce a gender-specific time dummy as an additional regressor and estimate Equation (5). We
find that there are no significant differences on the effects of the WOTC amendment by gender
group (Table 9).

Trend Increase in DI Enrollment As extensively documented in the literature (e.g., see Lieb-
man, 2015), there has been a steady increase in DI enrollment since the early 1990s. One may
wonder whether our results may be partially explained by this trend. First, one potential concern
is that this change in DI enrollment may lead to changes in worker composition within each dis-
ability category. If workers with fewer job amenities among the moderately disabled stop working
and receive DI, it may drive our estimate of the interaction term of the moderately disabled and the
WOTC amendment dummy. This is essentially the composition effect: as discussed in Appendix
C.1.1, our findings are robust with respect to controlling for compositional effects.
     Another potential effect is that an increase in DI enrollment may actually increase the job
amenities received by the moderately disabled precisely because of the screening mechanism as
discussed in Section 2.4. If an increase in DI enrollment is concentrated among severely disabled
workers, then firms hiring moderately disabled workers no longer need to reduce job amenities
to screen out the severely disabled. Because this channel is consistent with the screening mecha-
nism, we view that whether changes in job amenities are induced by the WOTC amendment or
by changes in DI enrollment does not matter for detecting screening tools. However, as seen in
Table 11, we find a statistically insignificant effect of employment in the interaction between the
severely disabled and the WOTC amendment dummy. Thus, at least in our sample, we think that
it is unlikely that this channel drives our findings.

C.1.2      Effects on Employment and Wages
Table 11 documents the empirical results on employment and wage rates by disability status.

             Table 11: Effects of the WOTC-amendment on Labor Market Outcomes

                                                                              Dependent variable
              Coefficients
                                                                        Employment    (log) Hourly wage
              Post -amendment (  1 )                                       0.109                        -0.011
                                                                            (0.014)                    (0.072)
              Disability status (  2h )              Severe                -0.876                     -0.118
                                                                            (0.019)                    (0.056)
                                                     Moderate              -0.398                     -0.088
                                                                            (0.013)                    (0.035)
              Disability status                      Severe                  -0.012                    0.087
              × Post -amendment (  3h )                                     (0.015)                    (0.051)
                                                     Moderate                -0.002                      0.050
                                                                            (0.015)                    (0.037)
              # of observations                                             34,141                       8,890
Note: This table reports the coefficient estimates of regressions on employment and hourly wage rate. The sample includes individuals
between ages 50 and 64 from 1996 to 2008. The wage regression sample is further restricted to those who recorded an hourly rate of
less than $43.75, which is equivalent to the 95th percentile among the observations. The additional covariates used in the regression
include age, age-squared, years of education, annual growth rate of GDP, annual employment rates, firm-size categories, and health
outcomes. The sample is weighted by individual-level survey weight. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                 48
C.1.3      Effects on Other Measures of Job Amenities
We estimate Equation (5) in Section 3.2 on other job amenity variables available from the HRS:
the availability of switching to a part-time position, the number of paid sick days per year, the
number of vacation weeks per year, and the availability of ESDI coverage. Results are reported
in Table 12. It is important to note that the sample sizes in regressions for the availability of part-
time work and the availability of sick days are much smaller than that for the option to reduce
working hours. As a result, we may not have enough statistical power to credibly estimate our
regression models. Moreover, we also find that the coefficients for the disability dummies (  2h ) are
not monotonic in disability status in regressions for vacation days and ESDI coverage, in addition
to the lack of the significance of the effect of the WOTC amendment. One possibility is that the
provision of these job amenities, especially ESDI, are determined at the firm level. Thus, it may be
very difficult for firms to exploit them to screen out a particular worker.


                Table 12: Effects of the WOTC Amendment on Other Job Amenities
                                                                              Dependent variable
         Coefficients                                       Available        Available     Available              ESDI
                                                            part-time      paid sick leave vacations            coverage
                                                                               (day)        (week)
         Post-amendment (  1 )                                 -0.015             0.933             -0.348         -0.063
                                                              (0.113)           (3.874)            (0.804)        (0.056)
         Disability status (  2h )          Severe              0.030          13.496              -0.833          -0.082
                                                              (0.109)           (4.855)            (0.750)        (0.056)
                                            Moderate            0.038          9.378                0.377         0.071
                                                              (0.058)           (3.107)            (0.558)        (0.035)
         Disability status                  Severe             -0.076            -2.161              0.183         -0.002
         × Post-amendment (  3h )                             (0.132)           (6.160)            (0.510)        (0.064)
                                            Moderate            0.004           -4.035             -0.232           0.034
                                                              (0.064)           (2.774)            (0.458)        (0.037)
         # of observations                                      1,950             3,280              6,331          6,200
Note: The additional covariates used in the regression include age, age-squared, years of education, annual growth rate of GDP,
annual employment rates, firm-size categories, and health outcomes. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



C.1.4      Additional Diagnosis
We also examine whether the option to reduce working hours evolves similarly across workers
with different disability status before the 2004 WOTC (pre-trend conditions). To do so, we modify
our main empirical regression (Equation (5)) by introducing time-specific dummies for disability
status. Specifically, we are interested in whether time-specific dummies for each disability status
before the implementation of the WOTC exhibit the same trend. Due to sample size issues, es-
pecially among severely disabled workers who are employed, we pool years into three periods:
1996 and 1998 survey years; 2000 and 2002 survey years; and 2004 and 2006 survey years. Thus,
the base year in this specific analysis is 2008, which allow us to consistently pool years by two
survey years before and after the amendment. Figure 8 summarizes the estimated coefficients
and the 95% confidence intervals for all employed and newly hired workers for severely disabled
(Panel (a)) and moderately disabled (Panel (b)) workers. As seen from Panel (a), we find that
the year coefficients for severely disabled workers are small and roughly constant, although the
confidence intervals are much larger due to the small observations of those who are severely dis-


                                                                 49
             Figure 8: Year-Specific Effects on the Option to Reduce Working Hours
                                                                                 (a) Severely Disabled Workers

                                                                                 0.6




                                         Coefficients and Confidence Intervals
                                                                                            All Employees
                                                                                            New Hires
                                                                                 0.4


                                                                                 0.2


                                                                                   0


                                                                                 -0.2


                                                                                 -0.4
                                                                                    1996-1998       2000-2002    Amendment   2004-2006
                                                                                                            Years
                                         (b) Moderately Disabled Workers

                                                                                 0.6
                                         Coefficients and Confidence Intervals




                                                                                            All Employees
                                                                                            New Hires
                                                                                 0.4


                                                                                 0.2


                                                                                   0


                                                                                 -0.2


                                                                                 -0.4
                                                                                    1996-1998       2000-2002    Amendment   2004-2006
                                                                                                            Years



Note: We plot the coefficients on disability- and year-specific dummies and their 95% confidence intervals. The additional covariates
used in the regression are age, age-squared, years of education, annual growth rate of GDP, annual employment rates, firm-size
category dummies, and health outcomes. Standard errors are clustered at the individual level.



abled and employed in our data. Moreover, as shown from Panel (b), the coefficients on 1996-2002
year dummies of moderately disabled workers remain roughly similar, but the coefficient on years
2004-2006 is positive and statistically significant. This pattern is much more distinctive for new
hires, which is more relevant for screening channels. Note that the level of amenity for moderately
disabled in 2008 (base year) is roughly the same as that in pre-WOTC periods. This may be due
to an early effect of the Great Recession on disabled workers. All the results of the impact of the
2004 WOTC amendment are robust even if we restrict our sample years to include up to 2006, as
seen in Table 13.




                                                                                                            50
  Table 13: Effects of the WOTC Amendment on the Option to Reduce Working Hours:
                               Sample Period 1996-2006.
            Coefficients                                            (1) All employed             (2) New hires
            Post-amendment (  1 )                                   0.007      (0.060)         0.014      (0.070)
            Disability status (  2h )            Severe             0.156      (0.060)         0.204      (0.083)
                                                 Moderate           0.051      (0.033)         0.044      (0.048)
            Disability status                    Severe             0.030      (0.102)         0.010      (0.119)
            × Post-amendment (  3h )             Moderate           0.129      (0.058)         0.209 (0.067)
            # of observations                                             6,599                      2,913
Note: We estimate Equation (5) with the linear probability model. The additional covariates used in the regression are age, age-
squared, years of education, annual growth rate of GDP, annual employment rates, firm-size category dummies, and health outcomes.
Standard errors are clustered at the individual level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



C.2      ADA Amendments Act of 2008
In 2008, the ADA Amendments Act (ADAAA) was passed to broaden and clarify the definition of
disabilities. The ADAAA does not specifically name all of the impairments that are covered. In-
stead, under the ADAAA, a person is considered disabled if he (i) has a physical or mental impair-
ment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, (ii) has a history or record of such
an impairment, or (iii) is perceived by others as having such an impairment. For instance, after
2008, individuals with health conditions such as mental illness, cancer, diabetes, and HIV/AIDS
became eligible to claim protection under the ADAAA. This policy change could plausibly in-
crease the firm's expected cost of hiring disabled workers by allowing more disabled workers to
be subject to labor market protection.
    We describe our empirical specification to examine the effects of labor market screening using
the ADAAA. The empirical specification is similar to our specification for the WOTC Amendment
in 2004:

        yit =  1 I{t>2008} +                         2h Ih +                  3h I{t>2008} Ih + Xit +  Zt +  it .
                                     h{mod, sev}               h{mod, sev}

The dependent variable yit indicates whether an individual i at time t has an option to reduce
working hours or not. The definition of the other regressors remains the same as those described
in Equation (5). It is worth mentioning that even though we control for the aggregate economic
conditions by including macroeconomic variables in Zt , our results could be confounded by the
Great Recession. The sample period for the ADAAA analysis is between 2004 and 2014. We
consider the post-ADAAA period as years after 2008, because the ADAAA went into effect in the
beginning of 2009. Table 14 summarizes the regression results.
    For moderately disabled workers, the expansion of the ADA-eligible workers led to a decrease
in the provision of the option to reduce working hours. This effect was especially more prominent
among newly hired workers as shown in Column (2). However, we find that there was no statis-
tically significant change among the severely disabled workers' amenity levels after 2008. Again,
these findings are consistent with the standard screening model's predictions, as described in Sec-
tion 3.2. While the severely disabled workers' contracts are unaffected, the employment contract
for the moderately disabled depends on firms' screening incentives. These observations are sug-
gestive evidence for our hypothesis that the option to reduce working hours can serve as a firm's
screening device against workers with disabilities.




                                                               51
    Table 14: Effects of the ADA Amendment on the Option to Reduce Working Hours

                                                                        Sample period: 2004 to 2014
                    Coefficients
                                                                     (1) All employed (2) New hires
                    Post-amendment (  1 )                                 -0.075                  0.001
                                                                          (0.0350)               (0.045)
                    Disability status (  2h )          Severe              0.214                  0.172
                                                                           (0.108)               (0.132)
                                                      Moderate            0.205                 0.222
                                                                           (0.061)               (0.074)
                    Disability status                  Severe               0.062                 0.136
                    × Post-amendment (  3h )                               (0.107)               (0.135)
                                                      Moderate             -0.105               -0.212
                                                                           (0.062)               (0.074)
                    # of observations                                       3,728                 1,917
Note: This table reports the coefficient estimates based on years 2004-2014. The sample includes individuals between ages 50 and
64 and is weighted with individual-level survey weight. The additional covariates used in the regression include age, age-squared,
gender dummy, education, annual growth rate of GDP, annual employment rates, firm-size categories, and health outcomes. Standard
errors are clustered at the individual level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



C.3        List of Control Variables
We present the list of the regressors that are included in our empirical analysis but omitted from
the main text because of space limitations.

Aggregate Variables. At the aggregate level, we use two variables, the growth rate of GDP and
the average annual employment rates, to control for macroeconomic conditions. We use the all-
industry total real GDP in millions of chained 2005 dollars from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) to compute the annual GDP growth rates. For annual employment rates, we use data from
the Current Employment Statistics program surveys of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We
convert seasonally adjusted monthly total employment in non-farm sectors into annual data by
taking the average of 12 months. Then, we compute the employment rate by dividing this number
by the size of the U.S. working-age population (defined as those between ages 18 and 65). We
obtained population estimates from the U.S. Census Bureau. All of these data series are public
and available online.

The Size of Employment. On the labor demand side, we control for the size of employer. The
HRS offers two kinds of variables for employment size: the size of an establishment ("the number of
employees at location") and the size of a firm ("the number of employees at all locations"). We choose the
establishment size as the main index for the size of an employer and substitute with the firm size
variable if the establishment size is missing.66 As the range of the employment size vastly varies
between zero and 999,999, we introduced five category dummies instead of directly introducing
the employer size as a regressor. Employers with fewer than 10 employees are considered as the
base group, and we introduce four dummies representing the employment size for 11 to 50, 51 to
200, 201 to 600, and 600 or more. Each category represents 26%, 29%, 23%, 12%, and 10% of the
sample observations.


   66 In
       our sample, 2.4% of the observations fall into this category. Our results are unaffected when we
exclude these observations from the analysis.

                                                               52
Individual Characteristics. On the labor supply side, we control for age, age-squared, educa-
tion, and health outcomes. In our benchmark analysis, we further categorize the years of schooling
into five subcategories: (i) less than high school, (ii) high school graduates, (iii) some college, (iv)
college graduates, (v) and individuals with advanced degrees. Each category represents 21%, 33%,
23%, 11%, and 12%. In our regressions, individuals with less than high school are set as a base
group.
    For health outcomes, we use the number of reported major diagnoses and include the types
of diagnoses as dummy variables. The list of major diagnoses is (i) arthritis or rheumatism, (ii)
diabetes or high blood sugar, (iii) heart attack, congestive heart failure, or other heart problems,
(iv) stroke or transient ischemic attack, (v) emotional, nervous, or psychiatric problems, and (vi)
and high blood pressure or hypertension. We also include annual medical expenditures and the
Body Mass Index (BMI).67 The summary statistics associated with these objective health measures
are reported in Table 8 of Section B.
    Along with these regressors, we also add two subjective health measures, difficulties with
Activities of Daily Living (ADL) and the subjective health evaluation. The ADL asks whether re-
spondents have difficulties with performing the five basic tasks: bathing, eating, dressing, walking
across a room, and getting in or out of bed. We define the number of reported difficult tasks as an
ADL index and introduce a dummy variable for each category. In our sample, 87.4% of respon-
dents have no difficulties in performing ADLs, and the share of each category diminishes to 6.3%,
2.9%, 1.7%, 1.1% and 0.6% along with the index. Because of smaller sample size for indices 4 and
5, we merge the last two categories into one. Similarly, the health evaluation score varies from 1
to 5, and we introduce it as a dummy variable.


D      Employment Effects of DI Removal
Ideally, we would like to compare labor market statistics from our counterfactual experiment
without DI to real-world equivalent measures. While we cannot directly observe labor market
outcomes without DI, recent empirical analysis sheds light on labor supply changes caused by DI
(Maestas et al., 2013; French and Song, 2014). In this section, we explain how we use these empir-
ical estimates to compute the effects of DI removal on employment for individuals between ages
50 and 64.
    According to Maestas et al. (2013), DI applicants can be categorized into three groups: 57%
of truly disabled applicants receive DI for sure, 20% of applicants are always rejected, and the re-
maining 23% of applicants are classified as marginal cases, as their outcomes may vary depending
on the judge's leniency. These findings indicate that, roughly speaking, the current DI recipi-
ents can be either truly disabled or marginal, and their shares are given by 71.25%(=57/80) and
28.75%(=23/80), respectively.68
    According to the Social Security Administration (2018), there are 6.18 million DI recipients be-
tween ages 50 and 64. Using the decomposition explained above, we expect that 4.4 million of
them are truly disabled recipients and that the remaining 1.78 million are marginal cases. Among
the 59 million of the U.S. population between ages 50-64 (Census population estimates), approxi-
mately 37.17 million are employed, yielding an employment rate of 63%.69

   67 Instead of directly taking BMI as a regressor, one can introduce dummy variables for being overweight

(BMI 27) and underweight (BMI 18) to capture nonlinear effects of BMI on one's health. We find that
our results are not affected.
    68 These DI recipient shares are broad estimates because we ignore possibilities of appeals and re-appeals

in the DI application process. Our approach does not take into account the heterogeneity of rejection rates
within the marginal cases either.
    69 The number is calculated as the 10-year average of employment rates for workers of ages 50-64 from



                                                     53
    From the estimation results in Maestas et al. (2013), the employment rate for DI applicants de-
clines after the rejection of application, and the magnitude of this decline varies by the applicant's
type; 57% of marginal case applicants return to work once their application is rejected; however,
for the truly disabled, only 12% return to work after rejection. Using these numbers, we compute
that without DI, we would expect 12% of 4.4 million and 56.6% of 1.78 million DI recipients (or
1.54 million) to return to work. This would result in an increase in employment from 37.17 to 38.71
million out of 59 million workers between ages 50 and 64, or a 2.6 pp increase in the employment
rate of this group.




2008 to 2010. Data source: BLS statistics, the number of employed for ages 50-54 (LNU02024937Q) and
55-64 (LNU02000095Q).

                                                 54
