                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  RATIONAL SENTIMENTS AND ECONOMIC CYCLES

                                      Maryam Farboodi
                                       Péter Kondor

                                     Working Paper 27472
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27472


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We are grateful to John H. Moore whose insightful discussion to our previous work,
Heterogeneous Global Cycles, was the main inspiration to write this paper. We also thank
Vladimir Asriyan, Ricardo Caballero, Amin Jafarian, Nobu Kiyotaki, Pablo Kurlat, Jonathan A.
Parker, Jeremy Stein, and seminar and workshop participants at Bank of England, ECB, LSE,
FTG, ESSFM Gerzensee, MIT, NBER EF&G. Kondor acknowledges financial support from the
European Research Council (Starting Grant #336585). The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Maryam Farboodi and Péter Kondor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Rational Sentiments and Economic Cycles
Maryam Farboodi and Péter Kondor
NBER Working Paper No. 27472
July 2020
JEL No. D82,E32,E44,G01,G10

                                           ABSTRACT

We propose a rational model of endogenous cycles generated by the two-way interaction between
credit market sentiments and real outcomes. Sentiments are high when most lenders optimally
choose lax lending standards. This leads to low interest rates and high output growth, but also to
the deterioration of future credit application quality. When the quality is sufficiently low, lenders
endogenously switch to tight standards, i.e. sentiments become low. This implies high credit
spreads and low output, but a gradual improvement in the quality of applications, which
eventually triggers a shift back to lax lending standards and the cycle continues. The equilibrium
cycle might feature a long boom, a lengthy recovery, or a double-dip recession. It is generically
different from the optimal cycle as atomistic lenders ignore their effect on the composition of the
pool of borrowers. Carefully chosen macro-prudential or countercyclical monetary policy often
improves the decentralized equilibrium cycle.


Maryam Farboodi
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-627
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
m.farboodi@gmail.com

Péter Kondor
London School of Economics and Political Science
Houghton Street
WC2A 2AE
Houghton Street
London
UK
p.kondor@lse.ac.uk
1       Introduction

A growing body of empirical evidence suggests that periods of overheating in credit markets
forecast recessions. Overheated, high sentiment markets are characterized by increased total
quantity of credit, low interest rates, and importantly, deteriorating quality of newly issued
credit. In the subsequent recessions, credit turns scarce and expensive even for ex-post
high-value projects.1

    A major conundrum for policy makers and academics alike is how economic policy should
respond to this phenomena. For this, it is essential to understand the mechanism which
triggers overheating and then turns credit booms into recessions, and vice-versa. That is, we
need a framework where credit and real cycles arise endogenously. In this paper, we build a
model where the interaction between credit market sentiments and real economic outcomes
generate cycles. We also rank various policy instruments according to how efficiently they
steer the economy towards higher welfare cycles.

    The model captures credit market sentiments as lenders' rational choice of lending stan-
dards under imperfect information. In our model, entrepreneurs run projects and obtain
credit from investors to scale up their operation. Only some entrepreneurs intend to pay
back their debt. The majority of investors are not sufficiently skilled to distinguish these
good entrepreneurs from the bad ones. However, they have access to a technology that can
imperfectly reveal entrepreneur type.

    Specifically, investors can choose to run one of two tests to decide which entrepreneurs to
grant credit to. A bold test represents lax lending standards. This test approves the credit
application of all good entrepreneurs along with some bad ones. A cautious test on the other
hand represents tight lending standards as it only approves a fraction of good applications. It
rejects all bad applications and even some good ones. Thus, tight lending standards improve
the quality, but decreases the quantity of the credit issued by an investor.

    When there are few bad entrepreneurs among borrowers, investors optimally choose lax
lending standards. Credit market exhibits symptoms of overheating or high sentiments. A
    1
    See (Greenwood and Hanson, 2013; L´    opez-Salido et al., 2017; Greenwood et al., 2020) on identifying
overheated markets and their relationship with future bond excess returns and recessions. See also Morais
et al. (2019) for US and international evidence on lax bank lending standards in booms, and Baron and
Xiong (2017) for the negative relationship between banks' credit expansion and banks' equity returns. More
generally, there is ample evidence of pro-cyclical volume and counter-cyclical value of investment in a wide
range of contexts. For instance, Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006) demonstrate this for sales of property, plant
and equipment, while Kaplan and Stromberg (2009) show similar evidence on venture capital deals.


                                                     1
mixed quality of credit is issued at a low interest rate which induces high credit growth
and high output. At the same time, the flow of credit towards bad types helps them grow,
leading to the deterioration of borrower quality in future periods. When the average borrower
quality sufficiently deteriorates, lenders rationally switch to tight standards. Tight lending
standards coincides with high credit spreads and low quantity, but high quality of issued
credit. Thus the pool of credit applications improves, eventually triggering a shift back to
lax lending standards. And the cycle continues. As such, there is a two-way interaction
between credit sentiment and the fundamentals of the economy.

    Booms are generally characterized by high output and positive output growth, and low
yields in the credit market. In contrast, output is low and output growth is negative in a
recession, while credit markets are fragmented.

    The model generates a variety of cyclical behavior depending on the underlying param-
eters. Often there are long booms interrupted by short recessions, akin to the usual US
business cycle patterns. Alternatively, the cycle can feature a prolonged recovery period, or
a double-dip recession. We characterize how the properties of cycles change in response to
changes in parameters.

    We also argue that the generated cycles are not constrained efficient. It is so because
investors fail to internalize that their individual choice of lending standards affect the future
quality of borrowers. Nevertheless, a constrained planner often prefers a cycling economy to
one with persistently lax or persistently tight lending standards. In a constrained optimal
cycle, recessions induced by tight lending standards keep the fraction of bad projects at bay
which makes the subsequent booms more beneficial.

     We further connect the constrained optimal solution to realistic monetary and macro-
prudential policies. We show that changing the risk-free rate through well designed monetary
policy, and specifying capital requirements using a macro-prudential policy can be used to
influence investors' lending standards. Therefore, each of these policies affects the dynamics
of the state distribution, and, consequently, welfare. However, the policy maker can improve
the quality of loan applications only at the expense of increasing the average cost of capital.
This trade-off determines the ranking across policies. Under our representation, we show
that macro-prudential and counter-cyclical monetary policy both strongly dominate a non-
state contingent monetary policy. The counter-cyclical monetary policy can improve welfare
slightly more than the risk-weighted capital requirements, however, the former requires a
more sophisticated regulator.


                                               2
    Literature. To the best of our knowledge our paper is the first to provide a mechanism
where economic cycles are endogenously generated by the interaction between the choice of
lending standards and average borrower quality.

    Our paper belongs to the growing body of literature on dynamic lending standards.
In this literature, lenders' choice to acquire information on borrowers differs in booms and
in recessions (Martin, 2005; Gorton and Ordonez, 2014; Hu, 2017; Asriyan et al., 2018;
Fishman et al., 2019; Gorton and Ordonez, 2016). Gorton and Ordonez (2016) and the
contemporaneous paper of Fishman et al. (2019) are the closest to our work. Similar to our
model, the mechanism in Fishman et al. (2019) rely on the two-way interaction of lenders'
information choice and borrowers' average quality. However, unlike our paper, their economy
does not feature an endogenous cycle, and converges to a high or a low steady state depending
on the parameters. In other words, Fishman et al. (2019) and most of the rest of the papers
in this literature do not provide an endogenous mechanism repeatedly turning a boom into a
recession and vice-versa. One exception is Gorton and Ordonez (2016). This paper has both
an economy that converges to a good steady state, and one that cycles between multiple
periods in the good state and one in the bad one. Unlike us, in this economy recessions and
the corresponding tight lending standards have no welfare benefits. If possible, a planner
prefers to force agents to always use lax lending standards. In our setup on the other hand,
a planner often prefers a cyclical economy to a persistent boom, as tight lending standards
during the downturn improves future borrowers' quality which makes the subsequent boom
more beneficial.2

     Our paper also contributes to the literature on endogenous credit cycles (Azariadis and
Smith, 1998; Matsuyama, 2007; Myerson, 2012; Gu et al., 2013). These papers present
different mechanism that leads to endogenous fluctuations in granted credit quantity. How-
ever, none of them capture the interdependence of investors choice of lending standards and
economic activity.

    This paper is also connected to the literature on collateral based credit cycles (Kiyotaki
and Moore, 1997; Lorenzoni, 2008; Mendoza, 2010; Gorton and Ordonez, 2014). As in these
papers, we are also interested in how a change in credit availability induces boom and busts.
However, these papers focus on how exogenous shocks are amplified by the effect through
the price of the collateral. In our model the price of collateral or exogenous shocks play no
   2
    The difference in welfare implications is a consequence of the different underlying mechanisms. Gorton
and Ordonez (2016) argue that dynamic lending standards imply fluctuation in the perceived quality of the
average borrowers. In our framework, they imply fluctuation in the realized quality of the average borrower.


                                                     3
role.

    There is a long tradition in economics starting with Keynes' metaphor of animal spirits
to associate boom-bust cycles with fluctuating investors' sentiment.3 There is a literature
(Bordalo et al., 2018; Greenwood et al., 2019; Gennaioli and Shleifer, 2020) focusing on the
role of extrapolative expectations. In contrast, we capture credit market sentiment as a
rational choice of lending standards. Our model generates some of the leading facts of the
empirical side of this literature; for instance the deterioration of credit quality in booms, or
the strong correlation between high credit growth, low subsequent returns and recessions.
However, as a rational model, our mechanism does not generate an exploitable anomaly
under the least informed agent's information set. That is, regarding evidence that points to
such anomalies, our approach can only play a complementary role to behavioral models.

   Finally, from a methodological perspective, the structure of the credit market builds on
Kurlat (2016) and our companion paper, Farboodi and Kondor (2018). Neither of these
papers focus on endogenous economic cycles.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the model. Section
3 solves for the equilibrium within each period. Section 4 characterizes the dynamic equi-
librium. Section 5 discusses optimal policy, and section 6 compares the implications of the
model with empirical facts. Finally, section 7 concludes.



2       Set Up. Rational Sentiments and Economic Cycles

The economy runs for an infinite number of periods. Each period is divided into two parts:
morning and evening. There is one type of consumption good. It can be consumed, invested,
or stored at a rate of return 1 + rf between morning and evening.4 There are two types of
agents, entrepreneurs and investors. Each agent is risk-neutral and endowed with one unit
of the good in the morning. There is no discounting except through possibility of death.
    3
     Angeletos and La'O (2013) provide a conceptually distinct approach to capture sentiment in a rational
framework as rationally overweigh public information.
   4
     rf , can represent a physical return or a policy rate. In sections 3 and 4, we think of it as the rate of
return on the storage technology, which can be normalized to zero. In section 5 we reintroduce rf as the
return on a risk-free asset provided by the policy maker.




                                                      4
Entrepreneurs. There is measure one of entrepreneurs, and each one is endowed with a
projects with a two-dimensional type. It is good or bad,  = g, b, and opaque or trans-
parent,  = 0, 1. Entrepreneurs know their own type. We use entrepreneur and project
type interchangeably. Let µ0,t and µ1,t denote the measure of opaque and transparent bad
entrepreneurs at time t, respectively. We will show that at each time t, (µ0,t , µ1,t ) is sufficient
statistics for entrepreneur type distribution.

    Each entrepreneur maximizes his life-time utility. At time t, entrepreneur (,  ) obtains
credit t (,  ) at interest rate rt (,  ) and invests it (,  ) in the morning, and consumes in
the evening. Each unit of investment in the morning produces  > 1 + rf the same evening.5
The cost of investment has to be covered by entrepreneur's initial endowment or credit,
implying the following budget constraint

       it (,  ) = 1 + t (,  ).                                                                       (1)


    Furthermore, each entrepreneur has to pledge his investment as collateral to obtain
credit. Seizing the collateral is the only threat to enforce repayment from borrowers, thus
(1 + rt (,  )) t (,  )  it (,  ). Using (1) this simplifies to

                         1
        t (,  )               .                                                                      (2)
                     rt (,  )

The key friction of the model is that investors cannot seize the investment in bad projects,
and they only have imperfect information about project type. That is, if investors could
observe the type of entrepreneurs, they would only lend to good ones as repayment from bad
ones cannot be enforced.

    At the end of each period, some entrepreneurs exit the market (`die'). An entrepreneur
exists either because he is hit by an exogenous shock with probability  , or because he has
not been able to raise credit. Thus, we assume that credit is essential for survival. When
an entrepreneur dies, he is replaced with a newborn so as to keep the population fixed at 1.
The type distribution of the new entrants is fixed.  (1 - ) of new entrants are good (bad),
and 1  ( 1 ) are transparent (opaque). The two dimensions of the type distribution of entrants
     2 2
are independent.
   5
    We have also solved the model under the alternative assumption that good (bad) investment returns
g > 1 + rf (b < 1). The expressions are more complex without providing further intuition. Therefore, we
have decided to use  = b = g > 1 + rf . The more general solution is available in the previous circulated
versions of the paper, as well as available upon request.


                                                   5
Investors. There are two groups of investors. A small, w1 , measure of investors are skilled,
while a large, w0 , measure are unskilled. Skill is privately observable. Each investor has one
unit of endowment. Let h  [0, w0 + w1 ] denote an individual investor.

    Each investor lives for one period and maximizes her period utility. She makes a portfolio
decision in the morning, and consumes and dies in the evening. A dead investor is replaced
by the same type of investor the next day. A portfolio decision involves extending credit to
entrepreneurs and/or storing part of their unit endowment until the evening.

    Each investor chooses to participate in or stay out of the lending market. Skilled investors
observe the type of each project. Participating unskilled investors only observe imperfect
signals for the project sample that they receive instead. These signals are generated by a
test of investor's choice. Each investor can opt for a bold test or a cautious test. We call the
former a bold investor, and the latter a cautious investor. The cost of either test is c  (0, 1),
and each unskilled investor runs exactly one test.

     The tests differ in the signal they generate for opaque projects. The bold test pools
all opaque projects, good or bad, with transparent good ones (a false positive error). The
cautious test pools all opaque projects with transparent bad ones (a false negative error).6
Intuitively, one can envision the bold test to reject transparent bad projects only and pass all
other ones, while the cautious test passes only transparent good projects. When an investor
is indifferent between the two tests, we break the tie by assuming that she chooses the bold
test.

    The size of the sample that an unskilled investor tests is limited by her unit endowment.
An unskilled investor can test only as many applications as she can finance if all application
pass her test.


Credit Market. Credit market operates in the morning. After each unskilled investor
chooses the type of her test, each participating skilled and unskilled investor advertises an
interest rate, r
               ~(h), at which she is willing to extend loans. Each entrepreneur chooses the
measure of loan applications  (r; ,  )  [0, 1  r
                                                 ] he wishes to submit at each interest rate r.
The credit market clears starting from the lowest interest rate. At each interest rate, the
unskilled investors sample first.
   6
    For simplicity we restrict investor's choice set to these two tests. In appendix D we enrich the model
and allow the investors to choose among the continuum of tests lying between the bold and cautious tests.
We prove that the dominant choice is always one of the extremes. Thus, this assumption is not restrictive.


                                                    6
    We assume that there is no credit history for entrepreneurs. That is, investors cannot
learn from the past. Furthermore, there is no saving technology available across periods.
Therefore, entrepreneurs consume their wealth at the end of each period, and if survived,
they start the new period with the unit endowment received in the morning. Moreover, we
make the following assumption about skilled and unskilled investor wealth.


Assumption 1 Skilled and unskilled investor capital w1 and w0 are such that


  (i) Skilled investor capital, w1 , is not sufficient to cover the credit demand of all opaque
      good entrepreneurs at any interest rate that any good entrepreneur is willing to borrow
      at.

 (ii) Unskilled investor capital, w0 , is abundant. In particular, it covers the credit demand
      of all entrepreneurs that unskilled investors are willing to lend to at any equilibrium
      interest rate.


    The formal optimization problem of investors and entrepreneurs, as well as further details
on collateralization and market clearing protocol are stated in Appendix A. We next define
the equilibrium within each period, and the full dynamic equilibrium of the economy. We
will show that the type distribution of entrepreneurs summarized by (µ0 , µ1 ) is a sufficient
state variable for the economy. As such, we fix (µ0 , µ1 ) when characterizing the stage game
equilibrium.


Definition 1 (Stage Game Equilibrium) For a fixed (µ0 , µ1 ), the stage game equilib-
rium consists of entrepreneurs' investment schedule i(,  ) and credit demand schedule  (r, ,  ),
investors' advertised interest rate schedule r
                                             ~(h) and unskilled investors' choice of test, equi-
librium interest rate schedule r(,  ), equilibrium credit allocation schedule to entrepreneurs
  (,  ), and equilibrium allocation of applications to investors such that


  (i) each agent's choice maximizes the agent's stage game utility given the strategy profile
      of other agents, equilibrium interest rates and allocations,

 (ii) the implied interest rate schedule r(,  ), credit allocation schedule for entrepreneurs
       (,  ), and allocation of applications to investors are consistent with agents' choices
      and the market clearing process.


                                              7
Definition 2 (Dynamic Equilibrium) The dynamic equilibrium consists of an infinite
sequence of {(µ0,t , µ1,t )}t=0 , individual entrepreneurs' it (,  ) and t (, , r ), individual in-
vestors' r
         ~t (h) and unskilled investors' choice of test, equilibrium rt (,  ), t (,  ) and alloca-
tion of applications to investors, all within each period, such that


    (i) there exists a finite  and a stable invariant set {(m0,i , m1,i )}i=1 such that (µ0,t , µ1,t ) =
        (m0,i , m1,i ) and

                                     (m0,i+1 , m1,i+1 ) if i < 
              (µ0,t+1 , µ1,t+1 ) =
                                      (m0,1 , m1,1 )    if i = ,

 (ii) the dynamics of (µ0,t , µ0,t ) is consistent with the birth-death process of entrepreneurs.

(iii) each agent's choice maximizes the agent's life-time utility given the strategy profile of
      other agents, equilibrium interest rates and allocations,

 (iv) in each period t, the implied interest rate schedule rt (,  ), credit allocation schedule for
      entrepreneurs t (,  ), and allocation of applications to investors are consistent with
      agents' choices and the market clearing process.


    The dynamic equilibrium nests both a steady state and a cycle. If  = 1, it is a standard
steady-state equilibrium. When  > 1, it is a cyclical dynamic equilibrium as it features a
stable cycle of length . We start by describing the stage game equilibrium, and then show
that each dynamic equilibrium is a sequence of stage game equilibria.



3       Stage Game Equilibrium

In order to analyze the stage game, fix the measure of opaque and transparent bad en-
trepreneurs, (µ0 , µ1 ). We first characterize the equilibrium interest rates in the credit market,
and then outline the real outcomes.

      The following lemma describes entrepreneurs' credit demand.


Lemma 1 Entrepreneurs' credit demand schedule  (r, ,  ) is as follows.



                                                    8
  (i) Entrepreneur (,  ) chooses a reservation interest rate rmax (,  ). He submits max-
      imum demand,  (r; ,  ) = 1  r
                                    to all r  rmax (,  ) and zero demand to all r >
      rmax (,  ).

                                                                     ¯   - 1, while bad
 (ii) Good entrepreneurs never choose a reservation rate higher than r
                                                               ¯   - 1,
      entrepreneurs never choose a reservation rate lower than r

            rmax (g,  )  r
                         ¯  rmax (b,  )       .


It follows from the lemma that it is sufficient to find the equilibrium reservation interest rate
for entrepreneurs, instead of working out a full credit demand schedule. Furthermore, the
lemma demonstrates that there exists an interest rate r     ¯ above which a good entrepreneur
never borrows as the repayment would be higher than the project payoff.

    We next show that in each period, the unique equilibrium in the credit market is one
of three distinct types, depending on the parameters. In what follows, the succeeding two
definitions introduce useful objects to characterize the equilibria.


Definition 3 (Interest Rates)

                                  µ0           1 - µ1             1
      rB (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf )              +              rf +             c                   (3)
                             1 - µ1 - µ0 1 - µ1 - µ0         1 - µ1 - µ0
                                       2
      rC (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf )  rf +             c                                              (4)
                                  1 - µ1 - µ0
                                 2µ0        1 + µ0 - µ1      1 + µ1 + µ0
      rM (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf )              +              rf +             c.                  (5)
                             1 - µ1 - µ0 1 - µ1 - µ0         1 - µ1 - µ0

                                                                   r-r -c)(1-µ )
                                                                  (¯f        1
Definition 4 (Opaque Bad Limit) Let µ         ~0 (µ1 , c, , rf ) = 2+c+rf +¯
                                                                           r
                                                                               be implicitly de-
             µ0 (µ1 ), µ1 , c, rf )  r
fined by rM (~                       ¯. For any measure of transparent bad entrepreneurs µ1 ,
it denotes the largest measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs for which interest rate rM (.) is
sustainable.


    The following lemma provides a result about individual investor lending behavior.


Lemma 2 Each unskilled investor who participates in the lending market only extends loans
to the projects that pass her test.


                                                9
    One of the implications of Lemma 2 is that transparent bad entrepreneurs never obtain
any credit. Next, Proposition 1 states our first key result, a characterization of the three
types of equilibrium in the credit market as a function of (µ0 , µ1 ).


Proposition 1 When min{rB (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ), rC (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf )} < r
                                                                       ¯,

                 c
  (i) µ0  [0, 1+  rf
                     ] corresponds to a bold stage. In a bold stage every unskilled investor who
      extends credit chooses the bold test. The credit market has a pooling equilibrium where
      all entrepreneurs who obtain credit (all good and opaque bad), do so at the common
      interest rate rB (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ).
                     c
 (ii) µ0  (max{ 1+    rf
                          ~0 (µ1 )}, 1] corresponds to a cautious stage. In a cautious stage
                         ,µ
      every unskilled investor who extends credit chooses the cautious test. The credit market
      has a separating equilibrium, where opaque good entrepreneurs obtain credit at interest
      rate r
           ¯, transparent good entrepreneurs obtain credit at rate rC (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ), and bad
      entrepreneurs don't obtain any credit.
               c            c
(iii) µ0  ( 1+  rf
                   , max{ 1+ rf
                                 ~0 (µ1 )}] corresponds to a mix stage. In a mix stage, among
                                ,µ
      the unskilled investors who extend credit some choose the bold test while others choose
      the cautious test. The credit market has a semi-separating equilibrium, where opaque
      good and bad entrepreneurs obtain credit at interest rate rM (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ). Transparent
      good entrepreneurs obtain credit at interest rate rC (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ).


Otherwise the economy is in autarky, where unskilled investors do not lend, bad entrepreneurs
do not borrow, and good ones obtain credit at interest rate r
                                                            ¯ from skilled investors only.


    Since unskilled capital is abundant, unskilled investors always lend at an interest rate
that makes them indifferent between paying cost c, running the test of their choice and
lending to the entrepreneurs who pass the test, versus using the storage technology and
earning the risk-free rate. The bold test passes many applicants, however the resulting loan
portfolio involves some defaults since some bad entrepreneurs pass the test. rB (.) has to
compensate the investor for these defaults. On the other hand, an investor who chooses the
cautious test is always paid back since he lends to a high quality loan portfolio. However, her
rejection rate is also high since even some good entrepreneurs fail the test. As running the
test has a fixed cost, not lending to tested applications is costly. rC (.) has to compensate the


                                                 10
investor for excess rejections. Lastly, rM (·) is a break-even interest rate for a bold investor
when not all good types are applying for loans at that rate.

     In the bold stage the break-even rate for bold investors is smaller than that of cautious
                                                           c
investors, rB (·)  rC (·). This is the case when µ0  1+     rf
                                                               , in the leftmost region of Figure
1. Here there are few opaque bad entrepreneurs. Thus the rejection rate of cautious test
is relatively high and cautious investors cannot compete with bold ones. As the bold test
passes all the good projects, skilled investors would not receive any applications at rates
higher than rB (.). Therefore, there is a single prevailing market interest rate at which all
good projects and some bad ones raise funding from both skilled and unskilled investors.
Skilled investors still make positive profits as they finance only good projects.

    Intuitively, when there are not too many bad projects around, investors are more con-
cerned about losing out on good projects by applying too tight lending standards. Thus
lending standards are lax, and many projects including some bad ones are able to raise
financing at the same relatively low rate. A bold stage realizes.

    On the other hand, if there are many bad projects, investors are concerned about ex-
tending loans to bad projects that will default. Lending standards are tightened and credit
market becomes segmented. Not only bad projects are unable to raise financing, even some
good ones are able to do so only at extremely high rates. In this case, rC (.) < rB (.). This
is the rightmost region in the left panel of Figure 1. As cautious investors reject opaque
good entrepreneurs, skilled investors can advertise a higher interest rate and attract them.
Since skilled capital is in short supply, the interest rate will be the highest rate that a good
entrepreneur is willing to accept, r¯.

     Lastly, if the measure of bad projects is in some intermediate range, some investors
apply lax and some tight lending standards. Thus, the mix stage arises. The third part of
the proposition states that this happens if there is an intermediate range of µ0 for which
             c
µ
~0 (µ1 ) > 1+ rf
                 , hence rM (·) is a feasible interest rate. This is the middle region in the left
panel of Figure 1.

    In a mix equilibrium the credit market is fragmented. Cautious unskilled investors
finance only transparent good projects at low interest rate rC (·) which allow them to break
even. On the other hand, bold unskilled investors break even at higher interest rate rM (.) in
a market where only opaque good and all bad applicants are present. In this market, some
bad projects are able to raise financing from unskilled bold investors. Skilled investors lend


                                               11
                                                                            12

2.5
                                             c
                                     0 =                ~
                                                        0 (1 )                                                   c        ~
                                           1 + rf                                                        0 =               0 ( 1 )
                                                                            10
                                                                                                               1 + rf
2.0


                                                                             8
1.5



1.0                                                                          6



0.5
                                                                             4


      0.0          0.1              0.2               0.3        0.4             0.0   0.1              0.2             0.3           0.4

                     0, measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs                                  0, measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs


                         (a) Interest rates                                                         (b) Output

Figure 1: Interest rates and output as a function of µ0 ,for a fixed µ1 . All three types
of stage equilibrium occur for some µ0 . The left panel displays the reservation interest
rates rB (dashed blue), rC (dashed red), rM (dashed grey), the maximum feasible rate
r
¯ (dashed green, horizontal), and the equilibrium interest rates (solid curves). The right
panel displays the output. In the leftmost region the stage game equilibrium is bold, in
the middle range it is mix, and in the rightmost region it is cautious. The parameters are:
 = 3,  = 0.3,  = 0.55, c = 0.265, rf = 0, w0 = 5, w1 = 0, µ1 = 0.11.


in the same market.

    A bold stage exhibits several features of an overheated, high sentiment credit market.
Interest rates are uniformly low and most projects including some bad ones are financed.
Thus the overall quality of initiated credit contracts is low with a significant share even-
tually defaulting. This is in contrast with the cautious stage which exhibits feature of a
low sentiment credit market. Most importantly, this market is fragmented. Some good en-
trepreneurs (transparent ones) enjoy a lot of funding at low interest rates. However, not
only bad projects are not funded, but also some good entrepreneurs (opaque ones) can get
only limited funding at very high rates. Therefore, the total loan quantity is relatively low,
but its quality is high, which leads to high subsequent realized returns.



3.1            Investment and Output

In this section, we conclude the characterization of the stage game equilibrium by deriving
the implied quantity of credit, investment and output for each stage.

            In the next proposition we will show that due to the informational friction some en-


                                                                       12
trepreneurs might face limited credit supply. Let ¯t (,  ) denote the maximum credit avail-
able to entrepreneur (,  ). As such, the effective credit constraint is

                                     1
      t (,  )    min ¯t (,  ),              .                                             (6)
                                 rt (,  )


    Each entrepreneur (,  ) faces interest rate rf < r(,  )  r   ¯. Thus they always prefer
to borrow up to the collateral constraint and invest all the proceeds in their projects, and
the borrowing constraint (6) holds with equality. The entrepreneurs who are funded by
abundant capital of the unskilled investors are unconstrained by the information friction,
               1
and borrow r(,   )
                   . This includes all good entrepreneurs in the bold stage, and transparent
good entrepreneurs in the cautious stage. For the constrained entrepreneurs who are able
to raise financing, ¯(,  ) is determined either by the information friction, or by the limited
supply of capital at the market where they raise financing. The next proposition formalizes
this result.


Proposition 2


  (i) In any equilibrium transparent bad entrepreneurs are not financed by any investors,
       (b, 1) = 0.

 (ii) In the bold stage, all entrepreneurs face interest rate rB (.). All good entrepreneurs
      borrow (g,  ) = r1  B
                            . Opaque bad entrepreneurs' are limited by unskilled investors'
                                                                 w1
      mistakes at interest rate rB (.), implying (b, 0) = r1
                                                           B
                                                             - 1-µ0 -µ1
                                                                        .

(iii) In the cautious stage, all transparent good entrepreneurs face interest rate rC (.) and
      borrow (g, 1) = r1  C
                            . Opaque good ones face r ¯ and are limited by the short supply of
      skilled capital, implying (g, 0) = 1-2 w1
                                           µ0 -µ1
                                                  . Opaque bad entrepreneurs are not financed,
       (b, 0) = 0.

(iv) In the mix stage, all transparent good entrepreneurs face rC (.) while opaque good ones
     face rM (.). Neither are constrained by information frictions, (g, 1) = r1
                                                                              C
                                                                                and (g, 0) =
      1
     rM
        . Opaque bad entrepreneurs are limited by unskilled investors' mistakes at interest
                                    w1
     rate rM (.), (b, 0) = 2r1M - 1-µ0 -µ1
                                           .


    The investment of entrepreneur (,  ) is given by i(,  ) = (1 + (,  )) and his output



                                                13
is y (,  )  i(,  ). Therefore, aggregate output in state (µ0 , µ1 ) is given by

                 1 - µ0 - µ1
      Y (µ0 , µ1 )            y (g, 1) + y (g, 0) +  µ1 y (b, 1) + µ0 y (b, 0)              (7)
                      2
                        1 - µ0 - µ1
                = 1+                 ( (g, 1) + (g, 0)) + µ0 (b, 0) .
                             2


    In a bold stage all good entrepreneurs are fully financed by bold unskilled investors at
interest rate rB (.). Transparent bad entrepreneurs are excluded from the credit market.
However, opaque bad ones can obtain some credit since the bold test does not distinguish
them from good entrepreneurs. Yet, their credit is limited by the participating unskilled
investor mistakes. Since all good entrepreneurs and even some bad ones raise a lot of credit
at low rates and invest, the output is high. Thus the bold stage corresponds to a "boom".

     In a cautious stage transparent good entrepreneurs are fully financed by cautious un-
skilled investors at interest rate rC (.). However, opaque good entrepreneurs can only obtain
credit from skilled investors, who charge them the maximum interest rate r     ¯. As the capital
of skilled investors is in short supply, their capital limits the credit of these entrepreneurs
implying low credit quantities. Furthermore, none of the bad entrepreneurs is financed. Thus
investment is low in a cautious stage and it corresponds to a "downturn".

    In a mix stage, some unskilled investors are cautious and some are bold. The cautious
ones finance transparent good entrepreneurs at interest rate rC (.). Similar to the cautious
stage, transparent good entrepreneurs use the capital supply of cautious unskilled investors
and are unconstrained. On the other hand, the bold investors lend at higher rate rM  (rC , r
                                                                                           ¯).
Here similar to the bold stage, opaque good entrepreneurs can use the capital supply of bold
unskilled investors and are unconstrained, and opaque bad entrepreneurs obtain some credit
as well and survive. Skilled investors only lend to opaque good entrepreneurs at rate rM (.).

    The right panel of Figure 1 illustrates aggregate output conditional on state µ0 , in each
type of stage game equilibrium. A natural observation is that for a fixed µ1 , the aggregate
output is smoothly monotonically decreasing in the measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs
within each class of equilibria. This is because the equilibrium interest rates are (weakly)
increasing in µ0 , as depicted in left panel. A larger proportion of bad entrepreneurs increases
the equilibrium interest rates due to adverse selection. This increases the cost of capital,
which in turn decreases investment and total output.




                                               14
4    Dynamic Endogenous Cycles

This section develops our main results about the cyclical dynamic behavior of the economy.
We describe the cycles that emerge under different conditions, and explain the outcome in
both the credit market and real economy in each cycle. Throughout, a boom or an upturn
refers to the times when output is high and output growth is positive. These real outcomes
are accompanied by low yields in the credit market. Alternatively, a bust, downturn, or
recession happens when output is low and output growth is negative. This is accompanied
by a fragmented credit market.

   We first establish that within each period, the dynamic equilibrium reduces to the stage
game that we established in the previous section.


Lemma 3 In any dynamic equilibrium, the economy is in a stage game equilibrium in each
period.


The key to the dynamics of the model is the interaction between the choice of lending
standards and the quality composition of the investment. This quality deteriorates in the
bold equilibrium when investors' lending standards are lax, and improves in the cautious
equilibrium when their lending standards are tight. At the same time, the change in borrower
quality composition induces rational shifts in investors choice of information test and implies
fluctuations in sentiment. This interaction leads to endogenous economic cycles without any
exogenous aggregate shock to the economy.

    We first describe the law of motion for the state variables (µ0 , µ1 ), and then explain
the emerging cycles. To ease the notation, we omit the time-subscript whenever it does not
cause any confusion.


Evolution of State Variables. Let (µ0 , µ1 ) and (µ0 , µ1 ) denote the state variables to-
day and tomorrow, respectively. When at least some investors are bold, only transparent
bad projects cannot raise financing. However, when all investors are cautious, opaque bad
projects are not financed either. Any entrepreneur who cannot raise financing exits and is
replaced by a new draw from the outside pool. The next proposition summarizes the law of
motion for measure of opaque and transparent bad entrepreneurs.



                                              15
Proposition 3 Assume min{rB (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ), rC (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf )} < r
                                                                         ¯ =  - 1 so the economy
is not in autarky.

                       c
  (i) If µ0  0, max{ 1+ rf
                            ~0 (µ1 )} , then the law of motion for µ0 and µ1 follows
                           ,µ

                                                               
               µ0B (, , µ0 , µ1 ) = (1 -  )µ0 + ( + (1 -  )µ1 ) ,                              (8)
                                                               2
                                                   
               µ1B (, , µ0 , µ1 ) = ( + (1 -  )µ1 ) .                                          (9)
                                                   2

                    c
 (ii) If µ0  max{ 1+ rf
                         ~0 (µ1 )}, 1 , then the law of motion for µ0 and µ1 follows7
                        ,µ

                                                          
               µ0C (, , µ0 , µ1 ) = ( + (1 -  )(µ0 + µ1 )) ,                                  (10)
                                                          2
                                                          
               µ1C (, , µ0 , µ1 ) = ( + (1 -  )(µ0 + µ1 )) .                                  (11)
                                                          2

    The laws of motion are intuitive. For instance, consider the measure of opaque bad
types µ0 . When some investors are bold, function µ0B (, , , µ0 , µ1 ) describes the evolution
of µ0 . It consists of survivals from the current period, plus the replacements from the
outside pool. From the existing opaque bad entrepreneurs, fraction (1 -  ) survive. The
replacements consists of two parts itself:  measure of all entrepreneurs are exogenously
replaced. Furthermore, the remaining transparent bad types cannot raise funding and are
replaced. From the replacements, a fraction /2 enter as opaque bad.

    The other laws of motion follow a similar intuition. The opaque and transparent good
entrepreneurs are subject to the same law of motion in both cases, as they always raise
financing, and their measures in the outside pool is the same. As such, in the long run both
measures are equal to 1-µ20 -µ1
                                . This validates that (µ0 , µ1 ) are sufficient state variables for
the economy despite four types of entrepreneurs.

     Notice that if the state variables were only governed by dynamics of one of µiB (equations
8-9) or µiC (equations 10-11), then (µ0 , µ1 ) would converge to constants regardless of the
initial conditions. This observation leads to the following Lemma, establishing conditions
for a dynamic equilibrium without cycles.

  7
      If economy is in autarky, equation (10) and (11) still govern the laws of motion.




                                                      16
Lemma 4 Consider the pair of constants

                                                                            
      ¯0B 
      µ                   ¯1B 
                         ,µ                    ¯0C 
                                           and µ                  ¯1C 
                                                                 ,µ                 .
             2 - (1 -  )       2 - (1 -  )          2 - 2(1 -  )       2 - 2(1 -  )

For any  and  , µ
                ¯0B > µ
                      ¯0C and µ
                              ¯1B < µ
                                    ¯1C . Furthermore,

                     c
         ¯0B  max{ 1+
  (i) If µ            rf
                         ,µ   µ1B )}, then (¯
                          ~0 (¯             µ0B , µ
                                                  ¯1B ) is a bold steady state equilibrium.
                     c
         ¯0C  max{ 1+
 (ii) If µ            rf
                         ,µ   µ1C )}, then (¯
                          ~0 (¯             µ0C , µ
                                                  ¯1C ) is a cautious steady state equilibrium.

     µ
     ¯0B and µ
             ¯0C denote the measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs in the permanent steady
states of the economy which correspond to a fixed information choice of investors, bold
and cautious, respectively. Observe that (¯ µ0B , µ¯1B ) and (¯
                                                              µ0C , µ
                                                                    ¯1C ) correspond to the fixed
points of equations (8)-(9) and (10)-(11) described in Proposition 3, respectively. Lemma
4 implies that if the investors' optimal information choice at the fixed point coincides with
the information choice that entails the fixed point, then the economy converges to a steady
state. Note that the measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs in the bold steady state has to
be higher that of the cautious one, µ¯0,B > µ
                                            ¯0,C , as the exit rate of opaque bad entrepreneurs
is lower when investors are bold.

    To understand when the economy converges to a permanent steady state, it is insightful
               c
to think of 1+  rf
                   as the opportunity cost of giving up on good investment for unskilled
investors. When the opportunity cost is high, investors prefer to be bold than cautious since
the bold test leads to taking all good investment opportunities.

    Very high opportunity cost leads to a permanent overheated bold stage since investors
always prefer bold to cautious test independent of fraction of bad entrepreneurs, the first part
of Lemma 4. The mirror image is the second part of Lemma 4, when very low opportunity
cost of giving up on good investment leads to a permanent low-sentiment cautious stage.

    Throughout the rest of the paper we focus on parameters where the conditions of Lemma
4 are violated and the dynamic equilibrium is cyclical. This happens when the cost of the
test is intermediate. In this situation, in the permanent bold steady state the fraction of
bad entrepreneurs is high enough to make it too costly for investors to be bold, and they
prefer being cautious. Alternatively, in the permanent cautious steady state, the fraction of
opaque good projects is too high. It is too costly for investors to stay cautious and give up
on all good investment opportunities, so they prefer to be bold. These deviations make the
permanent steady states unsustainable.

                                               17
    Depending on the parameters, the economy admits a wide range of cyclical patterns
where the two state variables cycle through a finite number of values in the long-run. We
use the following two criteria to broadly classify the cycles. The first criterion is whether
the cycle involves a mix stage or not. A two-stage economy is one with a permanent cycle
which only consists of bold and cautious stages. Alternatively, a three-stage economy is one
whose permanent cycle has all three stages, bold, mix, and cautious. The second criterion
is whether the economy spends more time in the bold or cautious stage during the cycle.


Two-Stage Economy. Using Proposition 1, an economy can cycle through only bold and
                               c
                   ~0 (µ1 )  1+
cautious stages if µ            rf
                                   , for every realized µ1 . Furthermore, from Lemma 4, a cyclical
                                        c
dynamic equilibrium can arise if 1+      rf
                                             (¯µ0,C , µ
                                                      ¯0,B ). The next Proposition provides further
                                                                        c
details on the prevailing cycles as a function of the position of 1+     rf
                                                                            within this interval.


Proposition 4 When 1+       c
                             rf
                                 (¯     ¯0B ), for any  and  there are constants µ
                                  µ0C , µ                                                 
                                                                                   0B < µ0C 
(¯
 µ0C , µ
       ¯0B ), such that if the prevailing cyclical dynamic equilibrium is a two-stage economy
then


  (i)     c
        1+rf
               [µ                                                                        
                  0B , µ0C ) implies a 2-period cycle with the two-point support (µ0B , µ0C ). In
        the long-run, the economy oscillates between a one-period bold stage and a one-period
        cautious stage.

 (ii)     c
        1+rf
               [µ  0C , µ
                        ¯0B ) implies a  > 2 period long bold-short cautious cycle. The cycle
        consists of  - 1 consecutive periods where µ0 increases, a long bold stage, followed by
                                                                        c
        a one period decline in µ0 , a short cautious stage. A larger 1+ rf
                                                                            implies a longer bold
        cycle.

(iii)     c
        1+rf
              (¯ µ0C , µ0B ) implies a  > 2 period short bold-long cautious cycle. The cycle
        consists of  - 1 consecutive periods where µ0 decreases, a long cautious stage, followed
                                                                           c
        by a one period increase in µ0 , a short bold stage. A smaller 1+   rf
                                                                               implies a longer
        cautious stage.


                                                            c
    When investors have an intermediate opportunity cost 1+  rf
                                                                , the economy features deter-
ministic endogenous cycles. The cycles are an outcome of the two-way interaction between
investor sentiment and the fundamentals of the economy. When the measure of opaque bad
applicants are relatively low, the opportunity cost of losing good investment is high and


                                                18
                                  0.4                                                                          2.5
bad opaque entrepreneur measure




                                                                                                               2.0
                                  0.3




                                                                                               interest rate
                                                                                                               1.5
                                  0.2


                                                                                                               1.0
                                  0.1

                                                                                                               0.5

                                  0.0
                                         5                10                   15    20                                5             10               15   20
                                                           time                                                                          time
                                                                   c
                                        0     ---   0 B    ...           -.-   0 C
                                                                  1+rf                                                       High rate          Low rate

                                            (a) State variable µ0                                                          (b) Interest rates


                                                                                                                0.3
                                  9


                                  8                                                                             0.2
        output, welfare




                                                                                               output growth




                                  7                                                                             0.1


                                  6
                                                                                                                0.0

                                  5
                                                                                                               - 0.1
                                  4

                                        5                 10                   15    20                                5             10               15   20
                                                          time                                                                           time

                                               output               welfare                                                     output growth

                                        (c) Output and Welfare                                                             (d) Output growth

Figure 2: This figure plots a two-stage economy with cycle that consists of a multi-period
boom and a one period recession. Panel (a) depicts the law of motions of state variables.
Panel (b) shows the interest rates. Panel (c) depicts the total gross output and welfare, and
Panel (d) is the output growth. The parameters are:  = 2.7,  = 0.6,  = 0.2, c = 0.33, rf =
0, w0 = 3.3, w1 = 0.2.




                                                                                          19
investors are bold. Lending standards are lax and the interest rate is low. There is a lot
of credit and the economy is in a boom. However, as a result of lax lending standards the
quality of the credit pool deteriorates. At some point, there are sufficiently many opaque
bad applicants that investors prefer to turn cautious. Being cautious implies tight lending
standards, high interest rate, large credit spread, and little credit to opaque projects. A
recession hits, but this also stops opaque bad entrepreneurs from raising funding. Hence,
the quality of credit improves, and the cycle continues.

    Proposition 4 illustrates different types of cycles that emerge for different parameter
                                                                 c
values, and describes a close relationship between the size of 1+ rf
                                                                     and the time the economy
spends in bold or cautious stages. Higher investor opportunity cost of giving up good invest-
ment implies longer booms interrupted by one period recessions. A short recession is enough
to improve the quality of loan applications enough for investors to be bold again. As such,
investors do not risk losing good investment at the cost of financing some bad projects.

    Figure 2 depicts this case, a long bold-short cautious cycle. Panel 2a shows the evolution
of the state variable, the measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs. Consider starting at a low µ0 ,
                         c
below the threshold 1+    rf
                             where the measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs is low. Investors
                                                                                 c
are bold and µ0 grows towards the higher bold steady state, µ     ¯0,B . Since 1+ rf
                                                                                     < µ
                                                                                       ¯0,B , µ0
surpasses this threshold before reaching the bold steady state and triggers a switch to being
cautious. At that point µ0 immediately drops and moves towards the lower cautious steady
state, µ¯0,C . The length of boom and bust is determined by the number of periods the
economy spends in each stage before crossing the threshold.8

    Figure 2b plots the interest rates throughout the cycle. As shown in Proposition 1,
there is no credit spread in the bold stage. However, the credit market is fragmented in the
cautious stage, and the credit spread spikes.

    On the other hand, lower investor opportunity cost implies longer downturns followed
                                                                            c
only by short booms. This corresponds to the economy in Figure 3. Lastly, 1+ rf
                                                                                in between
these two cases implies an alteration between short booms and short downturns.
   8                                    c
     The indifference threshold µ0t = 1+ rf is not a steady state equilibrium. With our tie-breaking assump-
tion, Proposition 3 implies that the bold dynamics apply at the threshold and thus µ0t increases. Any other
tie breaking assumption implies a change in µ0t as well. In particular, if positive measure of investors chooses
to be bold, the bold dynamics applies. If all investors choose to be cautious then the cautious dynamics
applies.




                                                      20
                                              c
Three-Stage Economy. If µ        ~0 (µ1 ) > 1+ rf
                                                  , the economy does not directly transition from
a bold stage into a cautious stage. Instead, it passes through a number of intermediate stages
in which a fraction of unskilled investors are bold and a fraction are cautious. In this mix
stage, credit market is fragmented, and interest rates rise. As such, the output experiences
a first drop. However, since there are still investors with lax lending standards, the opaque
bad projects are able to get some financing. Thus the quality of credit keeps falling as the
economy transitions through the mix stage. The mix stage ends when the credit quality
is sufficiently low that it is not optimal for any investor to be bold anymore. All investors
switch to being cautious and imposing tight credit standards. The economy enters a bust
and the output experiences a second drop. However, this drop is accompanied by a dramatic
improvement in quality of the credit applicants, to which the investors respond by switching
to lax lending standards. The economy switches to a boom, and the cycles continues. Figure
4 depicts a three-stage economy, formally outlined in the next proposition.


Proposition 5 For any  and  , if the prevailing cyclical dynamic equilibrium is a three-
stage economy then the cycle has length   3 and consists of a bold stage, followed by a mix
stage, and a one period cautious stage. µ0 increases during bold and mix stages and declines
in the cautious stage.


    In the next section, we discuss the real outcomes throughout a cycle.



4.1    Dynamics Evolution of Output

This section describes the properties of the path of aggregate output along equilibrium
cycles. The first lemma demonstrates that the change in total output is not smooth when
the economy switches between different stages.


Lemma 5 Consider a set of parameters for which the stage game equilibrium is not autarky.
Total output, Y (µ0 , µ1 ), is discontinuous at the threshold across any two stages and jumps
downward in µ0 .


    This result shows that Y (µ0 , µ1 ) is not continuous in the state variables of the economy,
as clear in Figure 1b. In this sense, the economy crashes around the thresholds where agents
switch sentiments. This crash is the consequence of a discontinuous drop in credit when

                                               21
some or all unskilled investors stop lending to opaque entrepreneurs. Furthermore, opaque
good entrepreneurs can only borrow at a higher rate. This leads to discontinuously less
investment and smaller output.


Output Growth. To illustrate upturns and downturns transparently, it is instructive to
examine output growth. We define output growth in each period as the percentage difference
between period output and initial capital of all agents,

                      Y (µ0 , µ1 )
     g (µ0 , µ1 )                  - 1.
                     w0 + w1 + 1

We believe this is the relevant measure of growth in our framework considering the OLG
structure of the model, and no inter-temporal transfer of resources.

    Panel 2c and 2d illustrate output level and growth along the equilibrium cycle for an
economy with a long boom and a short recession. Panel 2c illustrates the cyclicality of output,
and its crash when investor sentiments switches. Comparison with panel 2a shows the co-
movement of output with the measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs µ0 . Unsurprisingly, a
larger measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs implies smaller output. Moreover, the amplified
output drop when there is a switch from an overheated to a low-sentiment credit market is
noticeable. Panel 2a shows that this switch occurs in periods 4, 11 and 18 in our example.
While µ0 increases only slightly in those periods, panel 2c shows a sizable drop in output.
In these periods, the deterioration of the pool of credit applications triggers investors to
become cautious. Therefore all bad projects lose financing, and opaque good projects are
significantly squeezed. As panel 2b shows, the fragmentation in the credit market means the
opaque good entrepreneurs face a significantly higher interest rate than before.

    On the bright side though, the crash has a "purification effect" on the economy. Bad
entrepreneurs exit the economy at a higher rate. This leads to a sufficient improvement in
the credit application quality which triggers investors to switch to bold tests. Over the next
couple of periods, the credit market becomes overheated again, and the cycle continues.

    Panel 2d depicts the output growth throughout the cycle. The growth rate is positive
in the boom, and negative in the downturn.




                                              22
4.2    Interpreting Cycles

The richness of the cyclical behavior generated by this framework allows us to consider a
few different business cycle outcomes through the lens of the model.


Normal Expansion and Contraction. This is the common post-war business cycle
pattern in the US, for instance according to the NBER US Business Cycle Expansions
and Contractions categorization. It consists of a long boom, followed by a short recession,
followed by the same pattern. Credit market is integrated and the interest rate is low
throughout the boom, while during the recession there is segmentation in credit market and
interest rates increase. This is characterized in Proposition 4.ii, and depicted in Figure 2.


Prolonged Recovery. If investor opportunity cost is relatively low, the economy is trapped
in a lengthy recovery period after each bust, before turning to a short boom. During the
lengthy recovery period, the output and loan quality is only slowly improving, and the credit
market is fragmented for a long time until credit quality improves sufficiently that investors
choose to be bold and relax the lending standards. Figure 3 depicts such an economy which
is characterized in Proposition 4.iii.


Double-Dip Recession. The recession can be exacerbated if the initial decline in credit
quality is not sufficiently bad to make all investors adopt a cautious strategy and impose
tight lending standards. As such, although the fragmentation of credit market leads to a
drop in output, yet it does not entail an improvement in loan quality. For some time, the
credit market is fragmented, but since some investors are still bold, bad loans keep getting
financing and thus credit quality worsens. At some point however, the credit quality has
deteriorated so much that every investor chooses to use tight lending standards. The output
takes a second hit, but this time it is accompanied by an improvement in the loan quality and
leads to a boom. This phenomena happens in the three-stage economy. Figure 4 illustrates
an example of a double-dip recession, as explained in Proposition 5.




                                             23
                                  0.35                                                                            2.5


                                  0.30
bad opaque entrepreneur measure




                                                                                                                  2.0

                                  0.25
                                                                                                                  1.5




                                                                                                  interest rate
                                  0.20


                                  0.15                                                                            1.0


                                  0.10
                                                                                                                  0.5

                                  0.05
                                                                                                                  0.0
                                  0.00
                                             5               10                   15    20                               5                 10               15   20
                                                              time                                                                          time
                                                                      c
                                         0       ---   0 B    ...           -.-   0 C                                              High rate          Low rate
                                                                     1+rf


                                          (a) State variable µ0                                                                  (b) Interest rates

                                  20
                                                                                                                   0.2
                                  18
                                                                                                                   0.1
                                  16
                                                                                                                   0.0
output, welfare




                                                                                                  output growth




                                  14
                                                                                                                  -0.1
                                  12
                                                                                                                  -0.2
                                  10
                                                                                                                  -0.3

                                   8
                                                                                                                  -0.4

                                         5                   10                   15    20                                   5             10               15   20
                                                              time                                                                             time

                                                 output                welfare                                                        output growth

                                         (c) Output and Welfare                                                                  (d) Output growth

Figure 3: This figure plots a two-stage economy with a cycle which has a long recovery period.
Panel (a) depicts the law of motions of state variables. Panel (b) shows the interest rates.
Panel (c) depicts the total gross output and welfare, and Panel (d) is the output growth.
The parameters are:  = 2.7,  = 0.54,  = 0.22, c = 0.103, rf = 0, w0 = 8.8, w1 = 0.2.




                                                                                             24
                               0.40                                                                                                2.0
opaque entrepreneur measures




                               0.35




                                                                                                                   interest rate
                               0.30                                                                                                1.5

                               0.25


                               0.20                                                                                                1.0

                               0.15


                               0.10
                                                  5                10                   15               20                                5             10               15   20
                                                                    time                                                                                     time
                                                                                       c
                                      ~
                                      0 (1 )         0       1    ---   0 B     ...          -.-   0 C
                                                                                      1+rf                                                       High rate          Low rate

                                               (a) State variables (µ0 , µ1 )                                                                  (b) Interest rates

                               11

                               10
                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                9
       output, welfare




                                                                                                                   output growth




                                8                                                                                                   0.2

                                7
                                                                                                                                    0.0
                                6

                                5                                                                                                  - 0.2

                                4

                                                 5                 10                   15               20                                5             10               15   20
                                                                   time                                                                                      time

                                                         output               welfare                                                               output growth

                                                (c) Output and Welfare                                                                         (d) Output growth

Figure 4: This figure plots a three-stage economy with a double-dip recession. Panel (a)
depicts the law of motions of state variables. Panel (b) shows the interest rates. Panel
(c) depicts the total gross output and welfare, and Panel (d) is the output growth. The
parameters are:  = 3,  = 0.3,  = 0.55, c = 0.265, rf = 0, w0 = 3.99, w1 = 0.01.




                                                                                                              25
5     Optimal Cycles and Economic Policy

We have so far demonstrated that changes in credit market sentiments and production fun-
damentals feed onto each other and create endogenous cycles. As we explicitly model the
mechanism which turns booms to recessions and vice-versa, our framework is well suited to
explore how policy influences economic cycles.

      We first provide an appropriate definition of welfare in our framework, and express some
of its important properties. We use that to study the problem of a constrained planner who
can choose the investor lending standards, but not the lending and investment behavior di-
rectly. This clarifies the dynamic externality which leads to the equilibrium being generically
inefficient. Finally, we explore the rational for a policy maker to intervene in this economy
with realistic monetary and macro-prudential policies. We explore the cost and benefits of
each policy and rank their efficiency in our environment.



5.1    Welfare

The natural measure of welfare in this economy is the aggregate consumption of all en-
trepreneurs and investors. In equilibrium it simplifies to:



                                       1 - µ0 - µ1
      W (µ0 , µ1 ) (1 + µ0 (b, 0)) +                         (g,  ) [ - (1 + r (g,  ))]
                                            2         =0,1

                   + w0 (1 + rf ) + w1 1 + max r (g,  ) .                                  (12)
                                              



    The first term is the total production of all bad entrepreneurs which is fully consumed
by them. The second term consists of the consumption of transparent and opaque good
entrepreneurs, which is their production net of repayment. The third term is the consumption
of unskilled investors noting that they are indifferent between lending and storage at risk-free
rate. The last term is the consumption of the skilled investors.

    The next proposition shows that welfare decreases in the measure of opaque bad en-
trepreneurs, µ0 , within any segment of the state space where the type of equilibrium does
not change. Moreover, it discontinuously drops when the economy switches across two stages.


                                               26
Proposition 6 Consider a set of parameters for which the stage game equilibrium is not
autarky. Welfare, W (µ0 , µ1 ), is decreasing in the measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs µ0 ,
and discontinuously drops in µ0 at the threshold across any two stages.


    An increase in the measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs decreases welfare since it ex-
acerbates the borrower adverse selection problem. The cost of capital increases, and the
production falls. When some investors switch to be cautious, the problem is intensified since
not only some entrepreneurs lose some (or all) financing, but also some good ones can only
borrow at the high rates that skilled investors are willing to lend at.

    As such, in a cycling economy, just as output, welfare is higher in the bold stage than
in the cautious stage, re-enforcing our interpretation of these stages as booms and busts.
Figure 2c depicts the dynamics of welfare and output under our baseline parametrization.
We next provide a definition of average welfare that enables us to define the constrained
optimum and compare across policies.


Definition 5 (Expected Welfare.) For any collection of m states characterized by the
pair of state variables (µ0,j , µ1,j ), the expected welfare is
                                   m
                               1
      EW (µ0,j , µ1,j )m
                       j =1               W (µ0,j , µ1,j ) .
                               m   j =1



In what follows we are interested in the effect of policy on expected welfare of the cycle.



5.2    Optimal Cycles

In the rest of this section, we normalize the physical return of the storage technology to
zero. We then model the monetary policy as the introduction of an asset by the government
providing positive return rf .

    As we focus on the relationship between the choice of investors' lending standards and
fundamentals, it is instructive to study the following constrained planner problem.


Definition 6 (Constrained Planner Problem) The constrained planner maximizes the
                                                                           ^P
expected welfare in the ergodic state distribution by choosing a threshold µ 0 and one single


                                                     27
test available to investors for µ0  µ ^P                            ^P
                                        0 and another test for µ0 > µ 0 . He cannot choose
the prevailing interest rates, lending or investment levels. Furthermore, the participation
constraint of all investors and entrepreneurs has to be satisfied.


    The constrained planner has a very restricted tool to influence the economic outcomes.
He can only partition the state space into two parts, and in each part choose the single
test that is available to investors. As such, the planner can implement a bold (cautious)
steady state by choosing a threshold µ    ^P0 > µ      µP
                                                 ¯0,B (^ 0 < µ
                                                             ¯0,C ). Alternatively, the planner
can implement various two-stage cyclical economies by choosing different levels of µ      ^P
                                                                                           0 
(¯
 µ0,C , µ
        ¯0,C ) to partition the state space, and choose the available test to investors in each
partition.9 In the next section, we show that the policies we consider cannot outperform this
very restricted constrained planner, which makes it a reasonable benchmark.

    The next proposition provides a sufficient condition for the constrained planner solution
to be a cyclical economy.

                                2c+2r                 -c-r -1
Proposition 7 Let min  3c+3rf +1   f
                                     < max  2 2-c-rff -1 . For any   min , max , there
exists a ¯ such that for  < ¯, the constrained planner solution features a cycle.


    The proposition states conditions for the rational sentiment driven cycles to be the
choice of a welfare maximizing constrained planner. Intuitively, the choice of the test is
planner's instrument to influence the ergodic state distribution. Tight lending standards has
a purifying effect: it keeps the measure of bad entrepreneurs at bay. However, if the planner
forces investors to always be cautious, opaque good firms are always squeezed. Therefore,
to maximize expected welfare, the planner periodically forces the investors to be cautious
when the measure of entrepreneurs not paying back their loans is high.


Externality. The decentralized equilibrium features an externality because investors do
not internalize that their individual choice of test influences the ergodic state distribution.
Individual investors are atomistic, thus from their perspective a unilateral deviation to an-
other test does not affect the ergodic distribution. As such, the externality would persist
even if investors were long lived.
  9
    Note that the constrained planner cannot implement a three-stage economy and cannot partition the
economy into more than two segments even with only bold and cautious stages.



                                                 28
     Figure 5 compares constrained planner expected welfare with policy outcomes that we
will discuss in the next section. The solid green curve in Figure 5a is the planner curve. It
plots the expected welfare of the corresponding cycle for different levels of planner choice of
threshold µ^P
            0 . The blue dot represents the expected welfare in the decentralized economy,
which is achieved if the planner chooses µ ^P0 = c. The vertical dashed lines partition the
figure into three regions. The leftmost region corresponds to a cautious steady state, the
middle region to two-stage cyclical economies of various lengths and various bold/cautious
compositions, and the rightmost region is a bold steady state. Welfare changes discontinu-
ously wherever the choice of the planner changes the type of the prevailing cycle and it is
flat otherwise.

     Figure 5a illustrates that the constrained planner prefers to shorten the length of the
boom compared to the equilibrium. Panels 5b and 5c illustrate the intuition. Panel 5b
contrasts the path of the state variable µ0 chosen optimally by the planner with the decen-
tralized equilibrium. The planner enforces a switch to cautious test at a lower level of µ0
which implies that the economy purifies more often. This keeps the measure of bad types
in the applicant pool lower on average, which in turn makes the bold stage more produc-
tive. Panel 5c compares the welfare paths between the planner's choice and the decentralized
economy. Because of the lower measure of bad types, both the booms and the recessions lead
to a higher welfare under the constrained planner solution compared to the decentralized
equilibrium.



5.3    Economic Policy

We have so far established that the constrained optimal economy is often cyclical. In what
follows we connect the constrained optimum to realistic monetary and macro-prudential
policies. We analyze the cost and benefits of the different policies and compare their efficiency
in this economy.

    In order to implement monetary policy, the policy maker introduces a risk-free asset
for saving within each period. This asset supply is perfectly elastic for entrepreneurs and
investors alike. The monetary policy rate rf,t is the net return on this asset. To ensure that
the budget constraint of the policy maker is satisfied in every period, we assume a lump-sum
tax is imposed on investors each period which exactly covers the aggregate expenditure of
providing the risk-free asset. We further assume that the policy maker must implement the


                                               29
same rate within each stage, but he can set a different risk-free rate in bold, cautious and
             B    C      M
mix stages, rf , rf and rf correspondingly.

    As a macro-prudential tool, we model risk-weighted capital requirements. Assume that
the regulator imposes a risk weight x  1 for each unit of risky investment. The macro-
prudential policy is permanent and only depends on the risk characteristics of individual
investor portfolio. As such, it is non-state-contingent.

    Only bold unskilled investors lend to bad entrepreneur, so they are the only investors
with a risky portfolio and subject to the macro-prudential policy. Let vg and vr be the bold
investor's investment in the risky and risk-free asset per-unit-financing, respectively. Thus
we must have vg x + vr = 1. If x = 1, this reduces to the budget constraint of the investor
in our baseline economy. When x > 1 the capital requirement forces bold investors to forgo
investing vg (x - 1) units of their resources. We assume that the investor consumes this excess
capital at the end of the period.
                            B C M
   Let the tuple  = (x, rf   , rf , rf ) denote a policy profile. In the next proposition, we
express the equilibrium associated with each policy profile.

Proposition 8 Under the policy profile , the equilibrium is characterized by Propositions
1-2 with the following modified interest rate functions
                                                                 B
                                             B
                                                    (x - 1)(c + rf + 1)(1 - µ1 )
      rB (µ0 , µ1 , c,  )  rB (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf )+                                ,        (13)
                                                            1 - µ1 - µ0
                                             C
      rC (µ0 , µ1 , c,  )  rC (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ),
                                              M                         2µ1
      rM (µ0 , µ1 , c,  )  xrM (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ) + (x - 1)(1 -                 c),
                                                                    1 - µ0 - µ1
                                        c
and the modified thresholds for       1+rf
                                             and µ
                                                 ~0 (µ1 , c, , rf ) are,

                               c     (1 - µ1 )
        ^
        µ 0 (µ1 , c,  )          C
                                   -       C
                                                            B
                                               (x - 1) 1 + rf        B
                                                              + c + rf    C
                                                                       - rf           ,   (14)
                            1 + rf    1 + rf
                                              M                  M
                           (1 - µ1 )( - (1 + rf ) - (x - 1)(c + rf + 1)) - (1 + µ1 )c
      ~
      µ 0 (µ1 , c, ,  )                                       M
                                                                                      ,
                                                + x(1 + c + rf )

respectively.

    The next Corollary summarizes the effect of the policy tools on the cost of capital and
the cycle in a two-stage economy.

                                                      30
Corollary 1 For any state (µ0 ,µ1 ), keeping the state constant, an increase in the risk-free
                        B                          C                        M
rate in the bold stage rf , in the cautious stage rf , or in the mix stage rf increases the cost
of capital only in the corresponding stage. An increase in risk weight x increases the cost of
capital in the bold and mix stages.
                                                             B
    Furthermore, in a two stage economy an increase in x, rf   , or the common interest rate
          B    C
rf (rf = rf = rf ) shortens the bold and elongates the cautious stage.


    This corollary is a direct consequence of Proposition 8, evaluating the comparative statics
of interest rate and switching thresholds in equations (13) and (14) with respect to the
elements of  .

    Intuitively, higher risk-free rates and capital requirement lead to a tightening compared
to the laissez-fair equilibrium. Increasing the bold, cautious, or mix risk-free rate implies a
higher opportunity cost of lending to entrepreneurs in the corresponding stage. Alternatively,
increasing the capital requirement implies a higher opportunity cost only for bold investors
by directly decreasing the amount of capital that he can lend. Finally, observe that the
lending rate is more sensitive to the common risk-free rate in bold versus cautious regime.
Thus, an increase in the common interest rate increases the bold lending rate more than the
                                            B
cautious one. As such, an increase in x, rf   , or rf leads the economy to spends more time in
the cautious low sentiment stage.


Policy Experiment. To gain some insight about the relative efficiency of the available
policy instruments, we compare three specific policy profiles. A simple monetary policy
specifies the same interest rate rf regardless of the state of the economy, rf = (1, rf , rf , rf ).
A counter-cyclical monetary policy sets a specific risk-free rate for each stage. It is straight-
forward to show that it is optimal for the policy maker to have a positive bold risk-free rate
and zero cautious risk-free rate. We further assume that the planner sets the mix risk-free
       M
rate rf  r  ¯. This is sufficient to have rM  r ¯, so that the mix stage never realizes.10 Thus
                                                                              B
the counter-cyclical monetary policy profile is represented by rf    B = (1, r , 0, r
                                                                              f     ¯). A macro-
prudential policy consists of risk-weighted capital requirements for risky investment without
providing a risk-free asset, x = (x, 0, 0, 0).

    In order to make the welfare effects of these policies comparable, we introduce the concept
  10
     Our simulations indicate that the policy maker always finds it optimal to set the mix risk-free rate
sufficiently high that the realized cycle is two-stage.


                                                   31
of equivalent policies bellow.


Definition 7 Two policy profiles  and  are equivalent to each other, or to the planner's
       ^P
choice µ 0 , if they imply the same ergodic set for the state variable in the dynamic equilibrium.



    Equivalent policies are useful tools to compare effectiveness of policy tools in improving
                                                                                      B
the efficiency of the equilibrium cycle. One can work out policy instruments rf , rf    , and x
                                                                                      P
that implement the same ergodic state distribution as a given planner threshold µ   ^0  [0, c].
These policy instruments are generically well defined equivalent policies except for rare cases
where the implies risk-free rate is so high that pushes the economy into autarky.

    The critical observation is that policy equivalence does not imply the same welfare. Our
main result below ranks the three policy instruments according to their relative efficiency in
achieving the same constrained optimal cycle.


Proposition 9 Consider a planner threshold µ    ^P
                                                 0 that implements longer or more frequent
cautious stages than the equilibrium. Furthermore, consider the case where all three equiva-
lent policies rf , rf
                    B and x lead to a two-stage economy. Within each class of policies, pick


the one that corresponds to the lowest lending rate. Then the following statements hold.


  (i) Expected welfare associated with all three policies is strictly lower than the constrained
      optimal expected welfare.

 (ii) Equivalent policies rfB and x imply the same equilibrium interest rate for every en-


      trepreneur in every stage. However, the counter-cyclical monetary policy has a higher
      expected welfare.

(iii) For   8
            9
              ,

       (a) rf
            B has a higher expected welfare than r ,
                                                  f


       (b) c
           ¯ such that if c  c
                             ¯, x has a higher expected welfare than rf .


    All three policies are costly compared to the constrained optimum. Unlike the planner
who directly chooses the lending standards, the policy maker has to influence investors'
incentives to choose among the available tests appropriately. This leads to higher lending
rates under all policies, compared to the constrained optimum. Within each class of policies,

                                               32
                                                                             9.2



                                                                             9.0

                                                                                   Cautious                                                                      Bold
                                                              mean welfare



                                                                             8.8   Only                                                                          Only


                                                                             8.6



                                                                             8.4                               baseline outcome                        P =c
                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                       0.10        0.15      0.20      0.25                   0.30   0.35      0.40

                                                                                                               planner's threshold,  P
                                                                                                                                     0


                                            planner                    capital requirement                            simple monetary                                 counter-cyclical monetary

                                                                                                          (a) Expected welfare

                                      0.4
measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs




                                                                                                                                       10.0

                                      0.3
                                                                                                                                        9.5
                                                                                                                          W, welfare




                                      0.2                                                                                               9.0


                                                                                                                                        8.5
                                      0.1
                                                                                                                                        8.0


                                      0.0
                                                      5                      10               15                20                                    5                 10         15         20
                                                                             periods                                                                                   periods

                                                  decentralized equilibrium                    planner                                               decentralized equilibrium      planner

                                            (b) Measure of opaque bad projects                                                                              (c) Welfare paths

Figure 5: Expected welfare for different levels of planner choice of threshold µ ^P
                                                                                  0 , as well
as the comparison between the implied paths for the measure of opaque bad entrepreneurs
µ0 , and welfare, along the optimal versus the decentralized cycle. Baseline parameters are:
 = 2.7,  = 0.6,  = 0.2, c = 0.33, rf = 0, w0 = 4.5, w1 = 0.2. On bottom panels planner's
             ^P
threshold is µ 0 = 0.21.




                                                                                                                     33
                                                        ^P
we choose the one that implements the planner threshold µ 0 at the lowest interest rate in
the lending market.

    The higher cost of capital associated with each policy implies less borrowing, investment,
output and consumption, which entails a welfare loss. The simple monetary policy performs
the worst since it increases the cost of capital in all stages. This leads to less investment
and output in every period, while the other two policies only make borrowing costlier in the
bold stage.

    It is interesting to note that the counter-cyclical monetary policy and its equivalent
macro-prudential policy have the same effect on the cost of capital in a two-stage economy.
Thus they entail the same investment and output. Yet, the counter-cyclical monetary policy
has a higher expected welfare. The intuition is the following. Both policies imply the same
interest rates, thus they correspond to identical credit demand. However, on the credit
supply side, the macro-prudential policy implies a quantity constraint on lending. The lower
per-capita credit supply requires more unskilled investors to enter the lending market to
satisfy the same credit demand. As all of them have to pay the fixed cost c, the macro-
prudential policy is dominated by the counter-cyclical monetary policy. Nevertheless, unless
this cost is very high, it dominates the simple monetary policy.

    Both the simple monetary policy and capital requirements can turn a two-stage economy
to a three-stage economy by changing the incentives for different lending standards. In such
cases a bold, high sentiment stage is replaced by a mixed sentiment one. While the implied
dynamics under the two regimes is the same, welfare is typically higher if sentiments are
high.

    The three non-solid curves in Figure 5a illustrate the expected welfare under the three
policies that implement the constrained optimal threshold µ ^P
                                                             0 on the x-axis. The pink dashed-
doted line represents the counter-cyclical monetary policy, the orange dotted line is the simple
monetary policy, and the blue dashed line is the macro-prudential policy.

     The policies perform best by implementing cycles that have shorter booms than the
laissez-fair equilibrium, or slightly more recurrent low-sentiment purifying stages. Interest-
ingly, in this region, just to the left of the baseline outcome, the counter-cyclical monetary
policy and the capital requirements perform extremely close, and outperform the simple
monetary policy. They both imply a two-stage economy with identical cost of capital.

    To compare these two policies, it is important to note that the aggregate state is fully


                                              34
endogenous in this model. As such, the counter-cyclical monetary policy assumes a relatively
high degree of sophistication for the policy maker. The policy maker has to solve a fixed
point problem to compute the aggregate state, and predict what aggregate outcome each
choice of interest rate entails. For instance, he has to foresee whether the chosen interest rate
keeps the economy in a boom or moves it to a downturn. This allows the policy maker to
avoid the mix stage all together when using a counter-cyclical monetary policy. In contrast,
the macro-prudential policy conditions only on the individual lending choice of investors,
and delivers a very similar peak performance without requiring any information about the
aggregate state.



6     Model and Facts

The model generates a rich set of empirical predictions despite its simple structure. When
mapping the model outcomes to the data, a critical question is the empirical counterpart
of the distribution of credit flow to different firm types in the model. Here we explore the
empirical predictions of the model under two different approaches.

    The conservative approach is to treat the heterogeneity across firms as unobservable.
As such, the econometrician can only observe aggregate credit flows, without being able to
identify flows to different firm types. We first describe the predictions of the model under
this assumption, and then move to a less conservative assumption.


Tightness of credit, interest rates, and economic cycles Treating firm type as fun-
damentally unobservable, our model has the following predictions for any group of borrowers:
(1) Credit standards are lax and the average quality of issued credit is deteriorating in booms.
Morais et al. (2019) find both US and international evidence for lax lending standards in
booms in the bank loan market. In a different context, Demyanyk and Van Hemert (2009)
document that the quality of sub-prime loans deteriorated for six consecutive years before
the 2007 crisis. (2) Conditions of credit supply are more favorable in booms than in reces-
sions. Consistent with this prediction, Becker and Ivashina (2014) present various measures
to argue that the cyclicality of aggregate credit is mostly due to the cyclicality in credit sup-
ply, at least for small firms in the US. (3) Within group, credit is granted at less dispersed
interest rates in booms compared to recessions. We are not aware of any work focusing on
the cyclicality of interest rate dispersion within a group of borrowers.


                                               35
     A less conservative approach is to assume that at least ex-post, it is possible to partition
firms according to their transparency. Consider the following thought experiment building
on the example of the commercial paper market around the European debt crisis in 2010.
When global fundamentals are strong, investors choose to be bold and lend to all major
banks based in developed countries. They understand that some have less healthy balance
sheets than others, but they do not have the expertise to distinguish them. Instead, when
global fundamentals are weak, investors choose to be cautious and only lend to major US
banks as the safest strategy. If our mechanism captures main determinants of the European
debt crisis, we should be able to identify a large group of investors following the former
strategy before 2010, but switching to the latter after the Greek default. By observing the
difference between these two strategies, the econometrician would conclude that credit to
European banks maps to opaque credit in our model.


Market fragmentation and heterogeneous portfolio rebalancing As a bold stage
turns into a cautious stage, skilled and unskilled investors rebalance their portfolio in opposite
directions. Unskilled investors rebalance from low-quality bonds (opaque ones) to high-
quality ones (transparent ones), while skilled investors do the opposite. This implies that
good entrepreneurs face heterogeneous experiences. Some good entrepreneurs (transparent
good ones) enjoy abundant credit supply while others are squeezed (opaque good ones),
although in the bold stage they faced the same market conditions. This market fragmentation
and the implied heterogeneous effect of a downturn is a unique feature of our model.

    Indeed, our suggested thought experiment is inspired by Ivashina et al. (2015) and Gal-
lagher et al. (2018) who find a group of US money market funds that stopped lending to all
European banks in 2011, but not to other banks with similar fundamentals. This pattern
is implied by our mechanism considering these funds to be low-skilled investors. Moreover,
Ivashina et al. (2015) find evidence that this process led to a significant disruption in the
syndicated loan market, a possible channel for the real effect predicted by our model.11


Credit composition, the quality spread and credit market sentiment One inter-
pretation of the credit issued to firms who are rejected by a cautious test, i.e. credit to
opaque firms, is junk bond issuance. Alternatively, loans to transparent good firms map to
high-grade bond issuance.
  11
    Farboodi and Kondor (2018) provide a substantially richer picture on market fragmentation by treating
sentiment switches as exogenous.


                                                   36
                                                                 0                                                      0.70




                           R, realized return on opaque firms
                                                                                                                        0.65
                                                                0.2




                                                                                                                                S, opaque credit share
                                                                                                                        0.60

                                                                0.4                                                     0.55

                                                                                                                        0.50
                                                                0.6                                                     0.45

                                                                                                                        0.40
                                                                0.8
                                                                                                                        0.35
                                                                      return, t+1             opaque credit share, t
                                                                1.0                                                      0.30
                                                                      5             10               15                20
                                                                                    periods




Figure 6: Model generated positive correlation between opaque credit share and its future
realized excess return on the invested scale. The solid blue line plots the share of issued
credit to opaque projects relative to all credit in a given period on the right scale. The
dashed red line depicts the realized excess return on opaque credit, one period later, on the
left scale on an inverted scale.


    With this interpretation, our model is consistent with the well-known fact that the
quality spread, the spread between AAA and BAA corporate borrowers, is counter-cyclical.
As such, our paper provides an information based alternative explanation for time-varying
risk-premium.

    We can also interpret our predictions within the context of the growing body of evidence
suggesting that periods of overheating in credit markets forecasts low excess bond returns.
Importantly, Greenwood and Hanson (2013) show that the share of junk bond issuance out
of total issuance inversely predicts the excess return on these bonds.12

     Figure 6 illustrates the model equivalent of this empirical pattern documented in Exhibit
1 of Stein (2013), for the two-stage economy simulated on Figure 2. As in Exhibit 1 of Stein
(2013), the model predicts a positive correlation between share of junk bond issuance and
its future realized excess return on the invested scale. High level of curves correspond to
overheated periods with low subsequent returns. Low levels instead correspond to recessions,
  12
    The inverse relationship between credit expansion and subsequent returns is remarkably widespread
across various financial markets. For instance, Baron and Xiong (2017) document the negative relationship
between bank's credit expansion and banks' equity returns, Kaplan and Stromberg (2009) find a similar
inverse relationship between venture capitalists aggregate flow to new investments and their subsequent
returns. A related early work is Eisfeldt and Rampini (2006), who shows that volume of transactions is
pro-cyclical while return on transactions is counter-cyclical in the sales of property, plant and equipment.



                                                                                     37
low sentiment credit markets with high subsequent returns.13 Note the strong co-movement
between share of opaque loans and their corresponding return on a reverse scale, both within
the bold stage and across periods.

    It is important to note that although our model generates a strong positive correlation
between these variables, this does not amounts to an exploitable anomaly based on the
information set of unskilled investors.14



7       Conclusion

The idea that economic fluctuations can be captured by models with endogenous cycles is not
new. In fact, the earliest business cycle models by John Hicks and Nicolas Kaldor followed
this approach. However, as Boldrin and Woodford (1990) explain, these models fell out of
favor by the late 1950's because they had been empirically rejected: actual business cycles
were found not to show regular cycling behavior.15

    In this paper, we argue that despite real world cycles being stochastic and difficult to
forecast, simple models with endogenous cycles are a useful apparatus for macroeconomic
theory as indispensable analytical tools for policy analysis. To asses the effect of various
policies on the length and depths of booms and busts, it is essential to understand what
predictably turns booms into busts and vice-versa.

    We propose a model where endogenous cycles are generated by the interaction between
lenders' choice of lending standards in the credit market, and the economic fundamentals.
Tight credit standards screen out low quality entrepreneurs and thus the future quality of
credit applications improves. Once the improvement is sufficiently significant, it triggers a
switch to lax lending standards. This in turn leads to the deterioration of fundamentals,
which prompts tight credit conditions again.
  13
     Formally, let S (µ0 , µ1 ) denote the share of credit to opaque firms, and R(µ0 , µ1 ) denote the net excess
realized return on a portfolio of these loans. We have:
                                           1-µ0 -µ1                               1-µ0 -µ1
                            µ0 (b, 0) +        2     (g, 0)                          2       (g, 0)(1 + r(g, 0))
       S (µ0 , µ1 )                  1-µ0 -µ1                      R(µ0 , µ1 )                  1-µ0 -µ1            - (1 + rf ).
                       µ0 (b, 0) +      2     ( (g, 0) + (g, 1))                  µ0 (b, 0) +      2       (g, 0)

  14
     See Bordalo et al. (2018); Greenwood et al. (2019); Gennaioli and Shleifer (2020) for empirical facts
pointing towards such anomalies, and bounded rational models designed to target those.
  15
     See the recent work of Beaudry et al. (2020) for the argument that modern statistical techniques might
refute this statement.


                                                             38
    We show that simple policy tools allow the policy maker to control the cyclicality of the
economy. By utilizing a macro-prudential policy to carefully choose capital requirements
for risky investment, or through an appropriate counter-cyclical monetary policy, the policy
maker can optimally use recessions to keep the stock of bad borrowers at bay. We further
demonstrate that the predictions of the model match numerous stylized facts related to credit
cycles.



References
Angeletos, George-Marios and Jennifer La'O, "Sentiments," Econometrica, 03 2013,
 81 (2), 739­779.

Asriyan, Vladimir, Luc Laeven, and Alberto Martin, "Collateral booms and infor-
 mation depletion," Technical Report, CEPR WP 2018.

Azariadis, Costas and Bruce Smith, "Financial intermediation and regime switching in
 business cycles," American economic review, 1998, pp. 516­536.

Baron, Matthew and Wei Xiong, "Credit expansion and neglected crash risk," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2), 713­764.

Beaudry, Paul, Dana Galizia, and Franck Portier, "Putting the cycle back into busi-
 ness cycle analysis," American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (1), 1­47.

Becker, Bo and Victoria Ivashina, "Cyclicality of credit supply: Firm level evidence,"
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 2014, 62, 76­93.

Boldrin, Michele and Michael Woodford, "Equilibrium models displaying endogenous
 fluctuations and chaos: a survey," Journal of Monetary Economics, 1990, 25 (2), 189­222.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, "Diagnostic expectations and
 credit cycles," The Journal of Finance, 2018, 73 (1), 199­227.

Demyanyk, Yuliya and Otto Van Hemert, "Understanding the subprime mortgage
 crisis," The Review of Financial Studies, 2009, 24 (6), 1848­1880.

Eisfeldt, Andrea L and Adriano A Rampini, "Capital reallocation and liquidity,"
  Journal of monetary Economics, 2006, 53 (3), 369­399.



                                             39
Farboodi, Maryam and P´     eter Kondor, "Heterogeneous Global Cycles," Technical Re-
  port 62, Paul Woolley Centre Paper Series 2018.

Fishman, Michael J., Johanthan A. Parker, and Ludwig Straub, "A Dynamic
  Theory of Lending Standards," 2019. MIT.

Gallagher, Emily, Lawrence Schmidt, Allan Timmermann, and Russ Wermers,
 "Investor Information Acquisition and Money Market Fund Risk Rebalancing During the
 2011-12 Eurozone Crisis," 2018. MIT.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer, A Crisis of Beliefs, Princeton University Press,
 2020.

Gorton, Gary and Guillermo Ordonez, "Collateral crises," The American Economic
 Review, 2014, 104 (2), 343­378.

   and    , "Good booms, bad booms," Journal of the European Economic Association,
  2016.

Greenwood, Robin and Samuel G Hanson, "Issuer quality and corporate bond returns,"
 The Review of Financial Studies, 2013, 26 (6), 1483­1525.

Greenwood, Robin Marc, Samuel Gregory Hanson, and Lawrence J Jin, "Reflex-
 ivity in Credit Markets," 2019. Harvard University.

Greenwood, Robin, Samuel G Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, and Jakob Ahm
 Sørensen, "Predictable Financial Crises," Technical Report, Harvard Business School
 Working Paper 2020.

Gu, Chao, Fabrizio Mattesini, Cyril Monnet, and Randall Wright, "Endogenous
 credit cycles," Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 121 (5), 940­965.

Hu, Yunzhi, "A Dynamic Theory of Bank Lending, Firm Entry, and Investment Fluctua-
 tions," Firm Entry, and Investment Fluctuations (August 11, 2017), 2017.

Ivashina, Victoria, David S Scharfstein, and Jeremy C Stein, "Dollar funding and
  the lending behavior of global banks," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 130
  (3), 1241­1281.

Kaplan, Steven N and Per Stromberg, "Leveraged buyouts and private equity," Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 2009, 23 (1), 121­46.

                                          40
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore, "Credit cycles," Journal of political economy,
 1997, 105 (2), 211­248.

Kurlat, Pablo, "Asset markets with heterogeneous information," Econometrica, 2016, 84
 (1), 33­85.

L´
 opez-Salido, David, Jeremy C Stein, and Egon Zakraj          sek, "Credit-market senti-
  ment and the business cycle," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (3), 1373­
  1426.

Lorenzoni, Guido, "Inefficient credit booms," The Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75
  (3), 809­833.

Martin, Alberto, "Endogenous credit cycles," Available at SSRN 1001861, 2005.

Matsuyama, Kiminori, "Credit traps and credit cycles," American Economic Review,
 2007, 97 (1), 503­516.

Mendoza, Enrique G, "Sudden stops, financial crises, and leverage," The American Eco-
 nomic Review, 2010, 100 (5), 1941­1966.

Morais, Bernardo, Jos´  e-Luis Peydr´ o, Jessica Rold´  an-Pe~na, and Claudia Ruiz-
 Ortega, "The International Bank Lending Channel of Monetary Policy Rates and QE:
 Credit Supply, Reach-for-Yield, and Real Effects," The Journal of Finance, 2019, 74 (1),
 55­90.

Myerson, Roger B, "A model of moral-hazard credit cycles," Journal of Political Economy,
 2012, 120 (5), 847­878.

Stein, Jeremy C, "Overheating in credit markets: origins, measurement, and policy re-
  sponses," in "Speech given to the symposium on Restoring Household Financial Stability
  After the Great Recession, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, Febru-
  ary," Vol. 7 2013.




A     Agent Optimization Problem and Market Clearing
      Protocol

In this Appendix we formally define the problem of each agent, the market clearing protocol,
and a robustness criterion. We also show how the agents' problem reduce to the ones set

                                            41
up in the main text. The structure of our credit market is a modified version of Kurlat
(2016). The entrepreneur and investor problems are simplified versions of those in Farboodi
and Kondor (2018).


A.1     Entrepreneur and Investor Problems in the Stage Game

Let R denote the a set of trading posts, each of which identified by an interest rate r. The
problem for an entrepreneur (,  ) is

             max    i(,  ) - 1 =g (,  ) (1 + r(,  ))                                    (A.1)
      { (r;, )}rR

      s.t.
                            1
      0   (r; ,  )              r  R
                            r
       (,  ) =           (r; ,  )d (r; ,  )                                             (A.2)
                    R
                 r (r; ,  )d (r; ,  )
                    R
      r(,  ) =                                                                          (A.3)
                       (,  )
                 1
       (,  )                                                                            (A.4)
               r(,  )
      i(,  ) = (,  ) + 1.


     (r; ,  ) denotes the number of credit units entrepreneur (,  ) demands at interest
rate r. (,  ) and i(,  ) denote the total amount of credit and the investment level for
entrepreneur (,  ), respectively.

     is the rationing function that assigns  (R0 ; ,  ) measure of credit, per unit of appli-
cation, to entrepreneur (,  ) who has submitted applications to the subset of trading posts
R0  R.  is an equilibrium object, determined by the choices of the agents and the market
clearing protocol as explained below. The entrepreneur takes  as given.

    Let ¯ denote the maximum available credit for a given entrepreneur,

      ¯(,  )            1
                          d (r; ,  ) .
                    R   r

    We are interested in showing that an equilibrium exists. As such, we conjecture and
then verify that there exist an equilibrium in which each entrepreneur only raises credit at
one single interest rate. From equations (A.3) and (A.2), r(,  ) denotes the average interest
rate that the entrepreneur raises credit at. Under the conjecture that he raises credit at a
single interest rate, with some abuse of notation let r(,  ) denote that unique interest rate.
In particular, r(,  ) does not depend on  (.).

                                              42
    Under this conjecture, the entrepreneur's problem can be rewritten as

         max         + (,  )( - 1 =g (1 + r(,  )))                                        (A.5)
       (, ),r(, )

                                            1
      s.t.       (,  )  min ¯(,  ),                   .
                                          r(,  )

This form suppresses the choice over credit applications,  (·), and focuses on the total ob-
tained credit (·). For any obtained credit (,  ) along with equilibrium  (r; ,  ) schedule,
equation (A.2) determines  (r; ,  ).

    Each investor h advertises a single rate r(h). Unskilled investor h solves

       max (1 + r
                ~(h)) (Su (r; g, 1) + 1(h)=B Su (r; g, 0))
      (h),r
          ~(h)

             +(1 + rf ) Su (r; b, 1) + 1(h)=C (Su (r; b, 0) + Su (r; g, 0)) ,

while skilled investor h solves

      max (1 + r
               ~(h)) (Ss (r; g, 1) + Ss (r; g, 0)).
      r
      ~(h)


 (h) is the unskilled agent's choice of test. Su and Ss are the sampling functions for unskilled
and skilled investors.

    An unskilled investors has one unit of wealth, thus she samples total one unit of appli-
cations at the interest rate she advertises. Su (r; ,  ) denotes the measure of applications
submitted by (,  ) entrepreneurs that the unskilled investor who has advertised interest
rate r receives. Importantly, this measure is independent of unskilled investor's choice of
test. Ss (r; ,  ) is the analogous object for skilled investors. The sampling functions are
aggregate equilibrium objects determined by the market clearing protocol and the choices of
agents, and are taken as given by investors.

    We follow Kurlat (2016) to assume the following robustness criterion.


Assumption A.1 Suppose that  fraction of applications submitted at an advertised in-
terest rate are granted unconditionally. We require that the equilibrium strategy of each
entrepreneur is the limit of equilibrium strategies as  goes to 0.


This assumption has two implications. First, it prevents equilibrium multiplicity. Second,
it implies that every type who chooses to submit loan applications at a given interest rate,
submits the maximal amount. Thus  (r; ,  ) > 0 implies  (r; ,  ) = 1        r
                                                                              . As such, the
application pool at any given interest rate is independent of cross-sectional distribution of
i(,  ), and we can solve the credit market equilibrium independently of i(,  ) choices. This
simplifies the analysis considerably.


                                                   43
Market Clearing Protocol. Let r denote the lowest interest rate which is both adver-
tised by some investor and some entrepreneurs have submitted demand at this rate. If there
is no such interest rate, then no applications are financed.

    First, each entrepreneur who submits an application at that rate posts r down-payment
per unit of application from her endowment. Applications without a down-payment are
automatically discarded. Then, each unskilled investor who has advertised rate r obtains
a measure one sample of the (non-discarded) applications submitted at that rate with the
underlying distribution. As such, Su (r ; ,  ) is equal to the fraction of non-discarded (,  )
application submitted at interest rate r . The investor runs her chosen test and grants credit
to all applications that pass the test in the sample she receives.

     If there are not enough applications to fill up every unskilled present investor's capacity
limit, then all applications have been sampled and the sampling process stops. Otherwise,
all unskilled investors sample a measure (of value) one of applications and provide financing
to all applications in their sample that passes their chosen test. Their remaining endowment
is invested in the risk-free asset.

    If all unskilled investors reach their sampling capacity and there are remaining good
projects, then they are distributed pro rata across skilled investors up to their capacity
given by their one unit of endowment. As such, Ss (r ; g,  ) is the ratio of remaining non-
discarded (g,  ) applications at interest rate r relative to sum of remaining non-discarded
(g,  ) + (g,  ) applications after unskilled investors make their financing decision at rate r .
Skilled investors grant credit to these projects.

    Entrepreneurs who receive financing invest the credit they obtain along with the down-
payment, and the invested units are posted as collateral for the loan. These invested units
enter into a public registry, so they cannot serve as collateral to other loan applications.
Applications that are submitted but do not receive financing are discarded, and the down-
payment is returned to the entrepreneur who can only invest it in the risk-free asset.

    Then, the process is repeated at the next lowest advertised interest rate at which there
are applications. The process stops once there is no such rate anymore.  (r; ,  ) is computed
by aggregating over all investors who grant credit to entrepreneur (,  ) at interest rate r.


A.2     Entrepreneur and Investor Problems in the Full Game

Since each investor lives for a single period, she solves the identical utility maximization
problem in the stage game and the full game.

     For entrepreneurs the only change is that they maximize the expected sum of their future
utility while alive. This consists of entrepreneur's period utility, as well as his expected
continuation value. That is, instead of (A.5), the value function of the entrepreneur can be



                                              44
written as

V (,  ; µ0,t , µ1,t ) =
   max         + t (,  )( - 1 =g (1 + rt (,  ))) + (1 -  )1 t (,)>0 V (,  ; µ0,t+1 , µ1,t+1 ) (A.6)
 t (, ),rt (, )


                            ¯t (,  ),       1
s.t.       t (,  )    min                          ,
                                        rt (,  )

where the entrepreneur takes the equilibrium dynamics of (µ0,t , µ1,t ) as given.



B       Proofs

Proof of Lemma 1

The market clearing mechanism and Assumption A.1 implies that in the stage game if any
agent would like to raise credit at an interest rate rmax , she would want to submit a maximum
measure of applications,  (r; ,  ) = 1    r
                                            at every interest rate smaller than rmax too. The
reason is that it makes it possible that they are receiving a fraction of their credit at a
lower rate (as markets clear from the lowest interest rate), and potentially even without
the requirement to invest the received amount (Assumption A.1). This latter possibility is
attractive for bad entrepreneurs. Because applications with no down-payment are discarded,
there is no possibility of having more credit granted as intended. Agents also want to submit
the maximum measure of applications at rmax . Given the linear structure, if, at a given
interest rate an agent would like borrow to invest, she also would like to borrow up to the
limit 1
      r
        and invest at that rate. This concludes the first part of the Lemma.

    For the second part, observe that the objective function (A.1) implies that a good en-
trepreneur does not apply for credit at any interest rate r(g,  ) >  - 1 as that would imply
negative return on her investment. As we noted before, Assumption A.1 and objective (A.1)
imply that bad entrepreneurs instead apply for maximum credit at any interest rate as they
do not plan to pay back.


Proof of Lemma 2 and Proposition 1

The main steps of the proof are explained in the text. Here, we just have to specify the
details.

    As we explained, in any equilibrium unskilled investors have to lend at the break-even
interest rate which makes them indifferent whether to participate. Also, they never extend
credit to entrepreneurs not passing their test. This is so, because tests are informative.
Therefore, if an investor extends credit even to those entrepreneurs who are not passed her

                                                       45
test, it will increase her break-even interest rate. Therefore, if there were such a group of
investors in equilibrium, non-participating investors would deviate by entering at a slightly
lower interest rate, extending credit only to those who pass their test, and stealing the
business of the first group. This proves Lemma 2.
                                                      p
    Now, we derive the break-even interest rate, rB     , for bold investors in case all en-
trepreneurs submit the maximum demand at that advertised rate. The superscript refers to
                                                                              p
the fact that it is a pooled market where all entrepreneurs submit. In fact, rB is defined by
the indifference condition
                           p
      (1 - µ1 - µ0 ) (1 + rB ) + µ1 (1 + rf ) - c = 1 + rf                                    (A.7)
                                    (1-µ1 -µ0 )
Note that ((1 - µ1 - µ0 ) + µ0 ) ((1- µ1 -µ0 )+µ0 )
                                                    = (1 - µ1 - µ0 ) is the probability of ending up
financing a good project with a bold test (P r(passed test) × P r(good project|passed test)
), while µ1 is the probability that a entrepreneur in the sample will not pass the bold test,
hence the investor invests in the risk-free asset instead. Therefore, the left hand side is the
expected utility of running the bold test on a proportional sample of applications. Note that
we are using the assumption that unskilled investors sample first.

     Similarly, a cautious investor is indifferent to enter to a pooled market at interest rate
 p
rC , which is defined as:

      (1 - µ1 - µ0 )       p       (1 - µ1 - µ0 )
                     (1 + rC )+                   + (µ1 + µ0 ) (1 + rf ) - c = 1 + rf         (A.8)
            2                            2
                               p     p            p
We claim that if and only if rB    rC  holds, rB    supports a bold equilibrium where the entering
measure of unskilled investors is determined by the following market clearing condition.
Given the fraction of bold investors' capital financing good projects, together with the capital
of skilled investors (which all finance good projects) all good projects, opaque or transparent,
have all their credit demand satisfied. (This market clearing condition is spelled out in the
proof of Proposition 2). Then, following the intuition in the text, it is easy to check that
no one has a profitable deviation: skilled or unskilled investors do not want to change their
interest rate from rB p
                        , and none of the entrepreneurs want to demand less than L      ¯ at that
rate. While, if the condition above did not hold, investors would be motivated to choose to
                                        p    p
be cautious advertising a rate r  ~  (rC  , rB ).
                                                                                              s
     Now consider a cautious equilibrium where all unskilled are cautious and advertise rC      .
This implies that opaque good projects can be financed only by skilled investors. As skilled
capital is scarce, they will advertise the maximum feasible rate r ¯. As unskilled capital is
                       s
abundant, therefore rC has to make cautious unskilled indifferent whether to enter. As all
entrepreneurs demand credit at all advertised rate which is lower than their reservation rate,
the pool of applicants in that low interest rate post is identical to the one in the pooled
                 p             s                   s    p
equilibrium at rP  . That is, rC solves (A.8) and rC = rC = rC holds. If an unskilled investors
                                                                                               s
is to deviate to a bold test, she has two options. She can advertise an interest rate r ~  rC
                                                                                           s
attracting the pool of all type of entrepreneurs or it can advertise a high rate r  ~  (rC   ,r
                                                                                              ¯]

                                                46
attracting all, but the transparent good ones. The earlier is a profitable deviation if and only
    s    s           s
if rB  rC  where rB    solves (A.7). That is, a necessary condition for a cautious equilibrium
         p
is rB = rB > rC . The latter option is a profitable deviation if and only if rM  r   ¯ where rI
is determined by the indifference condition
             (1-µ1 -µ0 )
                  2                                             µ1
      (1-µ1 -µ0 )
                                    (1 + rM ) +   (1-µ1 -µ0 )
                                                                               (1 + rf ) - c = (1 + rf ) .
          2
                  + (µ1    + µ0 )                     2
                                                                + (µ1 + µ0 )

Note that rM > rB because it refers to an adversely selected pool of applicants. Checking
that neither skilled investors nor any type of entrepreneurs want to deviate from the assigned
strategies concludes the construction of the cautious equilibrium.

    Finally, if rM < r ¯ and rB > rC , then there is a mix equilibrium. In this case, skilled
investors cannot offer r¯ as they would be undercut by bold unskilled ones. Instead, skilled
and bold unskilled investors advertise rM (.). This high interest rate post is cleared similarly
to the one at the bold equilibrium: the fraction of entering bold unskilled investors have
to be sufficient to satisfy, together with skilled investors, all the credit demand of opaque
good projects. At the same time, a group of unskilled investors choose to be cautious and
advertise rC (.) to serve transparent good projects. Note that the two groups of unskilled
investors make the same expected profit of 1 + rf by the definition of rM (.) and rC (.). Again,
we can check that none of the agents prefer to deviate from the assigned strategies. Given
that the conditions for each type of equilibria are mutually exclusive, we have uniqueness.

   Observe that the static reasoning can be applied in each period of the dynamic set up,
and express the equilibrium criteria in terms of µ0 .


Proof of Proposition 2

We described in the main text how entrepreneurs' decide on investment i and borrowing
taking the interest rate r(,  ) and the borrowing limit ¯(,  ) as given. Then, expressions
in Proposition 2 follow from the determination of r(,  ) in Proposition 1 and the borrowing
limits ¯(,  ) which we derive here. We also derive here k (µ0 , µ1 ), the equilibrium fraction of
unskilled investors who decide to not to enter the credit market in a given state. Consider
the bold stage first. The market clearing condition for credit to transparent good and opaque
entrepreneurs is
                                                                      1
      w1 + (1 - kB ) w0 (1 - µ0 - µ1 ) = (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
                                                                     rB

where k (µ0 , µ1 ) = kB in a bold stage. Then, ¯(b, 0) is determined by the endowment of
unskilled investors which is allocated to bad, opaque credit by mistake:

      µ0 ¯(b, 0) = (1 - kB ) w0 µ0


                                                         47
implying

       ¯(b, 0) = 1 -     w1
                                                                                                   (A.9)
                 rB (1 - µ0 - µ1 )

and
                                      (1 + rB )    (1 + rB ) w1
       i (b, 0) = ¯(b, 0) (1 + rB ) =           -                .
                                         rB       (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
                               w1              1
Assumption 1 requires       (1-µ0 -µ1 )
                                          <   rB
                                                 ,   thus the bad entrepreneurs are constrained in a bold
stage.

      In the cautious stage market clearing for opaque good firms gives

        (1 - µ0 - µ1 ) ¯
                        (g, 0) = w1
              2
implying

       ¯(g, 0) =        2w1
                                                                                                  (A.10)
                   (1 - µ0 - µ1 )

and investment
                             2w1
       i (g, 0) = 1 +                  .
                        (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
                            w1         1
Assumption 1 requires (1-µ   0 -µ1 )
                                     < 2¯
                                        r
                                          implying that opaque good entrepreneurs are indeed
constrained in this stage. The fraction of entering unskilled investors in a cautious stage,
(1 - kC ), is determined by the market clearing condition for the low interest rate market,

        (1 - µ0 - µ1 ) 1               (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
                         = (1 - kC )w0                .
              2       rC                     2

                                                                             1-µ0 -µ1
      Turning to the mix stage recall from the proof of Proposition 1 that µ  0 +µ1 +1
                                                                                       fraction of
invested unskilled capital finances good, opaque projects at the high interest rate market,
      µ0                                            µ1
2 µ0 + µ1 +1
             finances opaque bad projects and 2 µ0 + µ1 +1
                                                           ends up at risk-free storage. Then
market clearing for opaque good firms then is

        (1 - µ1 - µ0 )                       (1 - µ1 - µ0 )
                       (g, 0) = (1 - kI ) w0                 + w1
              2                              1 + ( µ1 + µ0 )

as opaque good entrepreneurs are not constrained, this implies
        1 1        w1                            1
             -             = (1 - kI ) w0
        2 rM   1 - µ0 - µ1                1 + ( µ1 + µ0 )


                                                          48
Then market clearing for bad, opaque entrepreneurs gives
                                        µ0
      µ0 ¯(b, 0) = (1 - bI ) w0 2               .
                                    µ0 + µ1 + 1

Substituting back (1 - bI ) implies

      ¯(b, 0) =   1 1        w1
                       -                                                                    (A.11)
                  2 rM   1 - µ0 - µ1

and
                             1 1        w1
      i (b, 0) = (1 + rM )        -                       .
                             2 rM   1 - µ0 - µ1
                         w1
Assumption 1 requires (1-µ 0 -µ1 )
                                   < 2r1M . Also, w0 has to be sufficiently large that kI , kB , kC 
[0, 1]. We can summarize the requirements on w1 for later use as:

           w1                   1 1     1               1
                     < min         ,  ,             =      .                                (A.12)
      (1 - µ0 - µ1 )            2¯
                                 r 2rM rB               2¯
                                                         r


Proof of Lemma 3

Comparing (A.5) and (A.6) and using the equilibrium definitions, it is sufficient to show
that maximizing life-time utility leads to the same outcome as maximizing stage game utility
within each period. That is, introducing endogenous continuation does not change equilib-
rium strategy profiles.

    First, consider a sequence of stage game equilibria consistent with the law of motion for
state variables. We will show that in every period, there is no individual deviation from
the optimal strategy in the stage game equilibrium which would increase the life-time utility
of an entrepreneur who lives more than one period. That is, any sequence of stage game
equilibria consistent with the equilibrium law of motion of the state (µ0 , µ1 ) is a dynamic
equilibrium. Proposition 1 implies that in any stage game equilibrium all good entrepreneurs
obtain positive credit. That is, they hit the upper limit of their probability of survival, 1 -  .
As such, they cannot increase the interest rate that they accept, compared to the stage
game r ¯, in order to improve their survival probability. On the other hand, more credit
always increases bad entrepreneurs' stage game utility. Furthermore, as long as they are
able to raise credit they are indifferent about the corresponding interest rate. Hence, they
have no incentive to reduce their reservation interest rate below r   ¯. For them there is no
trade-off between stage game utility and increasing the chance of survival by obtaining more
credit

    Second, we show that there is no dynamic equilibrium where the economy is not in a
stage game equilibrium in each period. By contradiction, assume that such dynamic equilib-

                                                    49
rium exist. This implies that there is at least one period in which some good entrepreneur
obtains credit at rate r > r ¯. First note that any good entrepreneur can obtain some credit
if he demands a positive amount at an interest rate which a skilled investor advertises. Fur-
thermore, by assumption, any amount of credit is sufficient for an entrepreneur to survive,
i.e. maximizes the survival probability at 1 -  . Thus, a necessary condition for such an
equilibrium is that all skilled investors advertise an interest rate which is larger than r
                                                                                          ¯.

     In such an equilibrium, a good entrepreneur might be willing to borrow at interest
rate above r ¯, lose in the short-term but in return survive with positive probability. Let
r  r   ¯ +  denote the lowest advertised rate by any skilled investor. Note that since
continuation value of an entrepreneur is finite,  cannot be arbitrarily large. Furthermore,
all good entrepreneurs financed at r > r¯ would submit only a diminishingly small demand at
r because that leads to minimal current loss and guarantees maximum survival probability.
They submit 0 at every higher interest rate. Moreover, assumption A.1 implies that they
demand maximum credit at all rates equal or lower than r  ¯, where they make positive current
profit and guarantees maximum survival probability. The first consequence is that all skilled
investors must advertise the same rate r as by advertising a higher rate would not lend
anything. Second, each skilled investors can only lend out a diminishingly small fraction
of her endowment and thus obtains a diminishingly small return on her capital. Hence, a
skilled investor can deviate to r  r ¯ and lend a positive measure of her endowment, which
is a contradiction. Thus, such an equilibrium does not exist.


Proof of Lemma 4

See appendix C.1 for the proof.


Proof of Propositions 3

The proposition directly follows from birth-death process for entrepreneurs, the equilibrium
information choice and lending choice of investors.


Proof of Proposition 4

See appendix C.4 for the proof.


Proof of Proposition 5

See appendix C.4 for the proof.


                                             50
Proof of Lemma 5

Recall that Y (µ0 , µ1 ) is the population weighted sum of the outputs (1 + (,  )) for each
group of entrepreneurs (,  ). The statement follows from the observation that (A.9)-(A.11)
                        1
and that (,  ) = r(,      )
                            in the unconstrained cases and using (A.12). (g, 0) discontinuously
decreases in µ0 as it crosses the threshold from below between a bold and a mix stage, or a
bold and a cautious stage. Similarly, (b, 0) discontinuously decreases in µ0 as it crosses the
threshold from below between a bold and a mix stage, a bold and a cautious stage, or a mix
and cautious stage.


Proof of Proposition 6

Proposition 6 follows from the following five Lemmas.

Lemma B.1 Within the pooling region, welfare is decreasing in µ0 .

Proof. Welfare in the bold stage is
                                            1              1      w1
       WB = (1 - µ0 - µ1 ) ( - 1) (1 +        ) + µ0 (1 +    -              ) + µ1 
                                           rB             rB (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
               + w0 (1 + rf ) + w1 (1 + rB )

which we rewrite as

       WB = + w0 (1 + rf ) + w1 
                                                            1      w1
               + ( (1 - µ1 ) - (1 + rB ) (1 - µ0 - µ1 ))      -
                                                           rB (1 - µ0 - µ1 )

Note that
             1     w1                 1 drB       w1
       d(      -           )/dµ0 = (- 2     -               )<0
            rB 1 - µ0 - µ1           rB dµ0 (1 - µ0 - µ1 )2

also

       (1 - µ1 ) ( - (1 + rf )) - c = (1 - µ1 ) (¯
                                                 r - rB ) + µ0 (1 + rB ) > 0,

implying the result.


Lemma B.2 Within the mix region, welfare is decreasing in µ0 .




                                                 51
Proof. Welfare in the mix stage is

               1 - µ0 - µ1           1        1                 1   1
      WM =                    (1 + ) -          (1 + rC ) + (1 + ) - (1 + rI ) +
                    2               rC       rC                 rI  rI
                         11           w1
               µ0 (1 +        -                  ) + µ1 
                         2 rI    1 - µ0 - µ1
               + w0 (1 + rf ) + w1 (1 + rI )

which we rewrite as
                                        1 - µ0 - µ1              1
      WM = + w1  + w0 (1 + rf ) +                        ( - 1)    -1 +
                                             2                  rC
                                                          1        w1
               ( (1 - µ1 ) - (1 - µ1 - µ0 ) (1 + rI ))       -
                                                         2rI   1 - µ0 - µ1

Then, the statement follows from the observations that
       1 1 - µ0 - µ1
         ,           , ( (1 - µ1 ) - (1 + µ0 - µ1 ) (1 + rf ) - (1 + µ1 + µ0 ) c)
      rC      2
are decreasing in µ0 ,
                                      1
                               ( - 1)   -1>0
                                     rC
      ( (1 - µ1 ) - (1 - µ1 - µ0 ) (1 + rI )) = (1 - µ1 ) ( - (1 + rI )) + µ0 (1 + rI )) > 0

as rC  r
       ¯, and
       1        w1
          >
      2rI   1 - µ0 - µ1

by (A.12), finally

          1          w1
         2rI
               -   1-µ0 -µ1
                              <0
               µ0
as
      rI
         < 0.
      µ0




Lemma B.3 Within the separating region, welfare is decreasing in µ0 .



                                                  52
Proof. Welfare in the cautious stage is

              1 - µ0 - µ1           1      1                      2w1            2w1
       WC =                  (1 + ) -        (1 + rC ) + (1 +             )-              + µ0  + µ1 
                   2               rC     rC                  1 - µ0 - µ1    1 - µ0 - µ1
              + w0 (1 + rf ) + w1 (1 + r
                                       ¯)

which we rewrite as
                   1 - µ0 - µ1 ( - 1 - rC )
       WC =  +                              + w0 (1 + rf ) + w1 
                        2          rC
Then
          1-µ0 -µ1 (-1-rC )
             2       rC               1 - µ0 - µ1       -1   rC   1 ( - 1 - rC )
                                 =                  -    2
                                                                -                <0
                µ0                         2            rC   µ0 2       rC
                  rC
where we used     µ0
                        > 0. This implies the Lemma.

                                                         c
Lemma B.4 Fix µ1 and µ0 at any level µ0  1+               rf
                                                             . Welfare is strictly larger in a pool-
ing equilibrium than it would be in a ­ counterfactual ­ separating or mix equilibrium,
                                                                 c
WB (µ0 , µ1 ) > WC (µ0 , µ1 ) , WM (µ0 , µ1 ), as long as µ0  1+  rf
                                                                     .


Proof. As welfare is aggregate consumption, we can decompose WB (µ0 , µ1 ) - WC (µ0 , µ1 )
as follows. The difference in transparent good entrepreneurs' consumption is

       (1 - µ0 - µ1 )                  1      (1 - µ0 - µ1 )           1
                      ( - 1)             +1 -                ( - 1)      +1
             2                        rB            2                 rC

which is non-negative in any point when rB  rC , that is, in the pooling region. The
difference in opaque good plus skilled consumption is

     (1 - µ0 - µ1 )               1                      (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
                    ( - 1)          + 1 + w1 (1 + rB ) -                 + w1 (1 + r
                                                                                   ¯)       (A.13)
           2                     rB                            2

note that the term in the first squared bracket is decreasing in rB as

          (1-µ0 -µ1 )             1
              2
                        ( - 1)   rB
                                      + 1 + w1 (1 + rB )
                                               =
                         rB
          1 (1 - µ0 - µ1 )                1 (1 - µ0 - µ1 )          1 - µ0 - µ1
       =- 2                ( - 1) + w1  - 2                ( - 1) +             =
         rB       2                      rB       2                       rB
                                                        (1 - µ0 - µ1 )      -1
                                                     =                 (1 -     )<0
                                                             rB              rB
where we used (A.12), and equals to the term in the second left bracket when rB = r
                                                                                  ¯. That

                                                    53
is, (A.13) is non-negative at any point as long as rB  r¯. Unskilled consumption is equal
under the two regimes, while the difference in bad consumption is equal to

             1     w1
     µ0        -               > 0.
            rB 1 - µ0 - µ1

The proof for WB (µ0 , µ1 ) > WM (µ0 , µ1 ) is analogous, except that in the second step we
show that use that opaque good plus skilled consumption has the form of

       (1 - µ0 - µ1 )          1
                      ( - 1)      + 1 + w1 (1 + rx )                                    (A.14)
             2                 rx

with interest rates rx = rB , rM in the pooling and mixed cases, respectively, which term is
decreasing in rx by (A.12). That is, (A.13) is non-negative at any point as rB  rM  r   ¯=
 - 1. Finally, the difference in bad consumption is

             1      w1                  11         w1
     µ0 (      -              ) - µ0         -                =
            rB (1 - µ0 - µ1 )           2 rI   1 - µ0 - µ1
                                                                           1   11
                                                              =     µ0       -         > 0.
                                                                          rB 2 rI



Lemma B.5 Welfare jumps downward in µ0 at the mix-cautious threshold whenever that
threshold exists. That is, WM (µ0 , µ1 ) > WC (µ0 , µ1 ) at µ0 = µ
                                                                 ~0 (µ1 ).

Proof. Consider the definition (12) where each element corresponds to the consumption
of a group of agent of a given type. Recall that at µ0 = µ  ~0 (µ1 ), rM = r
                                                                           ¯ by definition.
This the interest at which good investors are indifferent whether to borrow. Therefore,
by Propositions 1 and 2, only the consumption of bad transparent types, (1 + (b, 0)) is
discontinuous at µ0 = µ~0 (µ1 ). (b, 0) jumps downward to 0 as opaque bad types cannot
borrow when all investors turn to cautious which proves the Lemma.


Proof of Proposition 7

We will show that under the conditions of the proposition, there is at least one cyclical
economy (the one with short-booms and short recessions) which is preferred by the planner
compared to both the always bold and always cautious economies. We will argue that for
this conclusion, it is sufficient to show that   min , max implies

                                                        WB (µ                        
                                                             0B , µ1B ) + WC (µ0C , µ1C )
     max(lim WC (¯
                 µ0C , µ
                       ¯1C ) , lim WB (¯
                                       µ0B , µ
                                             ¯1B )) < lim                                 .
             0                  0                     0                 2



                                              54
                                   
     Note that lim0 µ
                    ¯0B =         2-
                                         and

       lim µ     ¯1C , µ
           ¯1B , µ            
                                   ¯0C , µ
                        1C , µ1B , µ
                                                
                                          0C , µ0B = 0.
        0



   In an economy where investors are always bold or always cautious, welfare converges to
WB (µ      
     0B , µ1B ) and WC (¯     ¯
                        µ0C , µ 1C ) by definition. First, note that

                                            WB (µ                        
                                                 0B , µ1B ) + WC (µ0C , µ1C )   WB (0, 0) + WC (0, 0)
lim WC (¯
        µ0C , µ
              ¯1C ) = WC (0, 0) < lim                                         =                       .
 0                                        0                 2                             2
This is implied by Lemma B.4. Then, we show that   min , max is a sufficient condition

that

       lim WC (µ      
                0C , µ1C ) > lim WB (¯
                                     µ0B , µ
                                           ¯1B ) .                                                   (A.15)
        0                         0

or
                             
       WC (0, 0) > WB          ,0
                            2-

which we can rewrite as
                             1 1
       ( - 1 - (rf + c))              >
                             2 rf + c
                                                                            1                    w1
                                            > ( - 1 - (rf + c))          
                                                                                           -        
                                                                                                         .
                                                                   rB ( 2- 
                                                                            , 0, c, rf )       1 - 2- 


This holds when   min , max , because by (3)   min , max is the condition for

       1 1                1
                >       
       2 rf + c   rB ( 2- , 0, c, rf )
          
and rB ( 2- 
             , 0, c, rf ) < r
                            ¯ to hold simultaneously. As all inequalities are strict and all relevant
functions are continuous from the left in (µ0 , µ1 ), for any   min , max we can pick a          ¯ ()
that if  <   ¯ () then our statement holds. Picking

       ¯=
               max        ¯ ()
                          
            [min ,max ]


defines the threshold for .




                                                     55
Proof of Proposition 8

Clearly, a risk weight of x > 1 does not influence the interest rate in a cautious stage as
investors are lending to projects which they all pay back.

   In a bold stage, we require

     vg x + vr = 1

but still assume that the technology of a bold test did not change implying
         vg
              = (1 - µ1 ) .
      vg + vr

Therefore,
                  1 - µ1                   µ1
     vg =                     , vr =
             x (1 - µ1 ) + µ1        x (1 - µ1 ) + µ1
                                                                            x
which modifies the indifference condition determining the zero profit rate rB as follows

           1 - µ1            x (1 - µ1 - µ0 )         µ1
                       (1 + rB )              +                  (1 + rf ) - c = 1 + rf
      x (1 - µ1 ) + µ1             1 - µ1       x (1 - µ1 ) + µ1
                             x
implying the expression for rB in the proposition.

   In the mix stage, the bold test on the high interest rate market (at which transparent
good entrepreneurs do not apply for credit) implies
                       (1-µ1 -µ0 )
         vg                2
                                   + µ0
              =    (1-µ1 -µ0 )
                                              .
      vg + vr                  + ( µ 1 + µ0 )
                       2

Therefore
                 µ0 - µ1 + 1                       µ1
     vg =                        , vr = 2
             x + 2µ1 + xµ0 - xµ1          x + 2µ1 + xµ0 - xµ1
in the mix stage. This implies that the indifference condition determining the zero profit
      x
rate rM is modified as follows:
          1 - µ0 - µ1           x              µ1
                          (1 + rM )+2                     (1 + rf ) - c = 1 + rf
      x + 2µ1 + xµ0 - xµ1             x + 2µ1 + xµ0 - xµ1
                               x
which gives the expression of rM in the proposition. Finally, by analogous arguments to the
baseline case, the threshold between the bold and cautious stages is given by identity
      x
     rB  µx
        (¯                                        µx
           0 (µ1 , c, rf ) , µ1 , c, rf , x)  rC (¯ 0 (µ1 , c, rf ) , µ1 , c, rf )




                                                          56
                    ~x (·) is given by identity
while the threshold µ
       x
      rM  µx
         (~ 0 (µ1 , g , c, rf ), µ1 , c, rf , x)   - 1.




Proof of Proposition 9

First, we construct equivalent policies with the lowest implied cost of capital. Let (m0,i , m1,i ) i=1
the invariant set corresponding to the constrained planner's choice of µ          ^P
                                                                                   0 . We define i as
the index of the smallest m0,i  (m0,i )       i=1 such that m0,i > µ    ^P
                                                                         0 . Note that Proposition 1
imply that max(~ µ                    ^
                   0 (m1,i , c, ,  ), µ 0 (m1,i , c,  )) = m0,i is sufficient to ensure that policy 
is an equivalent policy to the planner's choice µ       ^P                             B
                                                         0 . Then, we can pick rf , rf and x for the
equivalent policies rf , rf B , x as follows:



                     (1 - m1,i )( - 1) - (1 + m1,i )c - m0,i ( + 1 + c) c - m0,i
      rf = max                                                         ,                              ,
                                     m0,i + (1 - m1,i )                   m0,i
       B   c - m0,i
      rf =          ,
           1 - m1,i
                 ((1 - m1,i ) - 2cm1,i - m0,i )           c - m0,i
       x = max                                    ,                                               .
                   ((m0,i + (1 - m1,i ))(c + 1))) ((1 + c)(1 - m1,i )) + 1)

   In this proposition, we focus on those economies when the implied cycle does not feature
a mix stage, that is, the relevant expression for rf and x is the second term within the max
operator. Note that welfare in the bold and cautious stage is

       
      WB (µ0 , µ1 ;  ) = +
                                           1                            1                      w1
      ( - 1) (1 - µ0 - µ1 )         
                                                         + µ0    
                                                                                      -                    +
                                   rB (µ0 , µ1 , c,  )          rB (µ0 , µ1 , c,  )       (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
                                         1               w1
      + (w0 + w1 ) - c           
                                                   -
                                rB (µ0 , µ1 , c,  ) (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
                                                                   1               w1
                                   - (1 - µ1 ) (x - 1) c                     -                             (A.16)
                                                          rB (µ0 , µ1 , c,  ) (1 - µ1 - µ0 )

and

                          1             1 - µ0 - µ1
      WC = +       
                                                    ( - 1) - c
                  rC (µ0 , µ1 , c,  )        2
                  + w0 + w1 .

These formulas follow the calculation in the baseline case with the additional adjustment in




                                                         57
the last line of (A.16). For that last term, the market clearing condition in a bold stage is

                                  (1 - µ1 - µ0 )                       1
       w1 + (1 - kP ) w0 vg                          = (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
                              ((1 - µ1 - µ0 ) + µ0 )                  rB
                                                                  (1-µ1 -µ0 )
where vg is the bold investor's credit to entrepreneurs, while ((1- µ1 -µ0 )+µ0 )
                                                                                  is the fraction of
good firms passing her test. Then the fraction of entering unskilled investors (1 - kP ) has
to satisfy

                        x (1 - µ1 ) + µ1                         1
       (1 - kP ) w0 =                        (1 - µ0 - µ1 )        - w1 .
                         (1 - µ1 - µ0 )                         rB

This implies that the total cost paid by these entrants is

                                                            1      w1
       -c (1 - kP ) w0 = - (x (1 - µ1 ) + µ1 ) c              -                  .
                                                           rB (1 - µ1 - µ0 )

As (x (1 - µ1 ) + µ1 ) > 1, this implies an adjustment of

                                         1      w1
       - ((x (1 - µ1 ) + µ1 ) - 1) c       -
                                        rB (1 - µ1 - µ0 )

which is the last term in (A.16).

    For the first statement, note that monetary policy effects welfare only through the cost
                    
of capital rB and rC  . As
         
       WB      1
        
          = -  2 (( - 1) (1 - µ1 ) - c (µ1 + (1 - µ1 ) x)) =
       rB    (rB )
               1                                                  B
          = -  2 ( - 1) (1 - µ1 ) - (1 - µ0 - µ1 ) (1 + rB  ) + (rf + 1)x(1 - µ1 ) =
             (rB )
               1                         B                                  
          = -  2 (¯r - rB ) (1 - µ1 ) + rf x + (x - 1) (1 - µ1 ) + µ0 (1 + rB ) <0
             (rB )

and
         
       WC
        
          <0
       rC
       
      rB  r
and      , C
      rf rf
                                                                                             ^P
               > 0, any of our monetary policies lead to smaller welfare than the equivalent µ 0.
                                                                                            
                                                                                           rB
The macro-prudential policy has a similar negative effect through cost of capital as       x
                                                                                                > 0,
along with an additional direct negative effect
         
       WB                                1                      w1
          = - (1 - µ1 ) c         
                                                       -                    <0
       x                         rB (µ0 , µ1 , c,  )       (1 - µ1 - µ0 )


                                                       58
The term in the bracket is the loan amount of an opaque bad borrower, hence it is positive.

   The additional argument for the second statement is to show that equivalent x and rf
                                                                                      B
                                                             
implies the same rB and rC . None of them have an effect on rC and

                                  
         rB                B ) - r (µ0 , µ1 , c, x ) =
            (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf      B

                1 - µ1    B   (x - 1)(c + 1)(1 - µ1 )
         =               rf -                         =
             1 - µ1 - µ0           1 - µ1 - µ0
                                        1 - µ1                     (x - 1)(c + 1)(1 - µ1 )
                                  =              (x - 1) (c + 1) -                         = 0,
                                     1 - µ1 - µ0                        1 - µ1 - µ0

where, in the second step, we used expression (14) and that µ                  
                                                             0 (µ1 , c, x ) = µ0 (µ1 , c, rf
                                                                                           B)

under the conditions of the statement.

     For the first part of the third statement, consider first the simple monetary policy rf =
c-m0,i                                                              B     c-m
 m0,i
       , and the equivalent counter-cyclical monetary policy rf       = 1-m0,i . Note that, if
                                                                              1,i
        B
rf  rf    in the two equivalent policies than welfare is weakly smaller in the bold stage and
strictly smaller in the cautious stage under the simple monetary policy. Hence, it is sufficient
to show that
         c - µ0   c - µ0
                <
         1 - µ1     µ0
whenever µ0 implies a bold stage and µ1 is within the support of the ergodic distribution of
µ1 , µ1  [¯
          µ1B , µ         ^
                ¯1C ]. As µ 0 (µ1 , c,  ) < µ
                                            ¯0B in any cyclical economy, it is sufficient that

                                     
         1-µ
           ¯1C = 1 -                             µ
                                                 ¯0B
                            2((1 -  )(1 - ) +  )
or
                                 
                     1-                      ,
         2 - (1 -  )    2((1 -  )(1 - ) +  )
                    8
for which           9
                        is a sufficient condition.

     Finally, the last result and the second statement implies the final statement: if c is
sufficiently small than expected welfare under x and rfB is sufficiently close. As r B strictly
                                                                                    f
dominates rf , x is also more efficient than rf .




                                                         59
C       The Cyclical Dynamic Equilibrium: Characteriza-
        tion and Existence Conditions

In this appendix, we provide detailed characterization for a class of cyclical dynamic equi-
libria in our economy. This class is defined by the property that the finite invariant set
{mi }                    
      i=1  (m0,i , m1,i )i=1 , or a cyclical permutation of it, is monotonic in i. All the cases we
highlight in the main text are within this class. Here, we present sufficient and necessary
conditions for the existence of each member of this class. We also show uniqueness within
this class, that is, at most one equilibrium within this class can exist for a given set of
parameters. As we explain below, while for some parameter values cyclical equilibria exists
outside of this class, they tend to have very similar properties to the ones exposed here.


C.1      Steady States; Proof of Lemma 4

Let
               µ0t
        µt =
               µ1t
                2
         a=
                2
                (1 -  ) 2
                          (1 -  ) 2
       AC =
                (1 -  ) 2 (1 -  ) 
                        
                                  2

and
                (1 -  ) (1 -  ) 2
       AB =
                   0    (1 -  ) 2

                                     c
. By Proposition 3, if µ0  0, max{ 1+ rf
                                          ~0 (µ1 )} then
                                         ,µ

       a + AB µt = µt+1                                                                     (A.17)


          ¯ B solves
      and µ

              ¯B = µ
       a + AB µ    ¯B                                                                       (A.18)

or
                                      
       ¯ B = - (AB - I)-1 a =
       µ                            -+ +2       ,
                                     -+ +2

a unique fixed point under the permanent bold regime. Clearly, the stationary steady state

                                                60
                          c
              ¯0B  max{ 1+
¯ B exists if µ
µ                          rf
                              ,µ   µ1B )}.
                               ~0 (¯
                    c
     If µ0  (max{ 1+ rf
                         ~0 (µ1 )}, 1] then
                        ,µ

       a + AC µt = µt+1                                                                       (A.19)


         ¯ C solves
     and µ

              ¯C = µ
       a + AC µ    ¯C                                                                         (A.20)

or
                                     1   
                          -1           
                                     2 -+ +1           µ
                                                       ¯0C
       ¯ C = - (AC - I)
       µ                       a=    1            =           ,
                                       
                                     2 -+ +1
                                                       µ
                                                       ¯1C


                                                                                      ¯C
    a unique fixed point under the permanent bold regime. The stationary steady state µ
                      c
          ¯0C  max{ 1+rf , µ
exists if µ                                      ¯0C  µ
                               µ1C )}. Note that µ
                           ~0 (¯                              ¯1C  µ
                                                      ¯0B but µ    ¯1B . Furthermore,

                                                 
                                                     + c -1
                                              (rf +1) (rf +1)
 0<µ   µ1B ) - µ
   ~0 (¯       ~0 (¯
                   µ1C ) = (¯
                            µ1C - µ
                                  ¯1B )               c                 µ1C - µ
                                                                     < (¯     ¯1B ) < (µ0B - µ0C )
                                                1 + 1+ rf
                                                          + 1+frf
           
for any         > 1 and ,   (0, 1) . That is, at most one of the steady states can exist.
        (rf +1)
Furthermore, both systems (A.17) and (A.19) are stable as the all eigenvalues of AB and AC
are within the unit circle. This concludes Lemma 5.2.


C.2       Monotonicity Properties

Before, we proceed, it is useful to establish some monotonicity properties when µ0  [¯     µ0C , µ
                                                                                                 ¯0B ]
and µ1  [¯µ1B , µ                                               ¯C, µ
                ¯1C ] . We will loosely refer to this range as [µ   ¯ B ] . Observe that under each
dynamics, (A.17) and (A.19) both µ0,t and µ1,t monotonically converge to their respective
steady states, but from opposite directions. For instance, under (A.19), µ0,t > µ0,t+1 > µ       ¯0C
and µ1,t < µ1,t+1 < µ ¯1C This can be seen by using (A.19)

                                                           
       µ0,t - µ0,t+1 = µ0,t -      - (1 -  ) µ0,t - (1 -  ) µ1,t >
                                 2           2             2
                                                             
                      =µ
                       ¯0C     1 - (1 -  )     -  - (1 -  ) µ  ¯1C = 0
                                           2      2          2




                                                 61
and
                                                       
      µ1,t - µ1,t+1 = µ1,t -   - (1 -  ) µ0,t - (1 -  ) µ1,t <
                             2           2             2
                                                         
                  =µ
                   ¯1C     1 - (1 -  )     -  - (1 -  ) µ  ¯0C = 0.
                                       2      2          2

Similarly, under (A.17)

                                                     
      µ0,t - µ0,t+1 = µ0,t - - (1 -  ) µ0,t - (1 -  ) µ1,t <
                           2                         2
                                                     
                   ¯0B (1 - (1 -  )) -  - (1 -  ) µ
                  =µ                                   ¯1B = 0
                                        2            2
and
                                         
      µ1,t - µ1,t+1 = µ1,t -   - (1 -  ) µ1,t >
                             2           2
                                              
                  =µ
                   ¯1B     1 - (1 -  )     -  = 0.
                                       2      2


C.3     Monotonic Invariant Sets

Next, we construct all potential finite invariant sets, {mi }                   
                                                             i=1  (m0,i , m1,i )i=1 for our dy-
namic equilibria which are monotonic in i. For each  > 2, there exists two candidates.


  (i) A B -cycle cycles through mB,   i   i = 1, ..., a sequence of two-dimensional vectors
      with monotonically increasing first dimension and monotonically decreasing second
      dimension. In this cycle, the first  - 1 steps are implied by (A.17) and then a step
      implied by (A.19) pushes back the economy to its starting point mB1 . This implies that
      mB,
        1   has to satisfy
                          n         -1
           mB,
            1  =  -1
                 n=0 (AB ) a + (AB )   AC mB,
                                           1

      implying
                                      -1
           mB,
            1  = I- (AB )-1 AC              -1      n
                                           n=0 (AB ) a.

      Clearly, there is a unique such point. Then, for any i  [2, ] we have
                          n         i-1
           mB,
            i  = i -2
                 n=0 (AB ) a + (AB )1   mB,
                                         1 .


 (ii) A C -cycle has the support of mC i  i = 1, .., which is monotonically decreasing in its
      first element, and monotonically decreasing in its second one. That is, starting from


                                               62
       mt0 +1 = mC                                                                     C
                  1 , for any non-negative integer k , if t = t0 + k + i then µt = mi . In this
       cycle, the first  - 1 steps are implied by (A.19) and then a step implied by (A.17)
       pushes back the economy to its starting point mC                          C
                                                          1 . This implies that m1 has to satisfy

                            n         -1
             mC,
              1  =  -1
                   n=0 (AC ) a + (AC )   AB mC,
                                             1

       implying
                                            -1
             mC,
              1  = I- (AC )-1 AB                  -1      n
                                                 n=0 (AC ) a.

       Clearly, there is a unique such point. Then, for any i  [2, ] we have
                            n         i-1
             mC,
              i  = i -2
                   n=0 (AC ) a + (AC )    mC,
                                           1 .                                                 (A.21)

For  = 2, two algorithms above imply the same {mi }2
                                                   i=1 values


       m2    B,2
        1 = m1   = mC,
                    2
                       2
                         = (I- (AB ) AC )-1 (a + AB a)
       m2    B,2
        2 = m2   = mC,
                    1
                       2
                         = (I- (AB ) AC )-1 (a + AC a) .
                                                                       
In the main text, we denote the first element of m2      2
                                                  1 and m2 as µ0C and µ0B respectively.




C.4      Necessary Conditions; Proof of Propositions 4 and 5
                                                                
Consider B-cycles first. For the invariant set            mB,
                                                           i          to be part of a cyclical dynamic
                                                                i=1
equilibrium, we need that
                           c
         mB,
               1
                   > max{        ~0 ( mB,
                                ,µ        2
                                            )}                                                 (A.22)
                         1 + rf
                            c
        mB,
         -1         max{         ~0 ( mB,
                                ,µ     -1 )},                                                  (A.23)
               1         1 + rf            2


where mB,      1
                 and mB, -1    denote the largest and second largest implied µ0 value along
                             1
this invariant set. Note, that under these conditions, this is a locally stable cycle because all
the eigenvalues of (AB )-1 AC are inside the unit cycle for any . (The largest eigenvalue is
  1
2-2
      -1 +       -2 i -2-i
                i=0  2        (1 -  ) < 1).

      The corresponding equilibrium is a bold-cautious two-stage economy, if
                          c
        mB,
         -1                    < mB,
                                        1
                                                                                               (A.24)
               1        1 + rf

and

       ~0 ( mB,
       µ             B,
             -1 ) < m-1             ,                                                          (A.25)
                    2           1


                                                     63
and a bold-mix-cautious three stage economy16 if

           mB,
            -1        ~0 ( mB,
                      µ     -1 ) < m
                                    B,
                                                         1
                                                                                                      (A.26)
                  1                       2

and
            c
                 < mB,
                    -1                .                                                               (A.27)
          1 + rf                  1


and
                            c
           mB,
            1         <          .                                                                    (A.28)
                  1       1 + rf

Two important observations, which can be justified by tedious algebra, are that

    (i) mB,
         i   (µ
              ¯C, µ
                  ¯ B ) and

    (ii) mB,
              +1
                  1
                    - mB,   1
                              > 0, that is, the relevant intervals for the thresholds to imply a
         B-cycle of length  are increasing and non-overlapping.

Given Proposition 1, the characterization in Proposition 5 and case (ii) in Proposition 4
follow.
                                          
         Analogously, if mB,
                          i                     is part of a cyclical dynamic equilibrium then conditions
                                          i=1

                               c
            mC,
                  1
                      < max{        ~0 ( mC,
                                   ,µ        2
                                               )}
                            1 + rf
                              c
           mC,
            -1         max{         ~0 ( µC,
                                   ,µ     -1 )}
                  1         1 + rf           2


must hold, implying a locally stable cycle because all the eigenvalues of (AC )-1 AB are inside
the unit cycle for any . (The largest eigenvalue has the form of 12
                                                                    -1 (1 -  ) ( + 1)). Also,
mC,
  i    (µ     ¯ B ) for all i and mC,
          ¯C, µ                    
                                      +1
                                          1
                                            - mC,    1
                                                       < 0. That is, the relevant intervals for
the thresholds to imply a C-cycle of length  are decreasing and non-overlapping. If the
corresponding cyclical dynamic equilibrium is a bold-cautious two-stage economy17 , then
                            c
           mC,
            -1        >           mC,
                                                   1
                                                                                                      (A.29)
                  1       1 + rf
    16
     If (A.26)-(A.27) hold, but (A.28) is violated, we have a cautious-mix economy. This case is qualitatively
similar to a bold-cautious two-stage economy, hence we do not discuss it in the main text.
  17
     A mix-cautious 2-stage economy is also possible, if
             c
                 < mC,
                             1
                                 ~0 ( mC,
                                 µ             C,
                                       -1 ) < m-1                .
          1 + rf                                  2          1

.


                                                             64
and

      ~0 ( mC,
      µ            C,
            -1 )  m-1                                                                                         (A.30)
                     2                   1

must also hold. Case (iii) in Proposition 4 is implied by these conditions. Case (i) corresponds
to a cyclical dynamic equilibrium of length  = 2. A necessary condition for this case is
                      c
       m2
        1   1
                           < m2
                              2          1
                                                                                                              (A.31)
                    1 + rf

and

      ~ 0 ( m2
      µ               2
             2 2 ) < m2        1
                                   ,                                                                          (A.32)

in line with the statement.


C.5     Sufficient Conditions

There is one additional condition to make sure that a given invariant set {mi }i=1 is part of
a cyclical dynamic equilibrium. It is that the economy is not in autarky, or

                rB (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ) + 1 rC (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ) + 1           
      min                                ,                              <
                        1 + rf                    1 + rf                    1 + rf

for any (µ0 , µ1 )  {mi }i=1 .

    The following Lemma is useful to establish sufficient conditions for a cyclical dynamic
equilibrium.


Lemma C.6 Suppose that 1 - µ
                           ¯1C - µ
                                 ¯0B > 0, and
                                       -2¯ µ1B
      (1 - µ
           ¯1C - µ
                 ¯0B )               1+¯
                                       µ1B +¯µ0B
                                ¯1C -µ
                             (1-µ    ¯0B )     -µ¯0B -µ
                                                                ¯0C .
                                                               >µ                                             (A.33)
             2
                                  2
                                           -1 1+¯
                                                µ1B +¯
                                                      ¯1B
                                                      µ0B

Then, condition

                   -2¯
                     µ1B                              1-µ ¯0B - µ
                                                                ¯1B
      max                    +                    -1                ,µ¯0C <
                 1+µ
                   ¯1B + µ
                         ¯0B               1 + rf     1+µ ¯1B + µ
                                                                ¯0B
                                           c          (1 - µ
                                                           ¯1C - µ¯0B )    
                                                < min                           - 1 ,µ
                                                                                     ¯0B . (A.34)
                                         1 + rf               2          1 + rf
                                                          c                                     c
defines a connected set of             1+rf
                                              > 1 and   1+rf
                                                               values. When      1+rf
                                                                                        and   1+rf
                                                                                                     are in this set,



                                                           65
then for any µ0  [¯     ¯0B ] and µ1  [¯
                  µ0C , µ              µ1B , µ
                                             ¯1C ] the economy is not in autarky, that is

              rB (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ) + 1 rC (µ0 , µ1 , c, rf ) + 1         
       min                             ,                            <                                  (A.35)
                      1 + rf                    1 + rf                  1 + rf

               c
and max      1+rf
                  ,µ
                   ~ (µ1 )    [¯
                               µ0C , µ
                                     ¯0B ] , hence the economy is not stationary.


Proof. For any µ0  [¯     ¯0B ] and µ1  [¯
                    µ0C , µ              µ1B , µ
                                               ¯1C ], a sufficient condition for (A.35) is

                  1-µ ¯1C           1         c                                  2          c            
       min                   +                                      ,1 +                           <
                1-µ¯1C - µ¯0B 1 - µ
                                  ¯1C - µ
                                        ¯0B 1 + rf                         1-µ
                                                                             ¯1C     -µ
                                                                                      ¯0B 1 + rf       1 + rf

by the monotonicity of the functions rB (·) and rC (·) in µ0 and µ1 . Note that if 1-µ
                                                                                     ¯1C -µ
                                                                                          ¯0B >
0, this is equivalent to

         c      (1 - µ
                     ¯1C - µ
                           ¯0B )            
              <                                  -1 .                                                  (A.36)
       1 + rf          2                  1 + rf

Now consider the condition µ ~ (µ1 ) < µ
                                       ¯0B . By the monotonicity of µ
                                                                    ~ (µ1 ) in µ1 , it is sufficient
that µ
     ~ (¯
        µ1B ) < µ
                ¯0B , which we rewrite as

         -2¯
           µ1B                                  1-µ
                                                  ¯0B - µ
                                                        ¯1B     c
                   +                 -1                     <                                          (A.37)
       1+µ
         ¯1B + µ
               ¯0B            1 + rf            1+µ
                                                  ¯1B + µ
                                                        ¯0B   1 + rf
                                         c
The two conditions along with          1+rf
                                               [¯
                                                µ0C , µ
                                                      ¯0B ] aggregates to (A.34). Consider the space of
  c                                  
1+rf
      values on the y -axis and 1+    rf
                                         - 1 values on the x axis Then we need the set between
two horizontal lines (¯ µ0C , µ
                              ¯0B ) and two increasing lines. The line corresponding to the left
hand side of (A.37) starts at a negative value, while the one corresponding the right hand
side of (A.36) starts at 0. As long as their intercept is above µ
                                                                ¯0C , the set exists. The intercept
is at
                 -2¯ µ1B
               1+¯
                 µ1B +¯µ0B                      
       (1-µ
          ¯1C -µ
               ¯0B )     -µ¯0B -µ
                                      =              -1
            2
                     -1 1+¯
                          µ1B +¯
                                ¯1B
                                µ0B
                                              1 + rf

therefore we need (A.33).

    It is simple to show that (1 - µ ¯1C - µ¯0B ) > 0 if  < 89
                                                               . With tedious algebra, one can
                                     ¯        ¯
also show that (A.33) holds if  <  where  is a specific root of a six-order polynomial and
¯ > 3 . (The numerically solution is 
                                       ¯ = 0.774388). Therefore,  < 3 can be used to replace
     4                                                                 4
                                                                                               c
the conditions of the Lemma. One can also show that there is a real subset of 1+     rf
                                                                                         and 1+ rf
values satisfying (A.34) generating one of the cycles B - or C -cycles we defined above. For
this, note that sufficiently large , the interval mC,  -1   , mC,   1
                                                                         gets arbitrarily close to
                                                          1
                                                  c
µ
¯0C from above. Hence there must be a set of 1+rf values, close to µ ¯0C , which simultaneously


                                                        66
satisfy (A.34) and are within the interval     mC,
                                                -1            , mC,
                                                                      1
                                                                          , implying a C-cycle of length
                                                          1
.


C.6     Other Classes of Cyclical Dynamic Equilibria
                             c
Suppose, that µ     µ1B )  1+
                ~0 (¯         rf
                                 , so we must have a 2-stage economy. As we have established,
                           x,
intervals of the form m-1 1 , [mx,     ]1 , x = B, C are non-overlapping. That is, there must
be a set of parameters that
                                 c               -1
                                             mC,
                                              -1          , mC,
                                                             -1           .
                               1 + rf                 1               1


This implies that the necessary conditions established in section C.4 for a cyclical dynamic
                                    
equilibrium with monotonic (m    i )i=1 are violated. Is there a cyclical dynamic equilibrium for
such set of parameters? Our simulations show that in these sets, our economy still converge
                                                     
to a cyclical dynamic equilibrium where (m        i )i=1 consists of a finite number of subsequent
                                           c
monotonic series. For instance, when 1+     rf
                                                is too high for a  = 3 B-cycle, but still too low
for a  = 4 B-cycle, then the economy converges to a cycle which is in a bold stage for 4
periods, then cautious for a single period, then bold for 3 periods and only then, after an
additional cautious period, returns to its starting point . By a trivial modification of our
algorithm in section C.4, it is possible to establish necessary conditions for these slightly
more complex cycles. However, given that the economic properties of these cycles are very
                                              
similar to the ones with monotonic (m      i )i=1 , this would not add anything to the analysis,
hence, we leave it for the interested reader.



D      Continuum of Tests

Assume there is a continuum of tests, indexed by s  [0, 1]. Every test s passes all 1-µ2     0 -µ1


transparent good projects and rejects all µ1 transparent bad projects. Furthermore, test s
passes s fraction of the opaque projects, i.e. s 1-µ2  0 -µ1
                                                             good projects and sµ0 bad opaque
projects. Thus, s = 0 corresponds to the cautious test, and s = 1 corresponds to the bold
test. Tests with s  (0, 1) cover everything in between. We follow the logic as in proof of
Proposition 1 to show that both the bold and the cautious equilibrium are robust to this
                                                                                                c
modification. In particular, investors strictly prefer to choose the bold test when µ0 < 1+      rf
                                    c
and the cautious test when µ0 > 1+   rf
                                        even  if the intermediate  choices are also available.

    Recall that the unskilled investors choose a test which allows them to advertise the lowest
break even interest rate under the conjecture that at that interest rate all types will submit
an application. If that were not true, unskilled investors not entering in equilibrium could
choose a test and advertise an interest rate which leads to higher profit than staying outside.
(We rely here on Lemma 1 (i) ensuring that if an entrepreneurs applies for a given rate in

                                                67
equilibrium, he also applies for all lower rates, advertised or not.) The break even interest
rate for any test characterized by s is

        1 - µ0 - µ1    1 - µ0 - µ1
                    +s                  (1 + r (s))
             2              2
                                                         1 - µ0 - µ1
                          + µ1 + (1 - s) µ0 + (1 - s)                    (1 + rf ) - c = 1 + rf ,
                                                              2

which in turn implies

      (1 + rf ) 1 - µ1 + (1 - s) µ0 + (1 - s) 1-µ2
                                                 0 -µ1
                                                           +c
                       1-µ0 -µ1                                 - 1 = r (s) .
                          2
                                + s 1-µ2
                                       0 -µ1



Note that
      r(s)          c - µ0 - µ0 rf
           = -2                         ,
      s         (s + 1)2 (1 - µ0 - µ1 )
                                   c
implying that whenever µ0 <             , the smallest interest rate is implied by the test s = 1,
                                (1+rf )
while in the opposite case it is s = 0. Thus, by the same argument as in the main text, if
         c
µ0 < 1+      , the equilibrium advertised interest rate by unskilled investors corresponds to
      ( rf )
the test s = 1 (bold test), and in the opposite case they choose s = 0 (cautious test). In this
sense, the continuum of intermediate tests are always dominated by either the bold or the
cautious test, and restricting investor choice to these two tests is without loss of generality.




                                               68
