                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE HIDDEN COSTS OF STRATEGIC OPACITY

                                            Ana Babus
                                          Maryam Farboodi

                                        Working Paper 27471
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27471


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




Maryam Farboodi has received financial support from Princeton and MIT Sloan during this
research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Ana Babus and Maryam Farboodi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Hidden Costs of Strategic Opacity
Ana Babus and Maryam Farboodi
NBER Working Paper No. 27471
July 2020
JEL No. D43,D82,G14,G21

                                        ABSTRACT

We explore a model in which banks strategically hold interconnected and opaque portfolios,
despite increasing the likelihood they are subject to financial crises. In our framework, banks
choose their degree of exposure to other banks to influence how investors can use their
information. In equilibrium banks choose portfolios which are neither fully opaque, nor fully
transparent. However, their portfolios are excessively interconnected to obfuscate investor
information. Banks can create a degree of opacity that decreases welfare, and makes bank crises
more likely. Our model is suggestive about the implications of asset securitization, as well as
government bailouts.


Ana Babus
Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Dr.
ST. LOUIS, Miss 63130
anababus@gmail.com

Maryam Farboodi
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-627
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
m.farboodi@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Bank interconnectedness has increased dramatically in the past few decades both in the
US and worldwide. A substantial fraction of connections are represented by overlapping
portfolio exposures across financial institutions. For instance, at its peak asset securi-
tization alone contributed $1.5 trillion to the increase in the interdependence of banks'
portfolios. Such connections render the financial system inherently opaque. The lack of
transparency plays a significant role in shaping market participants' beliefs, which have
been a key ingredient in the unfolding of the global financial crisis. But how costly is it
for banks to raise funds when investors are not able evaluate the web of interconnections
between them?
    In this paper we explore a model in which banks purposefully create opacity for
their investors, by choosing interconnected portfolios. Even as they compete to attract
investors, banks are able to raise funds at a negative premium for holding opaque
portfolios. Moreover, banks decide on portfolio allocations which expose investors to
uncertainty about banks' counterparty risk, and lead to an increase in the probability
of banking crises. In other words, banks sow the seeds for crises in order to boost profits
while they operate.
    We consider a simple three-period model with two banks and two investors. Each
bank has access to a risky investment project. A bank can decide to swap a fraction
of its project with the other bank. If banks exchange a positive share of their projects,
their portfolios are interdependent. Otherwise, their portfolios are independent.
    To finance the projects, banks need to raise funds from investors. We consider an
economy where banks compete to attract funds from investors by promising them a long-
term debt contract that maximizes investors' expected payoff. Although banks offer
competitive debt contracts, banks exercise market power when deciding their portfolio
allocation. Thus, there exists a wedge between how banks manage their asset exposures
and how their liabilities are set which allows banks to make positive profits in our model.
    Each investor has the option to liquidate the contract prematurely against an outside
redemption value. The outside redemption value represents the investors' reservation


                                            2
value, and can be interpreted as a reduced form of secondary market liquidity in the
tradition of Allen and Gale (1994), and more recently of Dewatripont and Tirole (2018).
If the investor liquidates early, the bank receives zero. If the investor continues the
contract, the bank repays him the face value of debt if the return of the portfolio is
sufficiently high. Otherwise the bank defaults. The bank is the residual claimant on
the return of the portfolio.
   In this environment we consider two frictions. First, we assume that investors can
use their funds to finance only one bank. The interpretation is that each bank needs
to be monitored, as in Diamond (1984), and monitoring two banks is prohibitively
expensive. This does not preclude the banks to offer competitive debt contracts, just as
in a standard Bertrand-Nash setting studied by Matutes and Vives (1996) and estimated
empirically by Egan, Hortacsu and Matvos (2018).
   Second, we consider an information friction between banks and investors. We assume
that each investor receives information that perfectly reveals the return of his bank's
project, and it is completely uninformative about the other bank's project. Thus, if
banks swap a fraction of their projects, the signal the investors receive is less informative
about the success of their bank's overall portfolio. This can be, for instance, because
banks specialize in lending to different industries and investors learn about their bank's
industry, in the spirit of rational inattention. While empirical work on how much
information investors decide to process is limited, evidence from international financial
markets suggests that agents do indeed allocate more attention to countries whose assets
make up a greater share of their portfolios (Mondria, Wu, and Zhang, 2010). Based
on the information they receive, investors can decide to liquidate their debt contract
before it matures, leading to a financial crisis. The degree of opacity of the financial
system is then given by the degree of interconnectedness of banks' portfolios.
   Our main focus is on whether banks choose opaque portfolios, whether opacity is
an efficient outcome, and what it implies about the frequency of financial crises.
   We obtain three sets of results. The first set of results characterizes the portfo-
lio allocation that banks hold in equilibrium and the implications for welfare. Our



                                             3
main finding is that banks often hold inefficiently opaque portfolios.1 In particular, we
show that in equilibrium, an intermediate level of opacity typically dominates both full
transparency, as well complete opacity. In addition, we find that in equilibrium portfo-
lio allocations are welfare reducing, unless investors' early redemption option is either
too low or too high. We argue that unlike the traditional view on securitization, which
suggests that banks sell securitized assets to benefit from an existing informational
asymmetry they have relative to the investors, in our model banks exchange assets as a
tool to create information asymmetry. By holding opaque portfolios banks can tilt the
division of surplus in their own favor and capture rents, although this can impose net
welfare losses.
       The second set of results describes the implications for financial crises. Surprisingly,
we find that banks choose a portfolio allocation that, at times, increases the likelihood
of a financial crisis. Importantly, financial crises do not arise via the typical contagion
mechanism. In fact, there is no contagion between banks in our model. Instead, financial
crises arise as banks are liquidated early when investors terminate their debt contract
prematurely. The mechanism that induces banks to choose a portfolio allocation which
amplifies the likelihood of a financial crisis is solely due to opacity. When investors have
incomplete information, the investors' liquidation decision is not precise. In particular,
the investors can liquidate their bank in some states in which the bank would not
default. The banks seek to exploit investors' information disadvantage to obtain a
higher payoff albeit in fewer states of the world.
       In the third set of results we emphasize the role of opacity by analyzing the bench-
mark in which investors have full information about both banks' project returns. An-
alyzing this case allows us to show that banks have interconnected portfolios beyond
what they would have if they cannot obfuscate investor information, deliberately creat-
ing opacity for their investors. While even in the full information set-up, banks portfolio
allocations can be inefficient, the implications for financial crisis are markedly differ-
   1
    Jiang, Levine and Lin (2016) document that an intensification in competition reduces bank opacity.
Note however that in our model we take as given that banks compete to attract funds and we do not
provide predictions whether decreasing the level of competition would increase opacity.



                                                  4
ent. Since investors are perfectly informed, they choose to liquidate early only if the
bank cannot repay the promised debt contract. As a result, banks cannot benefit from
financial crises, thus they occur in equilibrium less often than it would be the case if
portfolio allocation were optimal. This is in contrast with an economy with imperfect
information where the probability of financial crisis can be higher in equilibrium.


Related Literature. This paper relates to several strands of literature. The most
relevant studies are those on the opacity of banks, interconnections in the banking
system and securitization.
   It is well acknowledged that the banking system is opaque (see, e.g., Morgan, 2002;
Flannery, Kwan and Nimalendran, 2013). The financial crisis of 2007-2008 emphasized
the opacity of the financial system and prompted a line of research focused on the
role of policies that improve transparency. Bouvard, Chaigneau, and de Motta (2015),
Alvarez and Barlevy (2015), Goldstein and Leitner (2018), and Orlov, Zryumov, and
Skrzypacz (2018) provide models that study the costs and benefits of disclosing bank-
specific information. They show that increasing transparency is generally beneficial
during financial crisis, but has ambiguous effects in normal economic times. A different
perspective is provided by Dang, Gorton, Holmstrom and Ordonez (2017) who argue
that banks need to be opaque to facilitate risk sharing. These papers take the degree of
opacity in the banking system as given. In contrast, in our model the degree of opacity
is endogenously determined by banks' portfolio choices. While we show that banks are
indeed opaque in equilibrium, opacity is usually associated with welfare losses.
   Recently, a few papers have explored the issue of endogenous information production
in the context of financial markets. In Glode, Opp and Zhang (2018) and in Asriyan,
Foarta and Vanasco (2018) agents who choose how much information to disclose forego
informational rents to ensure that trade does not break down. Azarmsa and Cong (2018)
explore how competition between financiers affects the incentives of an entrepreneur to
produce information. These papers do not address the role of endogenous opacity in
banking crises, which is one of our main interests of analysis.
   In our model, opacity is a result of interconnections between banks. The literature

                                           5
on bank linkages is rapidly growing, not surprisingly given the prominence of intercon-
nectedness in the US financial system and its role during the last financial crisis. The
papers that are more related to ours study interconnections that arise when banks have
overlapping portfolio exposures. These papers are focused on understanding whether
common exposures between banks' portfolios can amplify systemic risk. For instance,
Shaffer (1994), Wagner (2010) and Ibragimov, Jaffee and Walden (2010) show that di-
versification is beneficial for each bank individually, but it can lead to greater systemic
risk as banks' investments become more similar. Galeotti and Ghiglino (2019) study
the role of portfolio linkages for excessive risk taking and volatility. Adrian and Brun-
nermeir (2016) propose a measure of systemic risk based on co-movement of financial
institutions' assets and liabilities. However, with the exception of Allen, Babus and
Carletti (2012), information is not central to the mechanism explored in these papers.
Even in Allen et al. (2012) banks do not choose explicitly how opaque they want to be,
albeit linkages between them are endogenous. In addition, in that model banks have
market power relative to investors. Instead, we assume that investors do not just break
even, but are able to extract rents from the banks.
   Interconnections between banks in our set-up arise as banks exchange a fraction of
their portfolio. While this can be interpreted as banks securitizing assets, our mech-
anism has differences with the one which securitization relies on. In particular, when
securitizing, the originator signals the quality of the project by retaining a fraction on
its balance-sheet (DeMarzo, 2004; Duffie, 2008; Chemla and Hennessy, 2014; Vanasco,
2017). This channel is absent from our model. Instead, our paper highlights an im-
portant adverse consequence of securitization generally overlooked in the literature: by
securitizing assets, banks deliberately produce opaque portfolios to capture informa-
tional rents, although this can increase the probability of banking crises.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we introduce the model set-
up. Section 3 explains how we solve for equilibrium as well as for the optimal portfolio
allocation. Our main results are presented in Section 4. In Section 5 we introduce the
full information benchmark to highlight the role of opacity. Section 6 concludes.



                                            6
2          Model Set-Up
Consider a three-period (t = 0, 1, 2) economy with two risk-neutral banks, denoted by
i = 1, 2, and two risk-neutral investors, denoted by I = 1, 2. At date 0, each bank i
has access to a risky investment project that returns Ri at date 2. For each bank i, the
return Ri is an independent draw from a uniform probability distribution G (·), with
support [0, 1]. Each investment project represents loans to a continuum of firms that
have perfectly correlated risks. Each project requires initial investment c and is not
scalable. To invest in the project, bank i raises funds from investor I .
        Banks choose whether to exchange a fraction of their project. In particular, a bank
i, chosen at random, proposes to exchange a fraction (1 - ) of her project for a fraction
(1 - ) of bank j 's project. Bank j can accept or reject. If she rejects, no exchange
takes place. If she accepts, bank i's portfolio is


                                      Vi () = Ri + (1 - ) Rj ,


while bank j 's portfolio is


                                      Vj () = Rj + (1 - ) Ri .


        In exchange for borrowing funds from the investor, each bank issues a debt contract
with face value D that matures at date 2.2 To capture that banks compete to attract
funds from investors, we assume that the face value of debt is set to maximize the
investor's expected surplus, given that he lends all his funds.
        Although banks offer competitive debt contracts, banks nevertheless have market
power when deciding their portfolio allocation (, 1 - ). In other words, bank i chooses
the fraction  of her project that she retains in her portfolio so to maximize her expected
profit, as we describe in detail below. Indeed, in practice banks are often constrained to
offer their investors returns that align with those offered by their competitors. However,
banks have more flexibility in shaping their assets' risk exposure. This wedge between
    2
        Banks are symmetric, thus debt contract each issues is the same (Di = Dj = D).


                                                    7
how banks manage their asset exposures and how their liabilities are set is an important
force which allows banks to make positive profits in our model. Exploring this wedge
is also the rationale for assuming that at date 0 banks first decide on their portfolio
allocation and then they issue the debt contract to their investors.
       At date 1, a signal perfectly reveals the return Ri of the project of each bank i. Each
investor I observes the return Ri , but not Rj . Each bank i observes both returns Ri and
Rj whenever   (0, 1). It follows that, from the perspective of an investor,  captures
the degree of transparency of a bank's portfolio. When  is high, then investor I 's
signal is more informative about the final realization of bank i's portfolio. Conversely,
the lower  is, the more opaque the bank's portfolio is, and thus the less informative
investor's signal is.
       After observing Ri , investor I decides whether to liquidate his investment, or con-
tinue and wait to receive D at date 2.3 We represent investor I 's decision through a
function                           
                                    1 if investor I continues bank i
                        sI (Ri ) =                                    .
                                    0 if investor I liquidates bank i

       If an investor I chooses to liquidate, he receives an early redemption value r <
E (Ri ). We set the amount of funds that an investor is endowed with c < r, to ensure
that the investor's participation constraint is satisfied. Liquidation of bank i does not
affect the state of the project of bank j . This is feasible since the projects that the
banks invest in represent loans to a continuum of firms. Thus, liquidating a fraction 
of loans in region i and a fraction (1 - ) of loans in region j need not affect the success
of the remaining firms in the either region.
       In our model r is exogenous and stands for secondary market liquidity. The idea
is that when the investor liquidates the bank early, projects are transferred to second
best users and are worth less because of the misallocation mechanism proposed by
Shleifer and Vishny (1992) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), and adopted by Lorenzoni
   3
    With deposit insurance, investors' decision would be trivial. However, according to FDIC, only
53% of the dollar value of deposits was insured as of Q3 2019. Morevover, bigger banks have a larger
fraction of uninsured deposits as Jiang, Matvos, Piskorski and Seru (2019) document.



                                                 8
(2008). If no information other than the bank early liquidation is available in a potential
secondary market, then it is reasonable to assume that the redemption value at date 1
is constant, r. Each value of r can be seen as a fraction of the unconditional expected
payoff of a bank's portfolio.
       If an investor I chooses to continue, then he receives D at date 2, if Vi  D and
zero otherwise. The idea is that at date 2, when the projects mature and the bank
cannot repay the investor, she enters costly bankruptcy. For tractability, we make the
stark assumption that bankruptcy absorbs all the project payoff. In other words, the
fraction that the investor receives of his bank's portfolio is 0.4
       The bank i is the residual claimant and receives at date 2


                                          max{Vi - D, 0}.


Thus, the bank receives 0 both if it is liquidates at date 1 or if defaults at date 2.
       In this set-up we use the following equilibrium concept.

Definition 1 A symmetric equilibrium is given by a portfolio allocation ( , 1 -  ), a
face value of debt D , and continuation decision sI (Ri ) of each investor I given signal

Ri such that

   1. the continuation decision maximizes each investor I 's expected payoff at date 1


                     max {sI (Ri ) · D · Pr(D  Vi () |Ri ) + (1 - sI (Ri )) · r} ;
                         sI



   2. the face value of debt maximizes each investor I 's expected payoff at date 0


                   max ERi {sI (Ri ) · D · Pr(D  Vi () |Ri ) + (1 - sI (Ri )) · r} ;
                     D
   4
    The results are robust to the alternative assumption that the fraction that the investor receives of
his bank's portfolio is a small positive  in the event of bank default at date 2. The robustness results
are available upon request.




                                                   9
    3. the portfolio allocation maximizes each bank i's expected payoff at date 0


                           max ERi ,Rj {sI (Ri ) · max[(Vi () - D), 0]}.
                             



    Implicitly, the optimal continuation decision is a function of the face value of debt
as well as the fraction of the project the bank retains in its portfolio, i.e. sI (Ri ) =

sI (Ri ; D, ). Similarly, the face value of debt is a function of the fraction of the project

the bank retains in its portfolio, i.e. D = D (). In the exposition below, we take
these dependencies as implicit so not to burden excessively the notation.



3      Model Solution

3.1     Equilibrium

We solve for the equilibrium in two steps. First we solve for the investors' optimal
liquidation decision, and the optimal face value of debt, as described by condition (1)
and (2) in Definition 1, given that each bank retains a fraction, , of her project. Second,
we solve for the optimal portfolio allocation, , taking into account that each bank
understands that investors behave optimally. We start with the case when   (0, 1).
We analyze the case of  = 0 and  = 1 separately, to highlight when banks have
perfectly opaque or perfectly transparent portfolios.
    In the first step, we start by analyzing investors' continuation decision. For each
portfolio allocation,   (0, 1), and each face value of debt, D, set at date 0, the optimal
continuation decision at date 1 must satisfy


         sI (Ri ) = arg max {sI (Ri ) · D · Pr (D  Vi () |Ri ) + (1 - sI (Ri )) · r } .   (1)


Thus, it is optimal for the investor I to continue funding bank i if the amount he expects
to receive at date 2, given that his signal is Ri , D · Pr (D  Vi () |Ri ), is larger than
the reservation value r, he obtains when he liquidates the bank at date 1. Investor's



                                              10
decision to continue funding the bank depends thus on how high the face value of debt
is, as well as on how high the probability that the investor gets repaid. Indeed, if the
realization of Ri is sufficiently high that D < Ri , then the investor gets repaid D with
                                                                                  D-Ri
certainty. However, if D  Ri , then the investor gets repaid D only if Rj          1-
                                                                                       ,
                                        D-Ri
which occurs with probability 1 - G      1-
                                                  . Otherwise, the bank goes into default
at date 2, and the depositor gets 0. Thus, everything else equal, the higher the face
value of debt is, the lower the probability that the investor gets repaid when D  Ri .
   This implies that investor I finds it optimal to continue funding bank i when

                                        D - Ri                   r
                       Pr   Rj  max            ,0      Ri          ,
                                         1-                      D

or when his signal is sufficiently large. In particular, investor's optimal continuation
decision can be characterized by a threshold strategy as follows
                                       
                                        1        if Ri  R
                            sI (Ri ) =                       ,                        (2)
                                        0        if Ri < R

where
                                      D 1 -  -1    r
                 R = max min 1,        -    G   1-                     ,0 .           (3)
                                                   D
   Thus, R can be interpreted as the probability that an investor liquidates his bank
at date 1, under the assumption that the return of the projects is uniformly distributed.
Equation (3) reveals that investor's continuation decision does not depend monoton-
ically on D. Clearly, if the face value of debt is too low, the investor liquidates the
bank, as he is better off cashing in the liquidation value r. However, the investor is
also more likely to liquidate when the face value of debt is too high. While a high face
value of debt benefits the investor, the investor expects he will be repaid with very low
probability. For instance, in the extreme case when D = 1, the probability that the
investor receives the face value of debt is zero. Hence, the investor finds it optimal to
liquidate the bank and receive the liquidation value r. These forces play an important
role in determining the optimal face value of debt, which we discuss next.


                                            11
Figure 1: The figure illustrates the equilibrium liquidation probability, R , and the
optimal face value of debt, D , as a function of the degree of transparency of a bank's
portfolio, , for r = 0.37.

     We turn to derive the optimal face value of debt taking as given a portfolio allocation
, and taking into account that investors make the optimal continuation decision at date
1. Investor I 's expected payoff is given by


              WI = ERi {s                                        
                         I (Ri ) · D · Pr(D  Vi () |Ri ) + (1 - sI (Ri )) · r } ,       (4)


or

                                
                          D - Ri
 WI = D · ERi      Pr Rj                   Ri  R Pr (Ri  R ) + r · Pr (Ri < R ) . (5)
                           1-

     The first term on the right hand side of (4) and (5) represents investor I 's expected
payoff provided he continues funding bank i. The second term on the right hand side
of (4) and (5) represents investor's expected payoff provided he liquidates the bank at
date 1.
     Thus, making use of (2), we obtain that the face value of debt satisfies the first




                                               12
order condition
                                                     
                                                    D -Ri
               1
                      
                       E
                      D Ri
                                      Pr Rj          1-
                                                              Ri  R Pr (Ri  R )
                 =-                                                                      .           (6)
               D                                D -Ri
                    ERi Pr Rj                    1-
                                                             Ri  R Pr (Ri  R )

The left handside of Equation (6) represents the marginal benefit for an investor ex-
pressed as a percentage increase in the face value of debt. The right hand side of
Equation (6) can be seen as the marginal cost for an investor represented as a percent-
age decrease in the expected probability of repayment associated with an increase in the
face value of debt. An equivalent interpretation is that, in equilibrium, the elasticity of
the expected probability of repayment with respect to the face value of debt is -1.
     We distinguish two main cases when R < 1 and the investor is willing to continue
his bank with positive probability: D   and D > . When D  , then there
exists values of Ri such that bank i can repay the investor from the realization of its
own project. Thus, the signal that investor I receives at date 1 can be sufficiently
informative about whether he will be repaid at date 2. When D > , it is necessary
that bank j 's project has a sufficiently good realization for bank i to be able to repay
the debt to the investor at date 2. In this case, the signal that investor I receives at
date 1 is less informative, as the investor is uncertain about whether he will be repaid
or not even if Ri is high.
     In the first case, when in equilibrium D < , the first order condition (6) becomes

 D                                              D                                    D
                                 1                                                   
           D - Ri                                                 D - Ri                     
      1-            dRi +            1dRi + D                1-            dRi + D             1dRi = 0.
            1-                                      D              1-                        D
R                            D                  R                                    R
                             



Integrating, we obtain that the face value of debt must satisfy the following equation


                    (D - R ) (3D - R ) = 2 (1 - ) (1 - R ) ,                                         (7)


for any   (0, 1). We illustrate in Region (ii) in Figure 1 the solution to (7) as well
the corresponding continuation decision of investor I , as a function of the degree of

                                                        13
transparency of his bank i, for a given reservation value r. The key observation is that
as  increases, investors' information improves. This leads to a more precise liquidation
decision, and the liquidation threshold R and optimal face value D converge to each
other. In fact, in the limit when investors are fully informed (  1), the liquidation
threshold is R = D .
   In the second case, when in equilibrium D > , the first order condition (6) becomes

              1                             1
                     D - Ri                              D - Ri
                  1-             dRi + D            1-             dRi = 0.
                      1-                        D         1-
             R                             R


Integrating, we obtain that the face value of debt must satisfy the following equation

                                    1   1  1
                                 D = R -  + ,                                         (8)
                                    4   4  2

for any   (0, 1). Similarly, the solution to (8) is illustrated in Region (i) in Figure
1. A change in the degree of transparency of a bank's portfolio, , implies that the
probability of liquidation, R , and the face value of debt, D , move in the same direction
in equilibrium. Figure 1 also shows that if the degree of transparency of bank i's
portfolio is too low, then there exists no face value of debt for which the investors are
willing to continue the bank, and R = 1.
   A general characterization of the investor optimal decision, i.e. the probability R
that a bank is liquidated and the face value of debt D , as a function of the investor's
reservation value, r, and of the fraction that the bank retains of her own project, ,
is provided in Lemma A.1 in the Appendix. Figure 2 illustrates the results stated in
the Lemma. When r is low and  is not too high, as in Region (i) in Figure 2, the
repayment an investor expects to receive from his bank at date 2 is sufficiently high
that he always continues the bank. As r increases, the investor continues the bank with
probability 1 only if he does not have sufficiently precise information about the bank's
portfolio, or when  is lower. Indeed, the threshold i-ii (r) that separates Region (i) and
Region (ii) is decreasing r. This is because when the investor is relatively uninformed



                                           14
                          1.0




                          0.8


                                                         (ii)


                          0.6


                       
                                      (i)

                          0.4

                                                         (ii)


                                      (i)
                          0.2
                                                                         (iii )




                          0.0
                                0.0         0.1   0.2            0.3   0.4        0.5
                                                             r




Figure 2: The figure illustrates how the liquidation probability R and the face value
of debt D depend on the investor's reservation value, r, and of the fraction, . In
region (i), R = 0. In region (ii), R  (0, 1). In region (iii), R = 1. The dashed lines in
regions (i) and (ii) represent the thresholds above which the equilibrium face value of
debt D  , and below which D > .

the face value of debt can be set to compensate him in expectation for not liquidating
early, provided r is small. In other words, opacity makes investors passive when r is
low. However, as the investors' reservation value, r, increases and banks portfolios
remain relatively opaque, or  is not too high, as in Region (iii) in Figure 2, investors
no longer tolerate opacity. Thus, in Region (iii), there exists no level of the face value
of debt for which an investor is willing to continue the bank at date 1. Thus opacity
makes investors aggressive when r is high. This is reflected in the threshold ii-iii (r)
that separates Region (ii) and Region (iii) which is increasing r.
   When  is high and the banks' portfolios are relatively transparent, an investor
continues his bank with probability R  (0, 1) for a large range of his reservation
value, r, as shown in Region (ii) in Figure 2. This also holds for lower levels of , as
long as r is not too high.
   The dashed lines in Region (i) and Region (ii) in Figure 2 represent the thresholds
above which the equilibrium face value of debt D  , and below which D > .


                                                        15
     In the second step, we analyze banks' decision about what fraction, , of their loans
to retain in their portfolio. When banks choose their optimal portfolio, they take into
account that the investors make optimal decisions. That is, a bank i understands that
each fraction (1 - ) of loans it exchanges with the other bank induces a continuation
decision sI , and a face value of debt D. Thus for each , and s       
                                                               I and D associated with

that , the bank i's expected payoff is

                                                           
               Wi = ERi ERj {max[(Ri + (1 - ) Rj - D ), 0]} · sI (Ri )



or

                                                       
                                                    D - Ri
Wi = ERi     ERj    Ri + (1 - ) Rj - D          Rj              Ri  R Pr (Ri  R ) .
                                                     (1 - )

Isolating D , and substituting the investor's payoff, we can write bank i's expected
payoff in (5) as

                                                    
                                       D - Ri
     Wi   = ERi Ri + (1 - ) ERj Rj Rj           Ri  R Pr (Ri  R ) (9)
                                        (1 - )
                                
                              D - Ri
            -D · ERi Pr Rj             Ri  R Pr (Ri  R ) .      (10)
                                1-

The first term in (9) represents the total surplus that is expected to be realized when
investor I continues to fund bank i. The last term is simply the payoff that investor I 's
expects to receive if he continues the banks. Thus, in equilibrium, each bank i chooses
the fraction, , of her project to retain in her portfolio such that the expected marginal
total surplus equals the marginal investor's payoff.
     The optimal degree of transparency,  solves
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                            1       1                                            
                                                                                 
                                                                    
            = arg max                          Ri + (1 - ) Rj - D      dRj dRi      .
                                                                                 
                                  
                        R max
                                 D -Ri
                                                                                 
                                  1-
                                       ,0                                        




                                               16
   The bank's objective is to choose a portfolio allocation ( , 1 -  ) that would result
in the lowest face value of debt, D, conditional on the investor continuing to fund the
bank. The bank has a two-fold incentive to choose a portfolio allocation that minimizes
D conditional on continuation. First, since the bank is the residual claimant on the
realization of her portfolio, then the smaller D the bank needs to pay to the investor the
more she is able to retain for herself in the states in which there is no default. Second,
a smaller D lowers the probability of default as well. Note that although D is set
competitively to maximize investors' expected payoff, banks' and investors' incentives
are not perfectly aligned. The investor could benefit from a portfolio allocation that
induces a higher D even though the bank defaults more often, as this could yield a
higher expected payoff for him. This wedge is an expression of the market power that
banks exercise when choosing .
   In deciding a portfolio allocation, the bank weighs two forces: the ex-post probability
of default at date 2 and the probability of liquidation at date 1. When possible, the
bank chooses a portfolio allocation to decrease both the ex-post probability of default
at date 2 and the probability of liquidation at date 1. This is the case when D >  in
Region (ii) in Figure 2. However, there are parameters for which the probability that
the investor liquidates the bank is not monotonic in , as it is the case when D  
in Region (ii) in Figure 2. Then, the bank faces a trade-off between the marginal
change she induces in the ex-post probability of default relative to the marginal change
she induces in the probability that the investors liquidate the bank. In this case, the
optimal choice of the degree of transparency has interesting implications for welfare and
the early liquidation of banks, as we discuss in Section 4.


3.2    Constrained Planner and Welfare

We start by introducing the social planner optimization problem. Our definition of
welfare aggregates banks' and investors' expected payoffs as of date 0, and can be




                                           17
         written as

                                                                          
                                 D - Ri                            D - Ri
     S
W = 2×ERi              Ri Pr Rj                 + (1 - ) E Rj |Rj                        · s                    
                                                                                            I (Ri ) + r · (1 - sI (Ri )) .
                                  1-                                1-
                                                                                                   (11)
         The social planner chooses a fraction of the project, S , that each bank retains such
         that
                                                                                                     
                   1                         
                                                                                1                   
 S
                       
                       Ri 1 - G max        D - Ri                                                                    
 = arg max                                        ,0          + (1 - )                   Rj dG (Rj ) dG (Ri ) + rG (R ) ,
                                            1-
                 R
                                                                               
                                                                                                    
                                                                              D -Ri
                                                                        max    1-
                                                                                    ,0



         given that the face value of debt satisfies (6) and investors take optimal continuation
         decisions that satisfy (1).
            The social planner's and the banks' incentives are partially aligned, as both benefit
         when investors continue to fund the bank and when default is avoided. However, two
         wedges may arise between the social planner and the banks.
            The first wedge arises because banks do not internalize that in case of early liq-
         uidation, investors nevertheless obtain their reservation value, r. In contrast, for the
         social planner, the early liquidation payoff represents a welfare gain even when a bank
         defaults. Moreover, as r increases, investors obtain a good payoff if they liquidate early.
         Thus, even if banks choose a portfolio allocation that decreases the probability of liqui-
         dation, it may be the case that the expected welfare gain from continuation increases by
         less. This force is most clearly identified by allowing investors to have full information
         about both banks' projects, a set-up which we characterize formally in the Section 5.
            The second wedge arises because the social planner and the banks associate a dif-
         ferent relative importance to being continued vs. defaulting. That is, the trade-off
         between the ex-post probability of default and the probability that the investors liqui-
         date the bank resolves differently for the social planner. This is because, each bank, as
         a residual claimant on the return of her portfolio, may benefit from receiving a higher
         payoff albeit in fewer states of the world. Therefore, it may be optimal for the bank


                                                     18
to chose a portfolio allocation under which investor receive a lower face value of debt,
even if this implies that investors are more likely to liquidate. In contrast, from the
perspective of a social planner, the face value of debt is a transfer from the bank to
the investor. Provided that investors are not too highly compensated for liquidating
early, the social planner's objective is to chose a portfolio allocation S , 1 - S for
each bank that yields a face value of debt, DS , such that the surplus is realized in as
many states of the world as possible. While the planner may also be concerned that
the face value of debt is be too high, this is because the bank can become insolvent
and default at date 2. This trade-off is present only when investors have incomplete
information about their banks' portfolio.


3.3    Case Study: Full Opacity vs. Full Transparency

As a preamble to the full equilibrium characterization, it is instructive to consider the
implications of our model if the only possible choices for the bank and the constrained
planner were full opacity ( = 0) and full transparency ( = 1).
   The case of  = 1, when each bank retains all of her project and the investors are
perfectly informed, is straightforward. Investor I continues to fund bank i when the
signal he receives Ri is larger than the face value of debt D, i.e. when he is certain
that the bank does not default at date 2. In other words, his continuation strategy is
given by (2) where R = D. At the same time, the face value of debt must solve the
following maximization problem
                                      1
                                                                
                                                                
                         max      D       1dG (Ri ) + rG (R )      ,
                          D                                     
                                   R


and the first order condition implies that

                                                  1+r
                                      D (1) =         .
                                                   2

                                                          1-r
Thus, the investor continues the bank with probability     2
                                                              .


                                             19
   The case of  = 0, when each bank swaps the entire project with the other bank,
is similarly straightforward. The signal that the investors receive at date 1 is not
informative about the return of their bank portfolio. Thus, an investor continues the
debt contract with the bank provided the amount he expects to be repaid at date 2,
D · Pr (D  Vi (0)), exceeds the reservation value he obtains when he liquidates the
bank at date 1, r. Then, the face value of debt must solve the following maximization
problem                                                   
                                              1
                                                          
                                 max      D       dG (Rj ) ,
                                  D                       
                                            D

and the first order condition implies that

                                                 1
                                          D (0) = .
                                                 2

Thus, if r <   1
               4
                   the investor continues the bank with probability 1 and receives D (0)
                           1                        1
at date 2 with probability 2 . Otherwise, if r      4
                                                        there exists no face value of debt that
can induce the investor to continue the bank.
   Direct comparison of these two extreme cases reveal three key outcomes. First, from
the perspective of the planner, it is always better to have fully transparent banks. In
the absence of diversification benefits, full opacity only makes the investors' liquidation
decision less precise, which leads to surplus being destroyed inefficiently. Thus, welfare
under full transparency is higher than under full opacity.
                                                                 1
   Second, the banks prefer to be fully opaque if r <            4
                                                                   ,   while they choose a fully
transparent portfolio if r  1
                            4
                                         1
                              . When r < 4 , opacity makes investors passive, and they
choose to continue their bank with probability 1. Banks favor this outcome, since they
need to pay a lower face value of debt than when they have perfectly transparent port-
folios. When r  1
                4
                  , opacity makes investors aggressive and they will always liquidate
the bank at date 1. A bank can persuade the investor to continue the contract with
positive probability if only and if she holds a perfectly transparent portfolio. In this
                                                              1-r
case, the investor continues his banks with probability        4
                                                                  .    Therefore, the bank is too
opaque relative to the constraint efficient allocation if and only if r < 1
                                                                          4
                                                                            . We show in

                                              20
the next section how investors' and banks' incentives adjust to intermediate levels of
opacity.
    The third key implication is that the probability of early bank liquidation, or of
a financial crisis, is always weakly lower in equilibrium compared to when the banks
choose fully transparent portfolios, as in the constraint efficient outcome. In other
words, banks always prefer to avoid early liquidation. However, as we argue in the
next section, narrowing banks' choice to be either fully opaque or fully transparent
misses an important consequence of opacity, namely bank strategic exposure to financial
crises. We show that such behavior only emerges if banks can fine-tune how much
information they provide to investors by choosing portfolios with intermediate level of
opacity,   (0, 1).



4     Equilibrium and Optimal Opacity
In this section we formally introduce our results. The first set of result characterizes
the equilibrium portfolio allocation, and contrasts it with the portfolio allocation that
maximizes welfare. The second set of results addresses the implications of the equilib-
rium portfolio allocation for financial crises. In our model, we define a financial crisis
as the event that a bank is liquidated prematurely, at date 1.
    We start by characterizing banks' equilibrium portfolio allocation in the following
proposition.

Proposition 1 There exists rh such that for any r < rh , banks hold in equilibrium
interdependent and opaque portfolios, or   (0, 1). If r  rh , banks have independent
and perfectly transparent portfolios, or  = 1.

    Figure 3 shows the equilibrium portfolio allocation,  , as a function of the investors'
reservation value, r. To gain intuition, we superimpose the equilibrium  on Figure 2
which shows the various regions corresponding to the investor's optimal outcomes, i.e.
the probability R that a bank is liquidated and the face value of debt D . In Region
(i) in Figure 3 (2) r is small and investors' outside option is not that attractive. In this

                                            21
Figure 3: The figure illustrates the equilibrium degree of transparency,  , depends on
the investor's reservation value, r. We plot  superimposed on Figure 2.

case, investors do not have an incentive to liquidate their bank early, particularly when
 is low and they are better informed. Thus R = 0. In this region, since the bank is
not liquidated, she simply chooses the  that minimizes the face value of debt D that
it has to pay the investor.
   As we transition to Region (ii) in Figure 3 (2), the probability R that a bank is
liquidated is positive. This introduces complex trade-offs in how a bank chooses her
portfolio allocation . In some cases, the bank prioritizes to be continued and chooses 
so to minimize the probability of liquidation, even though investors require a relatively
high face value of debt, D , that can increase the default probability. Yet in other cases,
the bank chooses  to minimize D and thus the probability of default, even though
this implies that it would be liquidated more often, as is the case when D  .
   Proposition 1 shows that when investors' payoff, r, from early liquidation is not too
high, neither full transparency, nor full opacity are desirable for the banks. To see this,
it is useful to first understand a bank's incentives at the two extremes. As we have
discussed above, when  = 1 and the investor has perfect information, he liquidates the



                                            22
bank if and only if the bank defaults at date 2. This allows the investor to extract a
larger share of his bank's surplus, under the form of D . When  = 0, the investor is
completely uninformed so he needs to be compensated more in expectation, in order to
retain his investment in the bank. In addition, if banks either don't swap or fully swap
their projects, there are no gains from diversification. In both cases, the bank is worse
off than when she chooses an interior portfolio allocation. With an interior allocation,
the bank's portfolio is opaque, and investor's liquidation decision is less precise. That
is, the investor liquidates the bank even in some states in which the bank would not
default and, conversely, the investor continues the bank even in some states in which
the bank would default. The bank essentially seeks a degree of opacity  to take most
advantage of the two types of errors that the investor makes.
   When the reservation value of the investor is too attractive, he will continue to fund
the bank only when he is certain that he will receive a sufficiently high face value of
debt, conditional on his information at date 1. In this case, the bank must retain all
of his project, as the investor does not tolerate any degree of uncertainty about the
portfolio return.
   A direct implication of Proposition 1 is that banks incur a negative premium for
holding opaque and interconnected portfolios, as long as r  rh . This premium is de-
fined as the difference between a bank's payoff when she holds a perfectly transparent
portfolio ( = 1) and the payoff she obtains in equilibrium, conditional on being con-
tinued. The next proposition shows that the gain banks obtain from opacity is at the
expense of the investors.

Proposition 2 There exists rl such that for any r > rl , welfare is maximized when
banks have independent and perfectly transparent portfolios, or S = 1. If r < rl , welfare
is maximized when banks have interdependent and opaque portfolios, and S =  < 1.

   The social planner finds it optimal that banks have independent portfolios if r is not
too low. There are two reasons for this. First, even if the probability of liquidation may
be higher when banks have independent portfolio than when they have interdependent
portfolios, the welfare gain that investors obtain from their reservation value, r, may

                                           23
compensate for the welfare loss when the bank is liquidated early. Second, investors
have perfect information about their bank portfolio return when  = 1. As we have
seen in the previous section, when  = 1, the face value of debt D = R . Thus investor
I continues to fund bank i only when he is certain he will receive D, given he knows
that the return of i's project is Ri at date 1. In other words, the investor liquidates the
bank only when the bank would otherwise default at date 2. In this case, no surplus
is destroyed inefficiently. In contrast, when  < 1 there can be a welfare loss because
when bank i is liquidated the (1 - ) share of project originated by bank j that i owns
is liquidated as well, even though it could yield a high return.
   A direct consequence of Proposition 2 is that equilibrium portfolio allocations de-
crease welfare for intermediate values of the investors' reservation value, r. In Figure
6 we plot the difference between the payoff that a bank obtains in equilibrium and the
payoff that a bank obtains when she holds the efficient portfolio as a function of r. The
figure illustrates that indeed banks gain from opacity, instead of incurring a cost, at
the expense of the investors.
   Formally, we show that rl < rh , such that the divergence between the social planner
and the banks arises when r  (rl , rh ). The next proposition introduces this result and
identifies the main sources of the inefficiency.

Proposition 3 For any r  (rl , rh ) banks' portfolios are inefficiently opaque. More-
over, there exists rm  (rl , rh ) such that

  1. If rl < r < rm , the investors continue their bank too frequently, or R ( ) < R (1).

  2. If rm < r < rh , the investors liquidate their bank too frequently, or R ( ) >
      R (1).

   Proposition 3 essentially characterizes the probability of financial crises as a function
of the banks' portfolio choices. Recall that we defined a financial crisis to be the event
that a bank is liquidated at date 1. While financial crises may be efficient conditional
on banks' choices, welfare losses arise nevertheless either because crises occur either too
frequently or too infrequently. There are two channels that explain why inefficiencies

                                              24
Figure 4: The figure illustrates ERi Pr(D > Vi |Ri > R ) , the expected probability
that a bank defaults at date 2, when at date 1 investors have learned the signal and
decided to continue funding the bank, given the equilibrium degree of transparency,
as well as the optimal degree of transparency. We distinguish two regions: Region (i),
when r  (rl , rm ) and Region (ii), when r  (rm , rh ).

occur. First, the banks default too often at date 2 if they are not liquidated early. That
is, there are cases when investors choose to forego r and not liquidate the bank, but
the bank defaults at date 2 and investors receive zero. This is shown in the first part of
Proposition 3. Second, banks are liquidated too often at date 1: there are cases when
investors choose to liquidate the bank and only receive r. However, if the bank were
not liquidated, it would be solvent and pay out D > r to investors at t = 2. This is
shown in the second part of Proposition 3.
   The intuition is as follows. Given equilibrium D and  set at t = 0, investor I
has an ex-ante expectation of his payoff, in case he does not liquidate the bank. At
t = 1, when investor I observes signal Ri , he updates the expectation of his payoff
given his signal. When r  (rl , rm ), banks choose relatively opaque portfolios. Thus
investor I 's signal is relatively uninformative. It follows that unless Ri is very low,
the investor does not revise his expected payoff significantly downward, and he chooses
to continue the bank. This leads the investor to continue funding the bank too often
relative to the case when banks hold the socially optimal portfolio. Since a large part

                                           25
of bank i portfolio depends on realization of Rj , ex-post the banks default frequently,
as illustrated in Figure 4, Region (i).
   When r  (rm , rh ), the banks choose relatively transparent portfolios, since in-
vestors' reservation value, r, is high. As investor's interim signal at t = 1 is informative,
he substantially updates his expectation about the payoff he obtains in case he does
not liquidate the bank. Thus even for an intermediate realization of the signal, concern
that his bank will default at date 2 prompts the investor to liquidate the bank. This
leads to too frequent liquidation relative to the case when the bank holds the socially
optimal portfolio. It also implies that the investor only continues to fund the bank
when his signal is relatively high, which leads to a healthy bank balance sheet since Ri
is a significant share of bank i's portfolio. As a result, conditional on continuation, the
bank rarely defaults at t = 2, as illustrated in Figure 4, Region (ii). The bank favors
this outcome as well since its payoff conditional on being continued is sufficiently high
to compensate for the fact that she is liquidated more frequently.
   Note that the liquidation probability is monotonically increasing in r, but the degree
of opacity is non-monotonic, as illustrated in Figure 5. The first observation is intuitive:
the liquidation value r represents investors outside option, and a higher outside option
increases the probability of liquidating the bank. By the same logic, one would expect
the equilibrium opacity to be monotonically decreasing in r. Indeed, higher bank trans-
parency can increase investor's likelihood that he receives his date 2 payoff, attenuate
the increase in probability of liquidation, and improve bank's payoff.
   Although this logic holds once r is sufficiently high, it is not globally true. In fact
for low levels of liquidation value, opacity is weakly increasing (transparency, , weakly
decreasing) in r. The reason is that when r is not too high, banks recognize that by
giving their investors a sufficiently risky payoff with a high upside, as represented by a
high face value of debt, they can remove the liquidation threat all together. It follows
that to induce a sufficiently high face value of debt, equilibrium opacity increases in r
until it peaks at r = 1
                      2
                        , while R is zero, i.e. the bank is never liquidated. Above this
threshold the investor's outside option is sufficiently high that he sometimes liquidates



                                             26
the bank, regardless of the degree of opacity, as we explained above.
   It is important to observe that the second part of Proposition 3 implies that the
probability of a financial crisis is higher when banks have correlated portfolios than
when they have independent portfolios. Counterintuitively, in our model banks choose
a portfolio allocation that increases the likelihood of a banking crisis. At the same time,
the face value of debt that compensates investors is lower than the one that prevails
when the banks are less exposed to crises, as is the case when  = 1. A banking crisis
can occur even when there is a positive probability that the bank's portfolio yields a
positive return if continued. This suggests that government interventions and bailout
policies can only increase the probability of banking crises by further distorting banks'
incentives, and thus are inefficient.
   Furthermore, the model also provides an interesting set-up to think about the timing
of bailouts. Specifically, in the context of our model, the government can intervene at
two distinct times. First, at t = 1 when investors receive a low signal and intend
to liquidate the banks, the government can intervene and allow the banks to continue.
Second, at t = 2, if a bank does not have enough resources, the government can intervene
and repay the face value of debt to investors. Neither intervention involves a transfer
of government resources to bank equity holders, but the two bailout policies have very
different implications for the equilibrium degree of opacity, as well as for the banks'
and investors' payoff. Thus, by explicitly modeling the strategic interactions between
banks and investors, our framework allows for comparing the equilibrium implications
of government intervention when banks are illiquid versus when they are insolvent.
   Another interpretation of Proposition 3 is in terms of investors' use of their infor-
mation. When banks have independent portfolios, investors are relatively information
insensitive, in the sense that they only liquidate the bank if they anticipate a low return
of their bank's project. Once the bank chooses to exchange projects, investors become
more information sensitive, by taking actions based on the (partial) information that
they receive about their bank portfolio.
   While r in our set-up is an exogenous parameter, it can be thought as capturing



                                            27
in a reduced form liquidity in the secondary market, as most recently modeled in De-
watripont and Tirole (2018). An improvement in the secondary market can be then
equivalent to increasing r, which effectively acts as an outside option for investors.
Then, an implication of our model is that more liquidity in the secondary market has
an adverse effect: it provides incentives for investors to liquidate the bank early as
they can guarantee themselves a safe return, and do not internalize the forgone residual
claim which accrues to the bank if it is continued. Under this interpretation, improving
secondary market liquidity makes the banking sector less stable, and destroys welfare
through frequent banking crises.



5     Opacity vs. Full Information
A useful benchmark for our analysis is the full information case. In the full information
case, we consider that at date 1 the two signals that perfectly reveal the return of banks'
projects, Ri and Rj , are observed by both investors. This benchmark helps disentangle
the sources of bank profits in the imperfect information case into two distinct con-
stituents. The first component purely relates to banks' actions counteracting investors'
bargaining position in setting the face value of debt. The second one exists since banks
can obfuscate investor information. The full information benchmark isolates the first
component. It also clarifies that the only reason banks choose to expose themselves to
excessive early liquidation is to obfuscate investor information. If investors are fully
informed, banks always choose a portfolio allocation that allows them to be continued
as long as possible.
    In the full information case, we consider that at date 1 the two signals that perfectly
reveal the return of banks' projects, Ri and Rj , are observed by both investors. This
case is informative of the extent to which opacity motives drive banks' decision to have
interdependent portfolios, and the implications for financial crisis.
    As in the main specification of our model, we start by analyzing investors' con-
tinuation decision. For each portfolio allocation, F I  (0, 1), and each face value of
debt, DF I , set at date 0 under full information, the optimal continuation decision that

                                            28
investor I takes at date 1 must satisfy

      /F I
    sI       = arg max sF I
                        I ·D
                             FI
                                · Pr DF I  Vi F I |Ri , Rj + 1 - sF
                                                                  I
                                                                    I
                                                                      ·r .                 (12)


Since at date 1 the investor is perfectly informed, he continues funding the bank when
the return of his bank's portfolio is sufficiently high to repay the face value of debt DF I .
In other words, his continuation strategy is given by
                                          
                        /F I
                                           1          if Vi F I  DF I
                       sI    (Ri , Rj ) =                                 .                (13)
                                           0          if Vi F I < DF I

To parallel the imperfect information case, we use R/F I  Pr Vi F I < DF I to de-
note the probability that the investor liquidates the bank at date 1. In contrast with the
case when they have information only about their bank's project, with full information
investors liquidation decision is perfectly accurate. That is, investors liquidate the bank
only in the states in which the bank defaults at date 2, and, similarly, they continue
the bank only in the states in which the banks is able to repay the face value of debt.
   With full information, investor's I expected payoff at date 0, is given by

                               /F I                            /F I
              WIF I = ERi ,Rj sI      (Ri , Rj ) · DF I + 1 - sI      (Ri , Rj ) · r ,


and the optimal face value of debt solves


 D/F I = arg max DF I · Pr DF I  Vi F I                + r · 1 - Pr DF I  Vi F I         . (14)


The solution to (14) ensures that when the investor continues the bank, he will receive
D/F I > r.
   We then turn to analyze each bank's decision about what fraction, F I , of their
loans to retain in her portfolio. As in the imperfect information case, when banks
choose their optimal portfolio, they take into account that the investors make optimal
                                          /F I
decisions. Thus for each F I , and sI            and D/F I associated with F I , the bank i's


                                                 29
     expected payoff is

                                                                      /F I
               WiF I = ERi ,Rj {max[(Ri + (1 - ) Rj - D/F I ), 0] · sI       (Ri , Rj )}.


     Thus, the optimal portfolio allocation, /F I solves




     /F I = arg max ERi ,Rj     Ri + (1 - ) Rj - D/F I |D/F I  Vi F I              · Pr D/F I  Vi F I   .


        The social planner optimization problem is similar to the incomplete information
     case. Total welfare aggregates banks' and investors' expected payoffs as of date 0, and
     can be written as




W S/F I = ERi ,Rj (Ri + (1 - ) Rj ) |D/F I  Vi F I      Pr D/F I  Vi F I          +r 1 - Pr D/F I  Vi F I   .
                                                                                              (15)
     The social planner chooses a fraction of the project, S , that each bank retains to
     maximize (15), given that the face value of debt satisfies (14) and investors take optimal
     continuation decisions that satisfy (12).
        Next we characterize the equilibrium portfolio allocation, as well as the portfolio
     allocation that maximizes welfare when investors are fully informed at date 1.

                                                                                       3-2r 1+2r
     Proposition 4 There exists rH such that for any r < rH , /F I = max                5
                                                                                           , 3     .
     If r  rH , banks have independent portfolios in equilibrium and /F I = 1.

        Note that for any portfolio allocation (, 1 - ) that is an equilibrium, the portfolio
     allocation (1 - , ) is also an equilibrium. This follows from the symmetry of the
     banks' portfolio return distribution in the full information case.
        Proposition 4 implies that banks find it beneficial to exchange projects only as long
     as the reservation value of the investor, r, is not too high. With perfect information,
     banks have an incentive to exchange projects either to change the distribution of their
     portfolio to gain on the upside, or to benefit from diversification and default less often.

                                                 30
Figure 5: The figure illustrates the equilibrium portfolio allocation under full informa-
tion, /F I , as well as the equilibrium portfolio allocation under incomplete information,
 , as a function of the investors' reservation value r.

   Under perfect information investors liquidate their bank at date 1 precisely when
the bank will default at date 2. In this case, banks are able to retain a larger share of
the aggregate surplus if they choose  that both lowers the probability of default and
face value of debt. Investors nevertheless could be better off with a portfolio allocation
for which the bank defaults more often but that yields a higher face value of debt.
   Exchanging projects brings diversification benefits as diversification lowers the prob-
ability of default. However, diversification also limits the payoff that a bank receives
on the upside as well. Hence, perfect diversification is not optimal, in the sense that
/F I = 1
       2
         . This is not surprising. While models like Diamond (1984) inform our in-
tuition that perfect diversification is desirable, this result tells us that including more
independently risky projects equally-weighted in a portfolio strictly improves the de-
fault probability. However, even in the standard model of Diamond (1984) in which
investors are offered a debt contract that allows them to break even, fixing the num-
ber of projects in the portfolio, a bank can be indifferent between various portfolio
allocations.

                                            31
   To shed light on how opacity affects banks' decisions to have interdependent port-
folio, it is then useful to compare the portfolio allocations that banks choose when they
cannot obscure investor information, with the allocations that banks choose when they
benefit from opacity as well. Figure 5 illustrates how the equilibrium allocation un-
der full information, /F I , compares with the equilibrium allocation under incomplete
information,  , as a function of the investors' reservation value r. It is immediate
from the figure that bank incentive to obscure investor information leads them to hold
excessively interconnected portfolios.

Proposition 5 There exists rL such that for any r < rL , welfare is maximized when
                                                               3-2r
banks have correlated portfolios and S/F I = /F I =             5
                                                                    .   If r  rL , welfare is
maximized when banks have independent portfolio and S/F I = 1.

   Just as in the equilibrium result, note that for any portfolio allocation (, 1 - )
that is welfare optimal, the portfolio allocation (1 - , ) is also welfare optimal. This
also follows from the symmetry of the banks' portfolio return distribution in the full
information case.
   Proposition 5 shows that an interior portfolio allocation is optimal only if the reser-
vation value of the investor, r, is sufficiently low. Since rl < rL < rm , even with full
information, the equilibrium is inefficient if r  (rL , rm ). The nature of inefficiency is
similar to our main specification when investors have only partial information. When
investors have access to full information about their bank's portfolio, banks choose
interdependent portfolios not to dilute investor information, but to gain from diversifi-
cation. However, the bank, just as in the partial information case, does not internalize
that if it is not continued, the liquidation value r still accrues to investors. For the social
planner on the other hand, the early liquidation payoff represents a welfare gain even
when a bank defaults. This is the only wedge that arises between the social planner
and the bank in the full information case.
   As we discussed in Section 4, opacity introduces a second wedge that renders banks'
portfolios inefficient. Banks significantly exploit the informational disadvantage of the
investors to increase their profits relative to what they would obtain if they held the

                                              32
Figure 6: The figure illustrates the difference between the payoff that a bank obtains in
equilibrium and the payoff that a banks obtains when she holds the efficient portfolio
under full information, as well as under incomplete information, as a function of the
investors' reservation value r.

optimal portfolio, as it is illustrated in Figure 6. Moreover, the region of inefficiency
is wider in the partial information case than in the full information case, as the same
figure shows.
    The next proposition characterizes formally the main source of inefficiency when
investors have perfect information, with implications for the probability of financial
crises.

Proposition 6 For any r  (rL , rH ) banks portfolio allocations are inefficient. More-
over, the investors continue their bank too frequently, or R/F I (/F I ) < R/F I (1).

    It is interesting to contrast the result in Proposition 6 with the result in Proposition
3. With full information about both project realizations, investors terminate their
bank whenever the total ex-post return is below the face value they are promised to
get. Perfectly informed investors are able to better tailor their joint (D/F I , R/F I )
decision to minimize the loss in the event of bad realizations, while capturing as much
surplus as possible. Thus, in the absence of opacity, banks cannot benefit from financial

                                            33
crises. While banking crises occur in equilibrium, they are not as frequent as it would
be the case if portfolio allocation were optimal. Only under opacity banks purposefully
inflict crises in order to boost profits while they operate.



6     Conclusion
We explore a model in which banks strategically hold interconnected portfolios render-
ing the financial system opaque and more prone to financial crises. In our set-up, banks
borrow funds from investors to finance risky projects, in exchange for risky long-term
debt contracts. Before maturity investors observe a signal about their bank's project,
and decide whether they liquidate their debt early against a fixed redemption value.
Ex-ante, each bank can affect how investors use their information by exchanging a
fraction of their project with another bank, thus creating opaque portfolios.
    We show that generically, banks choose portfolios which are neither extremely
opaque nor fully transparent. In other words, they provide investors with an opti-
mal level of information. Furthermore, banks can choose a degree of opacity which
makes equilibrium outcome constraint inefficient. However, rather counter-intuitively,
the equilibrium degree of opacity does not deem the banks interim safe but ex-post in
trouble. Instead, banks choose a degree of opacity that encourages crises: banks make
themselves exposed to frequent termination if in return they end up paying extreme
low returns to investors if they survive and become profitable. In other words, banks
choose to expose themselves to financial crisis.




                                            34
References
Adrian, Tobias, and Markus K. Brunnermeier, 2016, CoVaR, American Economic Re-
  view 106, 1705­1741.

Allen, Franklin, Ana Babus, and Elena Carletti, 2012, Asset commonality, debt matu-
  rity and systemic risk, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 519­534.

Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 1994, Limited market participation and volatility
  of asset prices, The American Economic Review 84, 933­955.

Alvarez, Fernando, and Gadi Barlevy, 2015, Mandatory disclosure and financial conta-
  gion, working paper University of Chicago.

Asriyan, Vladimir, Dana Foarta, and Victoria Vanasco, 2018, Strategic complexity when
  seeking approval, Technical report, Stanford University, Graduate School of Business.

Azarmsa, Ehsan, and Lin William Cong, 2018, Persuasion in relationship finance, Tech-
  nical report, Available at SSRN.

Bouvard, Matthieu, Pierre Chaigneau, and Adolfo de Motta, 2015, Transparency in the
  financial system: Rollover risk and crises, The Journal of Finance 70, 1805­1837.

Chemla, Gilles, and Christopher A. Hennesy, 2014, Skin in the game and moral hazard,
  The Journal of Finance 69, 1597­1641.

Dang, Tri Vi, Gary Gorton, Bengt Holmstr¨
                                        om, and Guillermo Ordo~
                                                              nez, 2017, Banks
  as secret keepers, American Economic Review 107, 1005­1029.

DeMarzo, Peter M., 2004, The pooling and tranching of securities: A model of informed
  intermediation, Review of Financial Studies 18, 1­35.

Dewatripont, Mathias, and Jean Tirole, 2018, Liquidity regulation, bail-ins and
  bailouts.

Diamond, Douglas W., 1984, Financial intermediation and delegated monitoring, The
  Review of Economic Studies 51, 393.

                                          35
Duffie, Darrell, 2008, Innovations in credit risk transfer: Implications for financial sta-
  bility, BIS Working Papers No 255.

Egan, Mark, Ali Horta¸
                     csu, and Gregor Matvos, 2017, Deposit competition and financial
  fragility: Evidence from the US banking sector, American Economic Review 107,
  169­216.

Erica Jiang, Tomasz Piskorski, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru, 2020, Banking with-
  out deposits: Evidence from shadow bank call reports, working paper Northwestern
  University.

Flannery, Mark J., Simon H. Kwan, and Mahendrarajah Nimalendran, 2013, The
  2007­2009 financial crisis and bank opaqueness, Journal of Financial Intermediation
  22, 55­84.

Galeotti, Andrea, and Christian Ghiglino, 2019, Financial linkages and portfolio choice,
  working paper LBS.

Glode, Vincent, Christian C Opp, and Xingtan Zhang, 2018, Voluntary disclosure in
  bilateral transactions, Journal of Economic Theory 175, 652­688.

Goldstein, Itay, and Yaron Leitner, 2018, Stress tests and information disclosure, Jour-
  nal of Economic Theory 177, 34­69.

Ibragimov, Rustam, Dwight Jaffee, and Johan Walden, 2011, Diversification disasters,
  Journal of Financial Economics 99, 333­348.

Jiang, Liangliang, Ross Levine, and Chen Lin, 2016, Competition and bank opacity,
  Review of Financial Studies 29, 1911­1942.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, 1997, Credit cycles, Journal of Political Economy
  105, 211­248.

Lorenzoni, Guido, 2008, Inefficient credit booms, Review of Economic Studies 75, 809­
  833.


                                            36
Matutes, Carmen, and Xavier Vives, 1996, Competition for deposits, fragility, and
  insurance, Journal of Financial Intermediation 5, 184­216.

Mondria, Jordi, Thomas Wu, and Yi Zhang, 2010, The determinants of international
  investment and attention allocation: Using internet search query data, Journal of
  International Economics 82, 85­95.

Morgan, Donald P, 2002, Rating banks: Risk and uncertainty in an opaque industry,
  American Economic Review 92, 874­888.

Orlov, Dmitry, Pavel Zryumov, and Andrzej Skrzypacz, 2017, Design of macro-
  prudential stress tests, Stanford University Graduate School of Business Research
  Paper No. 17-41.

Shaffer, Sherrill, 1994, Pooling intensifies joint failure risk, Research in Financial Ser-
  vices 6, 249­280.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, Liquidation values and debt capacity:
  A market equilibrium approach, The Journal of Finance 47, 1343­1366.

Vanasco, Victoria, 2017, The downside of asset screening for market liquidity, The
  Journal of Finance 72, 1937­1982.

Wagner, Wolf, 2010, Diversification at financial institutions and systemic crises, Journal
  of Financial Intermediation 19, 373­386.




                                            37
A      Appendix

A.1        Incomplete Information Derivations
                                               1
Lemma A.1 For any early redemption value r  0, 2 and any portfolio allocation
(, (1 - )) that banks hold, the probability, R , that an investor liquidates the bank at
date 1, as well as the optimal face value of debt, D , with incomplete information are
as follows.
    For any r,

                                                                                2-
                   2 2
   1. if 0    min{ 5 , 3 2(1 - 2r) -              (4r)2 - 4r + 1 }, then D =     4
                                                                                     and R = 0.
                                    
   2. if   2
           5
                  3
                  10
                        1 - 2r +       1 - 4r - 6r2 , then D =       2
                                                                     3
                                                                       (1   - ) and R = 0.

   3. if max{ 2
              3
                2(1 - 2r) -          (4r)2 - 4r + 1 , 1- 41r } <      1
                                                                      6
                                                                          1-r+       r(r + 10) + 1
      then D =    1
                  6
                       1+       1 + 12r(1 - ) and R =        3
                                                              1
                                                                  -4 + 3  +     1 + 12r(1 - ) ,
      0 < R < 1.

              3
                                                  1
   4. if max{ 10 1 - 2r +          1 - 4r - 6r2 , 6 1-r+          r(r + 10) + 1 } <   1, then
      D is the largest root of equation


                                -4D3 + D2 (2r +  + 1) + r2 ( - 1) = 0,


      and R =    
                 1
                       D - (1 - )(1 -      D
                                            r
                                              )   , 0 < R < 1.

   5. if 0   < 1 -      1
                        4r
                           ,   then R = 1.

Proof. Start from equations (3) and (6), letting G  U [0, 1]. We will consider R = 0,
R = 1 and 0 < R < 1 separately. Moreover, we need to consider the following cases
separately: D < , and D  . The distinction is that in the former case, lender I
takes into account that even if the opaque part of portfolio of bank i, (1 - )Rj returns
                                                    D
zero, for sufficiently high realizations of Ri ,    
                                                         Ri  1, the lender will get paid if he
chooses to continue the bank.
    1. No early liquidation, R = 0.

                                                  38
     D
1.   
         > 1. In this case, investor payoff simplifies to

                                                    1
                                                              D - z
                               WI = D                    1-           dz.
                                                0              1-

     The first order condition is
                                              4D +  - 2
                                                        = 0,
                                               2( - 1)
     which implies
                                                 1
                                              D = (2 - ).
                                                 4
     The second order condition holds (SOC< 0), thus the above D is a maximum.
                                                                   
     D >  requires 0    5    2
                               , while R = 0 requires   10
                                                        3
                                                           1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 ,
     which leads the first case.

     D
2.   
         < 1. In this case, investor payoff simplifies to

                                        D
                                                    D - z                   D
                          WI =               1-                dz + D(1 -     )
                                    0                1-                     

     The first order condition is

                                            3D2 + 2( - 1)
                                                          = 0,
                                              2( - 1)

     which implies
                                                         2
                                            D =            (1 - ).
                                                         3
     The second order condition holds (SOC< 0), thus the above D is a maximum.
                                                                 
     D <  requires   5   2
                           , while R = 0 requires   103
                                                         1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 ,
     which leads the second case.

2. Some early liquidation, 0 < R < 1.

                                            D 1-    r
                               R =           -   1-
                                                    D


                                                    39
                                                              r
We again separately consider two cases: rac1 -  1 -           D
                                                                  . We again separately con-
sider two cases:

       D
  1.   
           > 1. In this case, investor payoff simplifies to

                                          1
                                                    D - z
                              WI = D          1-              dz + rR
                                         R           1-

       Substituting for R and taking first order condition implies

                      (D(1 - 3D) + r(1 - )) (r(1 - ) - D(1 - D))
                                                                 = 0,
                                     2(1 - )D2

       This is a quadratic equation with four roots: D1 = 1
                                                          6
                                                            1 - 1 + 12r(1 - ) <
                         
       0. D2,4 = 12
                     1 ± 4r - 4r + 1 , and R (D2 ) = R (D4 ) = 1. Thus, the only
       relevant face value is D3 =   1
                                     6
                                         1+   1 + 12r(1 - ) . Note that R (D) < 1 only
       if D2 < D < D4 , thus the optimal face value can be in this interval. Moreover,
       D2 < D3 < D4 .

       Next, the second order condition is given by

                                         r2 (1-)2
                                             D3
                                                 + 3D - 2
                                              (1 - )

       Letting SOC= 0 leads to a quadratic equation. Only two of the roots are in
                                     soc          soc
       between D2 and D3 , and D2 < D1   < D3 < D 2   < D4 . Thus the second
       order condition changes sign twice on the interval [D2 , D4 ]. Moreover, the second
       derivative evaluated at D2 and D4 is

                           1±      1 - 4r(1 - ) (1 - 4r(1 - ))
                                                                     > 0,
                                         2r(1 - )2

       which implies that D2 and D4 are local minima, and that the second derivative
       is negative at D3 , thus D3 is a (local) maximum. Since first order condition is
       positive between D2 and D3 , and negative between D3 and D4 , D3 is the global


                                              40
     maximum in the interval [D2 , D4 ]. Thus we have

                               1
                           D =    1 + 1 + 12r(1 - )
                               6
                                1
                           R =     -4 + 3 + 1 + 12r(1 - ) .
                               3
                                                      
     Lastly, D >  requires  <         1
                                      6
                                           1-r+          r2 + 10r + 1 , R < 1 requires  > 1 - 41r
     and R > 0 requires  >        2
                                  3
                                          2(1 - 2r) -      (4r)2 - 4r + 1 . This leads the third
     case.

     Moreover, R cannot exceed 1, thus R = 1 if   1 -                     1
                                                                          4r
                                                                             ,   which leads the fifth
     case.

     D
2.   
         < 1. Here we need to consider two sub-cases

                  D
      (a) R <     
                       r < D < . In this case, investor payoff simplifies to

                                      D
                                                D - z                     D
                          WI =             1-                dz + D(1 -     ) + rR ,
                                 R               1-                       

             Substituting for R and taking the first order condition implies

                              -4D3 + D2 (1 +  + 2r) - r2 (1 - )
                                                                = 0.
                                            2D2 

             The numerator is a cubic function in D, with  = -432r4 (1 - )2 + 4r2 (1 -
             )(1 +  + 2r)3 , thus  < 0 implies (1 +  + 2r)3 - 108r2 (1 - ) < 0. For
             any pair (r, ) that satisfy  < 0,

                                     
             <~ (r) = max{ 3 1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 , 1 -r +                          r(r + 10) + 1 + 1 },
                          10                         6

             and (r, ) is covered by one of the first 3 cases. Thus when  > ~ (r),

             Delta > 0 and the cubic first order condition has 3 distinct real roots,
             D1 < D2 < D3 . D1 < 0, so it is not the solution. Moreover, note that the
             derivative of investors surplus approaches - as D  0 from above, and as


                                                 41
       D  .

       Next, the second order condition is given by

                                      r2 (1 - ) - 2D3
                                                      ,
                                             D3 

                                                  1
                                        r2 (1-)   3
       which has one root: Dsoc =           2
                                                      , and it is positive iff D < Dsoc .
       Moreover, D2 < Dsoc < D3 , thus D2 is a local minimum while D3 is a
       local maximum. Thus either D3 is the optimal face value, or the minimum
       feasible D, which in this case is D = r. Comparing the two values leads
       WI (, r, D3 ) > WI (, r, r),   > ~ (r). Thus we have


                           D  = D3
                                  1                r
                            R =     D - (1 - ) 1 -                  .
                                                  D

       Lastly, note that if D = r, first order condition implies that  = r. However,
         ~ (r), which in turn implies that whenever         D
       r<                                                   
                                                                < 1, D > r and thus the
       next case is never relevant.
             D
   (b) R >   
                  D < min{r, }. As argued above, this case does not arise in
       equilibrium.

  Lastly, if D = , first order condition implies  = 1
                                                    6
                                                      1 - r + r(r + 10) + 1 ,
                                      
  and R > 0 implies  > 10 3
                             1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 . This leads to the forth case.

Always liquidate.

                                      D
                                        >1
                                      




                                       42
Proof of Proposition 1

We need to calculate the optimal  for a bank i. That is,  that maximizes

                            1            1
                                                                             
                    Wi =                              Ri + (1 - ) Rj - D () dRj dRi
                           R            
                                       D -Ri
                                max     1-
                                             ,0



      As the optimal face value of debt changes depending on  and r, we need to consider
various cases, as defined in lemma A.1.
                        2 2
      Case 1: 0    min{ 5 , 3 2(1 - 2r) -                        (4r)2 - 4r + 1 }.
                    2-
      Here D =       4
                         and R = 0. Substitute in the planner objective function to get

                                                      72 + 12(1 - )
                                             Wi =                   .
                                                        96(1 - )

Since R = 0, the optimal face value and bank profit are independent of r. Observe
       dWi               d2 Wi
that    d
             > 0 and      d2
                                    > 0, thus the bank profit function is increasing and convex in
this region. It follows that if the equilibrium level of opacity is in this region we will
have

                                          2 2
                          = min            ,  2(1 - 2r) -           (4r)2 - 4r + 1      ,
                                          5 3

or
                         
                               2                                                            2
                    
                         
                               5
                                                                             if 0 < r <     15
                 =
                               2                                                  2          1
                         
                               3
                                     2(1 - 2r) -       (4r)2 - 4r + 1        if   15
                                                                                       <r<   4


                2              3
                                                  
      Case 2:   5
                               10
                                     1 - 2r +        1 - 4r - 6r2 .
      Here D =         2
                       3
                         (1      - ) and R = 0. Substitute in the bank objective function to
get
                                                     1 8        2
                                          Wi =        -           (1 - ) .
                                                     2 9        3
Since R = 0, again the optimal face value and bank profit are independent of r. Observe


                                                           43
        dWi                  1          d2 Wi
that     d
              = 0 at  =      2
                                 and
                               > 0, thus the objective function is convex, and the maxi-
                                         d2
                                                                        
mum is attained on one of the corners, i.e.  = 25
                                                  or  = 10 3
                                                              1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 .
                                                                                 2
Direct comparison of the bank profit on the two boundaries reveals that Wi ( 5     ) 
     3
                                           2
Wi 10   1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 for 0 < r < 15 . It follows that if the equilibrium level
of opacity is in this region we will have

                                                         2
                                                        = .
                                                         5

                         2                                                   1                 1
     Case 3: max         3
                                 2(1 - 2r) -        (4r)2 - 4r + 1 , 1 -     4r
                                                                                       <       6
                                                                                                       1-r+           r(r + 10) + 1 .
     Here, D =       1
                     6
                         1+            1 + 12r(1 - ) and R =           3
                                                                        1
                                                                            -4 + 3  +              1 + 12r(1 - ) ,
0 < R < 1. Substitute in the bank objective function to get

                         144r(1 - ) - (42r(1 - ) + 23) 12r(1 - ) + 1 + 31
                 Wi =                                                     .
                                            162(1 - )

                                                        1              1                                    2            1
It is more convenient to consider r <                   4
                                                            and r >    4
                                                                           separately. When                 15
                                                                                                                 < r <   4
                                                                                                                           ,
d2 Wi
 d2
        > 0. Since the bank objective is convex, maximum is attained at one of the two
                                                                   2
boundaries. Direct comparison reveals that Wi                      3
                                                                       2(1 - 2r) -            (4r)2 - 4r + 1             >
        1                                                                              1                   dWi
Wi      6
            1-r+         r(r + 10) + 1            . On the other hand, when            4
                                                                                           <r< 1
                                                                                               2
                                                                                                 ,          d
                                                                                                                 > 0. Since
the bank objective is increasing in , maximum bank profit is attained at maximum
                     1
relevant , i.e.      6
                         1-r+              r(r + 10) + 1 .
     Thus if the equilibrium level of bank opacity is in this region, we have
                         
                                 2                                                     2               1
                  
                         
                                 3
                                      2(1 - 2r) -      (4r)2 - 4r + 1             if   15
                                                                                            <r<        4
                  =
                                 1                                                     1           1
                         
                                 6
                                      1-r+         r(r + 10) + 1                  if   4
                                                                                            <r<    2


                   3
                                                
     Case 4: max{ 10 1 - 2r +                   1 - 4r - 6r2 , 1
                                                               6
                                                                 1-r+                  r(r + 10) + 1 } <   1.
     Here, D is the largest root of equation


                                     -4D3 + D2 (2r +  + 1) + r2 ( - 1) = 0,




                                                            44
and R =     
            1
                   D - (1 - )(1 -           D
                                             r
                                               )   , 0 < R < 1. Bank profit is given by

                              3D 5 - 3D 4 ( + 1) + D 3 (2 +  + 1) - r3 (1 - )2
           Wicase 4 = Wi =                                                     .
                                                   6D 3 

We will use Wicase 4 for the objective function in this region since we use it to define the
equilibrium thresholds.
                                                                 2                   2
   We consider two cases separately, when r <                    15
                                                                      and when r >   15


             2
   · r<     15
               :
                        d2 Wicase   4
                                                       3
                                                                        
      In this region,      d2
                                        > 0,   >       10
                                                             1 - 2r +   1 - 4r - 6r2 , thus the objective
      function is convex and the maximum is attained at one of the two boundaries. The
                                                             3
                                                                         
      upper boundary is  = 1 and the lower boundary is  = 10     1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 .
      The bank profit at the two boundaries is given by

             3          
      Wi        1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2                       =
             10
                    1     8
                      -                 2      1 - 2r(3r + 2) + 1 + r 3r + 6              1 - 2r(3r + 2) + 2 ,
                    2 45
               (1 - r)2
      Wi (1) =          .
                  8

      Where the first expression uses continuity of bank objective function on the
               3
                           
      boundary 10  1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 , and case 2 above. Direct comparison of
      the two expressions reveals that the former expression is always larger than the
      latter. Thus in this range

                                                3         
                                         =        1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2
                                               10

             2
   · r>     15
               :

      Consider the first order condition

                                                    dWicase 4 (, r)
                                                                    =0
                                                         d

                                                            45
                                                                               2 1
            The first order condition has either one or two solutions for r  ( 15 , 2 ). Let 1 de-
                                                            2 1                1
            note the larger solution. 1 exists for all r  ( 15 , 2 ), 1 >      6
                                                                                       1-r+     r(r + 10) + 1 ,
                   d2 Wicase 4 (,r)
            and          d2
                                      > 0, i.e. 1 is a minimum.
                                                                                        2 1
                                                                                   ^  ( 15
            Let 2 denote the smaller solution (if it exists). 2 exists only if r > r       , 5 ),
                   d2 Wicase 4 (,r)
            and          d2
                                      < 0, i.e. 1 is a maximum. However, 2 is not always larger than
            1
            6
                  1-r+         r(r + 10) + 1 , thus it is not always a relevant solution. Moreover,
            d2
             dr
                  > 0.

            Let                                                1 1               
                F OC = 2 , and let rz denote the level of r  ( 4 , 2 ) such that F OC (r ) =
            1
            6
                  1-r+         r(r + 10) + 1 . Thus for r > rz , F OC is an interior (local) maxi-

            mum.
                                               2
            Given the above argument, for r  ( 15 , rz ), bank objective function is either
                                                               1
            decreasing or convex (or both) for                 6
                                                                   1-r+      r(r + 10) + 1 , 1 . Thus
            the maximum is attained at one of the two boundaries. The bank profit at the
            two boundaries is given by

                   1
            Wi       1-r+               r(r + 10) + 1   =
                   6

46 2r r -       r(r + 10) + 1 + 5 + 1 + 2r r -           r(r + 10) + 1 + 5         7   2r r -    r(r + 10) + 1 + 5 + 1 - 24

                                      9 -r +     r(r + 10) + 1 - 5    -r +     r(r + 10) + 1 + 1

            and
                                                             (1 - r)2
                                                    Wi (1) =          ,
                                                                8
            where the first expression uses continuity of bank objective function on the bound-
                   1
            ary    6
                       1-r+            r(r + 10) + 1 , and case 3 above. Direct comparison of the
            two expressions reveal that the former expression is larger than the latter when
                 2
            r  ( 15 , rz ). Thus in case 4, in this range

                                                  1
                                              =     1-r+       r(r + 10) + 1
                                                  6



                                                         46
                                                                              (1-r)2
     Next, let rh denote r  (rz , 1) such that Wicase 4 (F OC , r ) =           8
                                                                                       = Wi (1). For
     any r  (rz , rh ), bank surplus is first concave and then convex over the interval
          1
                       
      6     1 - r + r2 + 10r + 1 , 1 , with an interior (local) maximum and a larger
     interior (local) minimum. Thus the global maximum is obtained at either the
     local maximum, F OC , or at the upper boundary  = 1. Direct comparison of

     the corresponding levels of objective functions reveals that Wicase 4 (F OC (r ), r ) >
      (1-r)2
        8
               = Wi (1) for r  (rz , rh ).

     Finally, for r > rh , the objective function is larger at the corner  = 1 compared
     to the interior local maximum, thus  = 1.

   Putting the cases together,
                           
                              3
                                                                              2
                              10
                                    1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2   if 0 < r <        15
                           
                              1
                                                                  2
                                   1 - r + r2 + 10r + 1
                           
                     
                           
                              6
                                                            if   15
                                                                      < r < rz
                    =
                              F OC                          if rz < r < rh
                            1                                                  1
                                                            if rh < r <        2


                                  1
   Case 5: 0   < 1 -              4r
                                     .
   Here R = 1, thus Wi = 0.


Comparison across cases. Next for each r, we compare the optimum across cases.
Again it is easiest to treat 3 ranges separately

                   2
  1. 0 < r <      15
                     :

     Here we compare the maximum across cases 1, 2, and 4. Case 1 shows that when
                   2
     0 < r <       15
                      ,   maximum is attained at  = 2
                                                    5
                                                      . Case 2 shows that  =               2
                                                                                           5
                                                                                               is also
                                                                      2
     optimal in that range. Thus within cases 1 and 2,  =             5
                                                                          is optimal.
                                         2                             3
                                                                                 
     Case 4 argues that if r <              ,
                                maximum bank profit is attained at  = 10
                                         15
                                                                         1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 .
                                                         
     However, case 2 shows that Wi ( 2
                                     5
                                       )  Wi
                                             3
                                             10
                                                1 - 2r +   1 - 4r - 6r2 . Thus the
                               2
     maximum is attained at  = 5 .



                                                 47
         2
   2.   15
             <r< 1
                 4
                   :

        Here we compare the maximum across cases 1, 3, and 4. Case 1 shows that when
        2
        15
             <r< 1
                 4
                   , maximum is attained at  =                  2
                                                                3
                                                                    2(1 - 2r) -           (4r)2 - 4r + 1 , which
        also maximizes bank profit over the region covered by case 3. The latter implies
               2
        Wi     3
                   2(1 - 2r) -      (4r)2 - 4r + 1              Wi ( 1
                                                                     6
                                                                       1-r+                r(r + 10) + 1 .
                     1
        Since  =     6
                         1-r+           r(r + 10) + 1 maximizes bank profit over the region cov-
                                                                        2
        ered by Case 4, the maximum is attained at  =                   3
                                                                            2(1 - 2r) -          (4r)2 - 4r + 1 .

        1
   3.   4
             <r< 1
                 2
                   :

        Here we compare the maximum across cases 3 and 4. Case 3 shows that
               1                                                      1
        Wi     6
                   1-r+         r(r + 10) + 1             Wi 1 -      4r
                                                                            = 0. Comparing with case 4
        in this region, and using continuity of the bank profit function at the boundary
        1
        6
             1-r+        r(r + 10) + 1 yields

                                 
                                    1
                                                                                     1
                                 
                                    6
                                         1-r+            r2 + 10r + 1          if    4
                                                                                         < r < rz
                                 
                          =         F OC                                       if rz < r < rh
                                  1                                                             1
                                                                               if rh < r <      2



   Putting all the regions together leads the final result.
                         
                            2                                                                   2
                            5
                                                                                if 0 < r <      15
                         
                            2                                                        2           1
                                2(1 - 2r) - (4r)2 - 4r + 1                      if        <r<
                         
                            3                                                        15          4
                                       
                    =       1
                                1 - r + r2 + 10r + 1                            if   1
                                                                                          < r < rz           (A.1)
                          6                                                          4
                         
                          
                            F OC                                                if rz < r < rh
                         
                                                                                                 1
                          1                                                     if rh < r <      2


                                        dWicase 4 (,r)              d2 W case 4 (,r)
where F OC is the solution to                d
                                                      = 0 with   i
                                                                   d2
                                                                         | F OC
                                                                                < 0. rz is the value
                                                         
          , 2 ) such that 
        1 1
of r  ( 4                 F OC (r ) =
                                              1
                                              6
                                                  1 - r + r2 + 10r + 1 , rz  0.324 and rh > rz is
                                                                      (1-r)2
                    , 2 ) such that Wicase 4 (
                  1 1
the value of r  ( 4                           F OC , r ) =              8
                                                                               = Wi (1), rh  0.477.




                                                          48
Proof of Proposition 2

We need to calculate the optimal  for the social planner who faces the same friction
as the bank facing the investors. That is,  that maximizes
                                                                                                       
                1                                                                       1
                                              D - Ri
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                  
     S
                                                                                                         
W = 2×              Ri 1 - max                       ,0            + (1 - )                       Rj dRj  dRi +rR
                                               1-
                R
                                                                                    
                                                                                                         
                                                                                   D -Ri
                                                                            max     1-
                                                                                         ,0



     As the optimal face value of debt changes depending on  and r, we need to consider
various cases, as defined in lemma A.1. Moreover, let

                                                       1          7
                                                rl =        2        -1 ,                                   (A.2)
                                                       3          15

                            2
and note that rl <          15
                               .       We will use rl later to characterize the optimal S .
     Case 1: 0    min{ 2 , 2 2(1 - 2r) -
                       5 3
                                                                   (4r)2 - 4r + 1 }.
                       2-
     Here D =           4
                            and R = 0. Substitute in the planner objective function to get

                                                       132 + 36(1 - )
                                               WS =
                                                         96(1 - )

Since R = 0, the optimal face value and total surplus are independent of r. Observe
         dW S                d2 W S
that      d
                > 0 and       d2
                                         > 0, thus the total surplus is increasing and convex in this
region. It follows that if the socially optimal level of opacity is in this region we will
have

                                              2 2
                            S = min            ,  2(1 - 2r) -         (4r)2 - 4r + 1          ,
                                              5 3

or
                            
                                   2                                                              2
                            
                                   5
                                                                                  if 0 < r <      15
                    S =
                                   2                                                   2           1
                            
                                   3
                                        2(1 - 2r) -        (4r)2 - 4r + 1         if   15
                                                                                            <r<    4




                                                             49
                2          3
                                            
    Case 2:     5
                           10
                                 1 - 2r +      1 - 4r - 6r2 .
    Here D =            2
                        3
                          (1   = ) and R = 0. Substitute in the planner objective function
to get
                                             1
                                   WS =        27 - 4 6(1 - ) .
                                            54
Since R = 0, again the optimal face value and total surplus are independent of
                        dW S                     1            d2 W S
r. Observe that          d
                                = 0 at  =        2
                                                     and       d2
                                                                       > 0, thus the objective function
is convex, and the maximum is attained on one of the corners, i.e. S = 2      5
                                                                                 or
      3
                  
S = 10   1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 . Direct comparison of the planner objective on the
                                                       
two boundaries reveals that W S ( 2
                                  5
                                    )  W S 3
                                           10
                                              1 - 2r +                          2
                                                       1 - 4r - 6r2 for 0 < r < 15 .
It follows that if the socially optimal level of opacity is in this region we will have

                                                     2
                                                  S = .
                                                     5

    Case 3: max{ 2
                 3
                   2(1 - 2r) -              (4r)2 - 4r + 1 , 1- 41r } <                1
                                                                                       6
                                                                                            1-r+        r(r + 10) + 1 .
    Here, D =       1
                    6
                        1+       1 + 12r(1 - ) and R =                 3
                                                                        1
                                                                            -4 + 3  +        1 + 12r(1 - ) ,
0 < R < 1. Substitute in the planner objective function to get

                    6r(27 - 12)(1 - ) - (17 - 30r(1 - )) 12r(1 - ) + 1 + 37
             WS =                                                           .
                                          162(1 - )

                                                     1                 1                         2             1
It is more convenient to consider r <                4
                                                         and r >       4
                                                                           separately. When      15
                                                                                                      < r <    4
                                                                                                                 ,
d2 W S
 d2
         > 0. Since the planner objective is convex, maximum is attained at one of the two
                                                                   2
boundaries. Direct comparison reveals that W S                     3
                                                                       2(1 - 2r) -         (4r)2 - 4r + 1      <
         1                                                                         1         1        dW S
WS       6
             1-r+       r(r + 10) + 1       . On the other hand, when              4
                                                                                       < r < 2 ,       d
                                                                                                             > 0.
Since the planner objective is increasing in , maximum welfare is attained at maximum
                    1
relevant , i.e.     6
                        1-r+        r(r + 10) + 1 .
    Thus if socially optimal opacity is in this region, we have

                                        1
                                  S =     1-r+                r(r + 10) + 1
                                        6

                  3
                                      
    Case 4: max{ 10 1 - 2r +          1 - 4r - 6r2 , 1
                                                     6
                                                       1-r+                     r(r + 10) + 1 } <   1.


                                                         50
   Here, D is the largest root of equation


                          -4D3 + D2 (2r +  + 1) + r2 ( - 1) = 0,


and R =   
          1
                 D - (1 - )(1 -           D
                                           r
                                             )   , 0 < R < 1. The total welfare is given by

       -3D 5 + 6D 4 r + D 3 (1 - 6r(1 - ) + (1 + )) + 3D 2 r2 (1 - ) - r3 (1 - )2
WS =                                                                              .
                                        6D 3 

                                                               2                     2
We consider two cases separately, when r <                     15
                                                                    and when r >     15


           2
   · r<   15
             :
                        d2 W S                       3
                                                                       
     In this region,     d2
                                 > 0,   >            10
                                                           1 - 2r +       1 - 4r - 6r2 , thus the objective
     function is convex and the maximum is attained at one of the two boundaries. The
                                                            3
                                                                        
     upper boundary is  = 1 and the lower boundary is  = 10     1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 .
     The total surplus at the two boundaries is given by

                 3          
       WS           1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2                      =
                 10
                   1   2
                     -           2        1 - 2r(3r + 2) + 1 + r 3r + 6                   1 - 2r(3r + 2) + 2 ,
                   2 45
       W S (1) = 1/8(3 + r(2 + 3r)).


     Where the first expression uses continuity of social planner objective function on
                    3
                                
     the boundary 10   1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 , and case 2 above. Direct comparison
                                                                                                           2
     of the two expressions reveal that there exists a threshold r1 , r1 < rl <                            15
                                                                                                              ,   such
                                                                              2            3
                                                                                                           
     that the two curves cross only once at r1 , and for r <                  15
                                                                                 ,   WS    10
                                                                                                1 - 2r +      1 - 4r - 6r2   >
     W S (1) iff r < r1 . Thus in this range
                           
                                     3
                                                     
                           
                                     10
                                          1 - 2r +        1 - 4r - 6r2          if 0 < r < r1
                     S =
                            1                                                                    2
                                                                                if r1 < r <      15


           2
   · r>   15
             :


                                                          51
                                                                                                           d2 W S
  In this region, there exists two thresholds, r2 and r3 , such that: (1)                                   d2
                                                                                                                    >
                      1                                            2                        dW S
  0,   >              6
                          1-r+          r(r + 10) + 1        iff   15
                                                                        < r < r2 , (2)          d
                                                                                                     > 0,   >
  1
  6
       1-r+               r(r + 10) + 1 iff r3 < r < 1, and (3) r3 < r2 . It follows that for any
       2                            d2 W S            dW S
  r,   15
             <r< 1
                 2
                   , either          d2
                                             > 0 or    d
                                                             >0>          1
                                                                          6
                                                                               1-r+         r(r + 10) + 1 (or
  both). Thus the maximum of the objective function is attained at one of the two
  boundaries.The total surplus at the two boundaries is given by

              1
  WS            1-r+            r(r + 10) + 1           =
              6
                          2 37 - 3
                                 2
                                   r 5+r-               r(r + 10) + 1          5 + 3r - 3 r(r + 10) + 1

                                 9 5+r-               r(r + 10) + 1        1-r+        r(r + 10) + 1

                              2 2r r -          r(r + 10) + 1 + 5 + 1 5r r -                    r(r + 10) + 1 + 5 - 17
                          +                                                                                              ,
                                             9 5+r-          r(r + 10) + 1        1-r+              r(r + 10) + 1

  W S (1) = 1/8(3 + r(2 + 3r)).


  Where the first line uses continuity of social planner objective function on the
                     1
  boundary           6
                          1-r+          r(r + 10) + 1 , and case 3 above. Direct comparison of
                                                                          1
  the two expressions reveal that W S (1) > W S                           6
                                                                               1-r+         r(r + 10) + 1           if
            2
  r>        15
               .   Thus in this range


                                                         S = 1


Putting the two cases together,
                            
                               3
                                                 
                            
                               10
                                     1 - 2r +    1 - 4r - 6r2                 if 0 < r < r1
                    S =
                             1                                                              1
                                                                              if r1 < r <   2


                                 1
Case 5: 0   < 1 -                4r
                                    .
Here R = 1, thus W S = r.




                                                        52
Comparison across cases. Next for each r, we compare the optimum across cases.
Again it is easiest to treat 3 ranges separately

                  2
  1. 0 < r <     15
                    :

       Here we compare the maximum across cases 1, 2, and 4. Case 1 shows that when
                  2
       0 < r <    15
                     ,   maximum is attained at  = 2
                                                   5
                                                     . Case 2 shows that  =                   2
                                                                                              5
                                                                                                   is also
                                                                        2
       optimal in that range. Thus within cases 1 and 2,  =             5
                                                                            is optimal.

       In comparing with case 4, we consider two ranges separately, r < r1 and r > r1 .
                                  3
                                            
       If r < r1 , in case 4  = 10  1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 is optimal . Using case 2,
            2           3
                                                              2
       W S(5  ) > W S 10   1 - 2r + 1 - 4r - 6r2 , thus S = 5   in this range.

       If r > r1 , within the relevant range of case 4,  = 1 is optimal. We need to
                                        2
       compare the welfare with  =      5


                                         2
                                    W S ( ) = 37/90,
                                         5
                                              1
                                    W S (1) = (r(3r + 2) + 3)
                                              8

                                          2                                    1       7
       Direct comparison shows that W S ( 5 ) > W S (1) iff r < rl =           3
                                                                                   2   15
                                                                                            - 1 . Thus
       in this range
                                         
                                            2
                                         
                                            5
                                                     if 0 < r < rl
                                   S =
                                          1                        2
                                                     if rl < r <   15


        2
  2.   15
            <r< 1
                4
                  :

       Here we compare the maximum across cases 1, 3, and 4. Case 1 shows that when
       2
       15
            <r< 1
                4
                  , maximum is attained at  =         2
                                                      3
                                                          2(1 - 2r) -        (4r)2 - 4r + 1 . Case
                             1                                          2
       3 shows that W S      6
                                 1-r+    r(r + 10) + 1        WS        3
                                                                             2(1 - 2r) -          (4r)2 - 4r + 1   ,
                                                 1
       and case 4 shows that W S (1) > W S       6
                                                     1-r+      r(r + 10) + 1           in this region.
       Thus the maximum is attained at  = 1.

       1
  3.   4
            <r< 1
                2
                  :

                                                53
     Here we compare the maximum across cases 3 and 4. Case 3 shows that
             1                                                                 1
     WS      6
                 1-r+           r(r + 10) + 1               WS 1 -             4r
                                                                                    = r, and case 4 shows that
                           1
     W S (1) > W S         6
                                1-r+              r(r + 10) + 1          in this region. Thus the maximum
     is attained at  = 1.

   Putting all the regions together leads the final result.
                                                  
                                                     2
                                                  
                                                     5
                                                               if 0 < r < rl
                                        S =
                                                   1                            1
                                                               if rl < r <      2


             1       7                  2
where rl =   3
                 2   15
                          -1 <          15



Proof of Proposition 3

Proposition 1 shows that for r < rh ,  < 1, while 2 shows that for r > rl ,  = 1. It
follows that for r  (rl , rh ),  < S , thus bank portfolios are inefficiently opaque.
   Next, note that since for r > rl , S = 1, the socially optimal R and D coincide,

                                                                                        1+r
                     R (1) = max{min{1, D (1)}, 0} = D (1) =                                ,
                                                                                         2

as shown in the main text. Thus R (1) is monotonically increasing in r. On the other
hand, given the equilibrium  in equation (A.1), R ( ) is given by
                     
                                                                                                     1
                      0                                                                   if r <     4
                                                           
                      -r+ r(r+10)+1+42r                  r-    r(r+10)+1+5 +1-7
                                                                                               1
                                                                                          if       < r  rz
       R ( ) =                               -r +    r(r+10)+1+1                               4
                          D (  F OC )        1-                     r
                                         +       F OC
                                                      (1   -               )              if rz < r < rh
                     
                     
                             F OC              F OC            D  ( F OC )
                          1+r                                                                               1
                                                                                          if rh < r <
                     
                           2                                                                                2


                                                                                                         1+rl
First, note that rl =     1
                          3
                                2   7
                                    15
                                              1
                                         -1 < 4 , thus at rl , R ( (rl )) < R (1) =                       2
                                                                                                              .   Second,
evaluate R at rz as defined in proposition 1 to get R ( (rz )) < R (1; rz ) =                               1+rz
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                 .   Thus
R ( )  R (1) for r  (rl , rz ). Third, evaluate R at rh as defined in proposition 1 to
                                         1+rh
get R ( (rh )) > R (1; rh ) =              2
                                              .

                                                           54
   Since R (1; r) =    1+r
                        2
                              it is continuous and increasing. Since  is continuous for
                                                                                                    dR ( (r))
   1
r> 4 , R ( ) is continuous for r >                    1
                                                      4
                                                          as well, including at rz . Moreover,         dr
                                                                                                                =
R (                                                                    
   F OC (r )) F OC (r ) > 0. Along with R ( (rz )) < R (1; rz ) and R ( (rh )) >

R (1; rh ), it follows that R () and R (1) cross once in the interval (rz , rh ), at r = rm ,
such that R ( )  R (1) for r  rm and R ( ) > R (1) for r > rm . rm is defined by
R ( (rm )) = R (1; rm ), rm  0.3287.


A.2     Full Information Derivations

In this section we first introduce some useful notation and concepts, as well as a lemma
with intermediate results. Then we proceed to the proofs.
   Following the main text, with full information, the portfolio of a bank holding  in
her project and (1 - ) in the other bank's project has the following return cumulative
distribution                    
                                        z2
                                      2(1-)
                                                                        if z < 
                                
                  H (z ; ) =     1-
                                         1
                                             (z - 2
                                                    )                   if   z  1 -  .
                                
                                                  (1-z )2
                                
                                 1-
                                
                                                                        if z > 1 - 
                                                 2(1-)

In this case, each investor I 's expected payoff is given by


                             WIF I = D(1 - H (D, )) + rH (D, ),


each bank i's expected payoff is given by

                                                  1
                                                                     H (z, )
                              WiF I      =                (z - D )           dz,
                                                 D                    z

while total welfare is given by

                                             1
                             S/F I                        H (z, )
                        W            =               z            dz + rH (D, ).
                                             D             z

                                                                                      1
   Note that H (z ; ) distribution is symmetric around  =                             2
                                                                                        ,   so we only need to
                       1                                   1
consider the case 0    2 . The case                        2
                                                                  1 follows by symmetry. The following


                                                               55
lemma characterizes the probability, R/F I = H (D, ), that an investor liquidates the
bank at date 1, as well as the face value of debt, D/F I , as a function of the investor's
reservation value, r, and of the fraction, , that the bank retains of her own project.

                                               1
Lemma A.2 For any early redemption value r  0, 2 and any portfolio allocation
(, (1 - )) that banks hold, the probability, R/F I , that an investor liquidates the bank
at date 1, as well as the optimal face value of debt, D/F I , under full information are
as follows:

  1. r < 1
         4
           .

      (a)          2r+2
                     5
                        ,      then D/F I = 2
                                            1
                                              (r + 1)- 1
                                                       4
                                                           [, (1 - )] and R/F I =                       1
                                                                                                       1-
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                  (r + 1) - 4  .

       (b)  >           2r+2
                               , then D/F I =              1
                                                             r   +    1
                                                                          r2 - 62 + 6  (r, ) and R/F I =
               1   1
                     5                  2
                                                           3          3
               3
                 r+ 3       r2 -62 +6
                        2(1-)
                                            .

  2. r  1
        4
          .

      (a)               2
                        3
                            (1 - r), then D/F I =                1
                                                                 2
                                                                               1
                                                                     (r + 1) - 4   [, (1 - )] and R/F I =
               1    1
              1-    2
                        (r + 1) - 3
                                  4
                                     .
                                                                                                                      2
                   2                            /F I       2                                /F I            (2 -2
                                                                                                                3 )
                                                                                                                  r
       (b)  > (1 - r), then D
                   3
                                                       =   3
                                                             r+ 1
                                                                3
                                                                       ((1 - ) , 1) and R          =   1-    3
                                                                                                            2(1-)
                                                                                                                          .

Proof. Since   1
               2
                 , then   1 - . Thus there are three relevant cases.
   Case 1: D < . The expected payoff of each investor is given by

                                                D2                              D2
                                WIF I   =D 1-                              +r         .
                                              2(1 - )                         2(1 - )

   The first order condition with respect to D yields

                                   1
                                         3D2 - 2rD - 2 (1 - ) = 0,
                                2 ( - 1)




                                                                 56
which has the following solutions

                                 1       1
                        D1a =      r-         r2 - 62 + 6 < 0
                                 3       3
                                 1       1
                         D1b   =   r+         r2 - 62 + 6 > 0
                                 3       3

   For D to be a feasible solutions, it must verify that r < D < . We have that

                                      2r + 2
                               >              D1b < .
                                         5

At the same time, D1b <  is sufficient to imply that D1b > r, as

                         2r + 2  1 1
                     >          > -  1 - 2r2  D > r
                            5    2 2

   Case 2: D > (1 - ). The expected payoff of each investor is given by

                                      (1 - D)2                 (1 - D)2
              WIF I = D 1 - 1 -                    +r 1-                  .
                                      2(1 - )                  2(1 - )

   The first order condition with respect to D yields

                           1
                                 (D - 1) (2r - 3D + 1) = 0,
                        2 ( - 1)

which admits the following solution

                                          2   1
                                      D2 = r + .
                                          3   3

For D to be a feasible solutions, it is sufficient that it verify that D > (1 - ), as
(1 - ) > r. We have that

                                                   2
                           D2 > (1 - )   >           (1 - r)
                                                   3




                                             57
   Case 3: D  [, (1 - )]. The expected payoff of each investor is given by

                                      1                             1            
                 WIF I = D 1 -                 D-             +r            D-       .
                                     1-                 2          1-            2

   The first order condition with respect to D yields

                                   1
                                         ( - 2r + 4D - 2) = 0,
                                2 ( - 1)

which admits the following solution

                                               1          1
                                      D3 =       (r + 1) - .
                                               2          4

For D to be a feasible solutions, it is sufficient that it verify that D3  (1 - ), D3  ,
and D3 > r. We have that
                                                  2
                                    D3              (r + 1)  
                                                  5
and
                                                    2
                                  D3  1 -             (1 - r)  .
                                                    3
Note that since 2 (1 - r) > , it follows that D3 > r as well.




Proof of Proposition 4

We need to calculate the optimal  for a bank i. That is,  that maximizes

                                           1
                                                            H (z, )
                               WiF I =         (z - D )             dz.
                                          D                  z

   As the optimal face value of debt changes depending on  and r, we need to consider
various cases.
                   1             2r+2               1              2
   Case 1: r <     4
                       &           5
                                      ,   and r     4
                                                        &          3
                                                                       (1 - r). From Lemma A.2, we
have that D/F I =      1
                       2
                           (r + 1) - 1
                                     4
                                       . Substituting into the objective function of bank i,



                                                  58
we obtain that

               1-                                                        1
                               /F I            1                                                       (1 - z )2
WiF I   =             (z - D          )          (z - )         dz +         (z - D/F I )       1-                 dz
              D/F I                     z     1-     2                 1-                   z         2(1 - )

or
                                        1
                        WiF I =              12 (r - 1)2 + 12 (r - 1) + 72
                                   96 (1 - )
Taking the first order condition with respect to  yields

                                       1
                           WiF I =               2         2
                                            2 12r - 12r - 7 + 14 .
                                   96 ( - 1)

Note that the second order condition with respect to  yields

                             2 F I        1         2
                              2
                                Wi =           3 12r - 12r + 7 > 0
                                     48 (1 - )

which implies that any feasible solution of the first order condition would be a local
minimum. Thus, to find the value of  that maximizes bank i's objective we need to
                                                                                                 1
compare the value of WiF I evaluated at the corners. In particular, for r <                      4
                                                                                                     we need
to compare WiF I           2r+2
                             5
                                , D/F I , r    and WiF I 0, D/F I , r , while for r         1
                                                                                            4
                                                                                                we need to
                      2(1-r)
compare WiF I            3
                              , D/F I , r     and WiF I 0, D/F I , r .
                         1
      Consider first r < 4 . Then

             2r + 2 /F I                                  1
WiF I              ,D    , r -WiF I 0, D/F I , r = -            30r3 + 7r2 - 16r + 7 > 0.
                5                                    240r - 360

Thus
                                                          2r + 2
                                                 /F I =          .
                                                             5
      Consider next r  1
                       4
                         . Then

               2 (1 - r) /F I                                   1
     WiF I              ,D    , r - WiF I 0, D/F I , r = -             (18r - 7) (r - 1)2 .
                   3                                       72 (2r + 1)




                                                        59
                       7
Thus, if r < rH =      18
                          ,
                                                               2 (1 - r)
                                            /F I =                       ,
                                                                   3
and, if r > rH ,
                                                        /F I = 0.

     Case 2: r <        1
                        4
                              &  >     2r+2
                                         5
                                            .       From Lemma A.2, we have that D/F I =                                  1
                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                            r   +
1
3
     r2 - 62 + 6. Substituting into the objective function of the social planner, we
obtain that

                                                                                        1-
                                                      z2                                                                 1     
WiF I =                 z - D/F I                                      dz +                   z - D/F I                    (z - )      dz +
              D/F I                    z            2(1 - )                                                     z       1-     2
                1
                                                            (1 - z )2
           +            z - D/F I                   1-                         dz
                  1-                    z                  2(1 - )

or
                                                                                                                    3
                                                                               1         1
                      1       1    1                                       1   3
                                                                                 r   +   3
                                                                                              r2 - 62 + 6
         WiF I =        -       r+       r2 - 62 + 6 +
                      2       3    3                                       6                  (1 - )
Taking the first order condition with respect to  yields

                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                              
                   2 - 1                      1  r+                   r2   -   62       + 6
 W FI =                           1 +                                                             r        r2 - 62 + 6 + 32 - 3 + r2 
                                                                                                                                     
 i              r2 - 62 + 6                 1622                      ( - 1)     2




which has a unique solution of  = 1
                                  2
                                    . Note however that the second order condition
                                                1
with respect to  evaluated at  =                2
                                                        yields

                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                              
2 F I                          2r2 + 3                             (2 - 1) r +                        r2   -   62   + 6
 W                 =                                          +r 
                                                                                                                              
2 i                                             3
                                                                   1622                                         2             
            1
          = 2           (r2 - 62 + 6)           2
                                                        = 1
                                                                                                      ( - 1)
                                                          2
                                                                                                                                 = 1
                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                    
                               2r2 + 3                            r+             r2 - 62 + 6                    1 
                   =                            3             +r                                                              >0
                                                                                     (1 - )                    813
                                                                                                                   
                        (r2 - 62 + 6)           2
                                                        = 1
                                                          2
                                                                                                                        = 1
                                                                                                                          2



                                                    1
which implies that the solution  =                  2
                                                        of the first order condition would be a local mini-


                                                              60
mum. Thus, to find the value of  that maximizes bank i's objective we need to compare
                                                                                          2(1-r)
the value of WiF I evaluated at the corners. In particular, we need WiF I                    3
                                                                                                 , D/F I , r
and WiF I    1
             2
               , D/F I , r    . We show that

                                2 (1 - r) /F I                       1 /F I
                      WiF I              ,D    , r - WiF I             ,D   ,r     > 0.
                                    3                                2

Thus,
                                                       2 (1 - r)
                                             /F I =              ,
                                                           3
     Case 3: r         1
                       4
                           &>      2
                                   3
                                       (1 - r). From Lemma A.2, we have that D/F I = 2
                                                                                     3
                                                                                       r+1
                                                                                         3
                                                                                           .
Substituting into the objective function of of bank i, we obtain that

                                  1
                                                                       (1 - z )2
                      WiF I =               z - D/F I            1-                  dz
                                 D/F I                     z          2(1 - )

or
                                                                         3
                                                    1          2    2
                                       WiF I =                   r-
                                                 6 ( - 1)      3    3
Taking the first order condition with respect to  yields

                                          4
                             WiF I =             (2 - 1) (1 - r)3  0.
                                     812 ( - 1)2

Note that the second order condition with respect to  yields

                      2 F I       8               3
                       2
                         Wi =           3 (1 - r )  32 - 3 + 1 > 0
                                3
                              81 (1 - )

Thus, bank i's expected payoff is always decreasing in this case.
                                                                                    1
     Thus, the derivations in Case 1 and Case 2 imply that for r <                  4
                                                                                        bank i's expected
                                                   2r+2 2(1-r)
payoff is maximized at /F I = min                    5
                                                       , 3       . Similarly, the derivations in Case
1 and Case 3 imply that for r                1
                                             4
                                                 bank i's expected payoff is maximized at /F I =
        2r+2 2(1-r)
min       5
            , 3            if r  rH and at /F I = 0 if r > rH .
     Note that for any portfolio allocation (, 1 - ) that is an equilibrium, the port-
folio allocation (1 - , ) is also an equilibrium. This follows from the symmetry of


                                                      61
the banks' portfolio return distribution in the full information case. We will work with
(1 - , ) to make it comparable with the analysis with incomplete information. Thus,
                                                                            3-2r 21+2r
bank i's expected payoff is maximized at /F I = max                          5
                                                                                , 3       if r  rH and at
/F I = 1 if r > rH .




Proof of Proposition 5

We need to calculate the optimal  for the social planner. That is,  that maximizes

                                                1
                                                        H (z, )
                                W S/F I =           z           dz + rH (D, ).
                                                D        z

     As the optimal face value of debt changes depending on  and r, we need to consider
various cases.
                          1            2r+2                 1          2
     Case 1: r <          4
                              &          5
                                            ,   and r       4
                                                                &      3
                                                                           (1 - r). From Lemma A.2, we
have that D/F I = 2
                  1           1
                    (r + 1) - 4 . Substituting into the objective function of the social
planner, we obtain that

                      1-                                               1
         S/F I                          1                                                 (1 - z )2
     W           =               z         (z - )               dz +        z       1-                dz
                     D/F I         z 1-        2                       1-       z        2(1 - )
                           1               
                     +r            D/F I -
                          1-               2

or
                                     1
                 W S/F I =                36r2 - 60r + 24r + 132 - 36 + 36 .
                                96 (1 - )
Note that the second order condition with respect to  yields

                               2 S/F I        1        2
                                2
                                  W    =          3 36r - 36r + 13 > 0,
                                         48 (1 - )

which implies that any feasible solution of the first order condition would be a local
minimum. Thus, to find the value of  that maximizes welfare we need to compare the
                                                                                    1
value of W S/F I evaluated at the corners. In particular, for r <                   4
                                                                                        we need to compare


                                                           62
W S/F I     2r+2
              5
                  , D/F I , r     and W S/F I 0, D/F I , r , while for r                  1
                                                                                          4
                                                                                              we need to compare
            2(1-r)
W S/F I         3
                    , D/F I , r           and W S/F I 0, D/F I , r .
     Consider first r < 1
                        4
                          . Then

             2r + 2 /F I                                    1
W S/F I            ,D    , r -W S/F I 0, D/F I , r = -            90r3 + 13r2 - 64r + 13
                5                                      240r - 360

Thus, if r < rL           0.23,
                                                                 2r + 2
                                                    S/F I =                ,
                                                                    5
and, if r > rL ,
                                                         S/F I = 0.

                                  1
     Consider next r              4


             2 (1 - r) /F I                                    1
W S/F I               ,D    , r -W S/F I 0, D/F I , r = -             (54r - 13) (r - 1)2 < 0
                 3                                        72 (2r + 1)

Thus
                                                         S/F I = 0.

     Case 2: r <             1
                             4
                                 &  >          2r+2
                                                 5
                                                    .   From Lemma A.2, we have that D/F I =                  1
                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                r   +
1
3
     r2 - 62 + 6. Substituting into the objective function of the social planner, we
obtain that

                                                                          1-
         S/F I                                   z2                                      1     
     W            =               z                           dz +              z          (z - )         dz +
                      D/F I         z          2(1 - )                              z   1-     2
                        1
                                                     (1 - z )2                  D/F I 2
                      +               z        1-                   dz + r
                             1-           z         2(1 - )                    2(1 - )

or

                                                                                          3                                 2
                     1                                    1    1                                     1    1
W S/F I =                         -32 + 3 - 2               r+        r2 - 62 + 6             + 3r     r+     r2 - 62 + 6
                 6 (1 - )                                 3    3                                     3    3




                                                              63
Taking the first order condition with respect to  yields
                                                                                                                       
           (2 - 1) r +                     r2   -   62   + 6
 W S/F I =                                                              2
                                                                   6 - 6 + 5r
                                                                              2
                                                                                         6 - 62 + r2 - r + 10r3   0.
                                                                                                                
            1622 ( - 1)2                        r2 - 62 + 6
                                                                                                   >0


Note that the second order condition with respect to  yields

 2 S/F I                1
  2
    W    =                           3 ×
                     2
           272 ( - 1) (r2 + 6(1 - )) 2
                                      >0
                                                                                                                          
                            102 - 10 + 5 r4 + 2163 - 1084 - 1532 + 45 r2 + 184 - 363 + 182 
                                               >0                             >0                                  >0

                                                                                   >0
                                  2
                 3 (2 - 1) 10r4     1          10    r4      2                                                1
             +               2             3 +            3 3 - 3 + 1
                      2
                  162 ( - 1) (r2 - 62 + 6) 2   81  (1 - )
                                                  3                                                     r2   - 62 + 6
                                                                         >0
                              3
                 10    r      2
             +             3 3 - 3 + 1
                 81  (1 - )
                    3

                                          >0


which implies that any feasible solution of the first order condition would be a local
minimum. Thus, the total welfare is always decreasing in this case.
     Case 3: r    1
                  4
                      &>              2
                                      3
                                          (1 - r). From Lemma A.2, we have that D/F I = 2
                                                                                        3
                                                                                          r+1
                                                                                            3
                                                                                              .
Substituting into the objective function of the social planner, we obtain that

                       1
                                                      (1 - z )2                    (1 - D/F I )2
        W S/F I =                 z             1-                   dz + r 1 -
                      D/F I               z          2(1 - )                        2(1 - )

or
                           1
           W S/F I =             10r3 - 30r2 + 81r2 - 81r + 30r - 10 .
                       81 ( - 1)
Taking the first order condition with respect to  yields

                                     10
                       W S/F I =             (1 - 2) (r - 1)3  0.
                                 812 ( - 1)2


                                                          64
Note that the second order condition with respect to  yields

                     2 S/F I       20               3
                      2
                        W    =           3 (1 - r )   32 - 3 + 1  0
                                 3
                               81 (1 - )

Thus, the total welfare is always decreasing in this case.
                                                                                             1
   Thus, the derivations in Case 1 and Case 2 imply that for r <                             4
                                                                                                 social welfare
                                2r+2
is maximized at S/F I =           5
                                        if r  rL and at S/F I = 0 if r > rL . Similarly, the
                                                                          1
derivations in Case 1 and Case 3 imply that for r                         4
                                                                              social welfare is maximized at
S/F I = 0.
   Note that for any portfolio allocation (, 1 - ) that is an optimum, the portfolio
allocation (1 - , ) is also an optimum. This follows from the symmetry of the banks'
portfolio return distribution in the full information case. We will work with (1 - , )
to make it comparable with the analysis with incomplete information. Thus,social wel-
                                   3-2r
fare is maximized at /F I =         5
                                             if r  rL and at /F I = 1 if r > rL .




Proof of Proposition 6

The first of the part of the proposition simply follows as a corollary of Proposition 4
and of Proposition 5.
   For the second part of the proposition, we need to show that for any r  (rL , rH ),
then R/F I /F I  R/F I (1).
                                                                                            2r+2 2(1-r)
   Since r < rH , we know from Proposition 4 that /F I = min                                  5
                                                                                                , 3       , and
from Lemma A.2 we have that
                                
                                      1           1             3     2r+2
                                
                                   1- 2r5
                                        +2        2
                                                      (r + 1) - 4 ×     5
                                                                                    if r  (rL , 1
                                                                                                4
                                                                                                  ]
             /F I    /F I
         R                  =                                             2(1-r)
                                         1            1
                                        2(1-r )       2
                                                        (r   + 1) - 3
                                                                    4
                                                                      ×      3
                                                                                    if r     1
                                                                                               ,r
                                                                                             4 H
                                   1-      3



Because of symmetry we also have that


                            R/F I /F I = 1 = R/F I /F I = 0



                                                             65
or
                                      1    1          3          1
                       R/F I (1) =           (r + 1) - × 0   =     (r + 1) .
                                     1-0   2          4          2
It is straightforward to show that


                                 R/F I /F I - R/F I (1) < 0.


Indeed
                                         
                                          - 1 (2r2 + r - 1) < 0        if r  (rL , 1 ]
             /F I   /F I      /F I         4r-6                                    4
         R                 -R      (1) =
                                          - 1 (2r2 - 3r + 1) < 0       if r     1
                                                                                  ,r
                                             4r+2                               4 H




                                               66
