                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    PROPERTY RIGHTS WITHOUT TRANSFER RIGHTS:
                       A STUDY OF INDIAN LAND ALLOTMENT

                                          Christian Dippel
                                            Dustin Frye
                                          Bryan Leonard

                                        Working Paper 27479
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27479


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 2020, Revised December 2020




We thank Doug Allen, Fernando Aragon, Lee Alston, Terry Anderson, Laura Davidoff, Donna
Feir, Rob Gillezeau, P.J. Hill, Gary Libecap, Dean Lueck, John Matsusaka, Paulina Oliva,
Dominic Parker, Marc Roak, Jessica Shoemaker, Martin Weiss, Gavin Wright and seminar
participants at Indiana University's Ostrom Workshop, University of Pittsburgh's Center for
Governance and Markets, the Hoover Institution's Workshop on Renewing Indigenous
Economies, the NBER Summer Institute, UCSB, UCSD, and USC for helpful conversations. We
thank Jefferson Kuate, Courtney Geiss, Nika McKechnie, Ryan Duchemin, and Gwyneth Teo for
excellent research assistance. We also thank the Environmental Research Institute, the Elinor
Nims Brink Fund, and the Ford Scholars Program at Vassar College for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christian Dippel, Dustin Frye, and Bryan Leonard. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Property Rights without Transfer Rights: A Study of Indian Land Allotment
Christian Dippel, Dustin Frye, and Bryan Leonard
NBER Working Paper No. 27479
July 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. J15,N51,Q15

                                         ABSTRACT

Governments often place restrictions on the transferability of property rights to protect property
owners from making "mistakes" such as selling their property under value. However, these
restrictions entail costs: they reduce the property's value as collateral in credit markets, limit
owners' ability and incentives to invest in the land, and create various transaction costs that
constrain optimal land use. We investigate these costs over the long run, using a natural
experiment whereby millions of acres of reservation lands were allotted to Native American
households under differing land-titles between 1887­1934. We compare non-transferable land
plots to neighboring plots held with full property rights, using fine-grained satellite imagery to
study differences in land development and agricultural activity from 1974­today.

Christian Dippel                                Bryan Leonard
UCLA Anderson School of Management              School of Sustainability
110 Westwood Plaza, C-521                       Arizona State University
Los Angeles, CA 90095                           bryan.leonard@asu.edu
and NBER
christian.dippel@anderson.ucla.edu

Dustin Frye
Vassar College
124 Raymond Ave, Box 76
Department of Economics
Poughkeepsie, NY 12604
dufrye@vassar.edu
1    Introduction

Government programs that formalize the property rights of the poor often include provisions

that limit the ability to transfer or alienate property for fear that property owners may sell their

property under value or against their own long-term interest. Legally speaking, owners enjoy

usufruct rights, i.e. they can use their property and enjoy its "fruits," but they cannot transfer or

alienate their property (Rose-Ackerman 1985, Ellickson 1993, Alston, Alston, Mueller, and Non-

nenmacher 2018, ch2-3). Such transfer restrictions may have been well-justified at the time they

were instituted. Many government programs that granted or organized property rights to poor

communities were passed by political coalitions of Yandle's proverbial "bootleggers and baptists,"

and the "baptists" may have correctly identified a need to protect newly created property owners

from the "bootleggers" (who in the setting we study were land-hungry white settlers).1 In the long

run, however, transfer restrictions may come at a heavy price: they can undermine a property's

collateralizability, reduce the incentive to invest in improvements, prevent assembly of multiple

plots to achieve scale economies, and constrain inheritance practices, leading to fractionated own-

ership claims that can create transactions costs and free-riding or hold-up problems (see e.g. Place

and Swallow 2000 and Fenske 2011).

    To investigate the long-run consequences of limits on transfer rights, we leverage a natural ex-

periment that resulted from the policy of "Indian allotment" on American Indian reservations in

the early 20th century. This policy generated a patchwork of land titles on reservations, with some

Native households owning their land in non-transferable "allotted trust" and other immediately

adjacent Native households owning land under full fee-simple property rights. To compare eco-

nomic activity on plots with different land titles, we map the universe of historic land allotments

from the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) to the Public Land Survey System (PLSS) grid, and to

high-resolution satellite data from the National Wall-to-Wall Land Use Trends Database (NWALT).

    The allotment period began in 1887 and ended with the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA) of 1934

(Taylor, 1980; Carlson, 1981). In the intervening half-century, the federal government allotted mil-

lions of acres of previously tribe-owned land to individual Native American households, starting

with the Dawes Act, and accelerating after the 1906 Burke Act. All land rights were first issued
   1
     India's prohibition of letting its citizens enter indentured servitude contracts in the British colonies constitutes an
application of the same idea to property rights over one's own labor (Sen, 2016)


                                                             1
in non-transferable "allotted trust," and could then--after a period of trusteeship--be selectively

converted into fee simple by a reservation's local Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) agent. Had this

policy run its full course, all reservations would have eventually been allotted, and all allottees

would have eventually seen their land rights converted to fee simple. However, the 1934 IRA put

an abrupt stop to the process, ending all allotment for good and freezing all allotted-trust plots

into trusteeship in perpetuity.2 This created a checkerboard of land tenures on reservations that

has persisted to the present day.

    Endogeneity problems in the comparison of non-transferable allotted-trust and fee-simple

lands on reservations arise from the fact that allotments may have been selectively converted into

fee simple. The primary concern is selection on land characteristics: plots with certain characteris-

tics may have gotten converted at a higher rate. We address this with a spatial fixed effect strategy

that compares plots only inside neighborhoods that are small enough to eliminate observable

differences in land characteristics. In our preferred specification, non-transferable allotted-trust

status reduces overall land utilization by 0.2 standard deviations, which translates into a 4 per-

centage point lower share of land in agricultural cultivation, and a 0.2 percentage point lower

share of land in development.3

    Another potential concern is that allottees with certain characteristics (such as a higher pro-

clivity for farming) may have had their plots converted at a higher rate before the policy ended

in 1934, and that such characteristics continue to matter today. One approach to addressing this

concern is to include (reservation-specific) family-name fixed effects in our baseline estimation.

Family-name fixed effects add considerable explanatory power to the regressions, but their effect

on our core estimates is marginal. As a second approach, we pursue an instrumental variable

(IV) strategy that generates exogenous variation in whether an allotted plot was converted to fee-

simple title before the process ended in 1934. The IV leverages the original allottees' birth year,

with later birth cohorts receiving allotments later and thus being less likely to convert to fee sim-

ple by 1934. The IV's exclusion restriction is that the birth year of the original allottee has no direct
   2
     Subsequent to 1934, moving land out of trust status remains a theoretical possibility but requires special approval
from the Secretary of the Interior (Shoemaker, 2003; C.F.R.150.1-150.11, 1981).
   3
     Our findings are robust to various forms of spatial correlation, including clustering by PLSS township, reservation,
or spatial HAC standard errors proposed by Conley (1999, 2008). We obtain very similar estimates when we measure
outcomes in the National Land Cover Database (NLCD), which is available only after 2001 but at a slightly higher resolu-
tion than NWALT.




                                                           2
effects on long-run land use of their heirs eighty to one hundred years later. We also construct

a second instrument based on the identity of the exogenously rotating BIA agents who decided

on conversion to fee simple on each reservation. This second instrument confirms the results of

the main IV, and allows for over-identification tests that supports the validity of the exclusion

restriction.

      We leverage the fact that the NWALT satellite data exist in five decadal waves (1974, 1982,

1992, 2002, and 2012) for a panel analysis, and find that the land-utilization gap between allotted-

trust and fee-simple land grew monotonically over 1974--2012. This is true even when including

plot fixed effects that absorb all unobserved differences in time-invariant characteristics (of both

the land and the original allottees). There was no difference at all in land development in 1974,

implying that the entire difference in 2012 is driven by subsequent divergence. By contrast, over

eighty percent of the 2012 difference in agricultural cultivation was already present in 1974. These

patterns are congruent with the process of structural transformation away from agriculture and

into manufacturing, tourism, and services that has occurred on reservations since 1974 (Cornell

and Kalt 1992, Jorgensen 2007, Treuer 2012, ch6).

      Turning to mechanisms, the literature on land tenure shows that more complete rights over

land encourage investment and economic activity by strengthening claims to output, by increas-

ing access to capital, and by allowing owners to gain from selling their land or liquidating their

sunk investments in response to adverse income shocks (see, e.g. Fenske 2011). These channels

are referred to respectively as "assurance," "collateralizability," and "realizability" in Brasselle,

Gaspart, and Platteau (2002).4 A fourth channel of potential importance on reservations is that

transferability creates "assembly problems" by preventing farms from being aggregated to more

efficient scale. In addition to these direct channels, transfer-restrictions may also stifle economic

activity indirectly by creating fractionated competing ownership claims to the same property over

generations through a process we describe in Section 2. This fifth potential problem, "fractiona-

tion," can stifle land utilization on allotted-trust land for several reasons. One is transaction costs:

because all claimants have equal undivided claims on an allotted-trust plot, each claimant can

undermine whatever productive activity another claimant may want to engage in. Another prob-

lem is free-riding because each claimant is entitled to a share of whatever fruits emerge from the
  4
      They are referred to as security, collateral, and gains-from-trade in Besley (1995).



                                                              3
productive activities of the other claimants.

    The assurance channel can be ruled out on allotted-trust land because title is fully secure,

and we cannot test for the importance of the realizability effect without data on individual-level

income shocks. However, the data do allow us to provide direct evidence for the other three

channels. Using FDIC banking data, we show that an expansion of banking around a reservation

amplifies the difference between allotted-trust and fee-simple plots and causes a substitution of

agricultural cultivation towards more capital-intensive land development, providing direct evi-

dence for the collateralizability mechanism. We also construct a measure of farm assembly across

plots, and find that there is significantly more assembly across fee-simple than across allotted-

trust plots. Finally, we find evidence that allotted trust plots with greater exposure to fractionation

exhibit less land utilization than other plots.5 In summary, we provide evidence that transfer re-

strictions affect land use through at least three channels: reducing access to credit, impeding land

assembly, and creating problems associated with competing ownership claims.

    Our paper complements a large literature on land tenure and economic development (Alston,

Libecap, and Mueller, 2000; Banerjee, Gertler, and Ghatak, 2002; Besley and Ghatak, 2010; Horn-

beck, 2010). This literature has tended to focus more on property rights security than on transfer-

ability as the primary source of assurance, collateralizability and realizability problems (De Soto,

2000; Goldstein and Udry, 2008; Besley, Burchardi, and Ghatak, 2012). Non-transferability has

been shown to affect investment mostly insofar as title in some settings is conditioned on oc-

cupancy or gets returned to the community (village or lineage group) after an owner's passing

(Migot-Adholla, Hazell, Blarel, and Place, 1991; Fenske, 2011).6 In contrast, our results show that

transfer-restrictions can be of first-order importance even when title is perfectly secure and not

conditional on occupancy. This is particularly true in settings where collateralizability and assem-

bly to larger scale are of primary concern, making our findings relevant for developing nations as

they continue to formalize their land titling systems and transition to more capital-intensive forms

of development and agriculture.

    Our paper also speaks to a literature on indigenous economic development. Non-transferable

property rights are particularly common among indigenous peoples, who historically had less
    5
      We use historical data to construct a measure of a plot's latent fractionation because the actual fractionation of
claims is private information.
    6
      Besley (1995) uses the language of transfer rights but is really focused on the security of rights.



                                                           4
bargaining power in shaping their property rights, and were often viewed by the government as

needing protections from making "mistakes" with their property. Examples include indigenous

land rights in Mexico until recent Procede land reforms (De Janvry, Emerick, Gonzalez-Navarro,

and Sadoulet, 2015), historical restrictions of Alaska Natives' transfer rights over their reindeer

herds (Massey and Carlos, 2019), and many Native American households and tribes who histori-

cally did not, and today often still do not have transfer rights over their land. A number of stud-

ies suggest that more complete property rights could improve economic outcomes in indigenous

communities (Trosper, 1978; Johnson and Libecap, 1980; Libecap and Johnson, 1980; Anderson,

1995; Alcantara, 2007; Dippel, 2014; Leonard, Parker, and Anderson, 2020). Our study contributes

to these by providing plausibly causal estimates of the cost of non-transferable land rights, using

highly disaggregated spatial units of analysis. By including the near-universe of allotted reserva-

tions, we provide the average treatment effect to complement a number of case studies compar-

ing trust-land and fee-simple land on specific reservations, including Agua Caliente in California

(Akee, 2009; Akee and Jorgensen, 2014), Fort Berthold in North Dakota (Leonard and Parker, 2021),

and Uintah and Ouray in Utah (Ge, Edwards, and Akhundjanov, 2019). Our paper is also simi-

           ´ and Kessler (2020), who find that Canada's "certificates of possession," which are
lar to Aragon

similar to allotted-trust rights, fall short of generating the benefits of full property rights.

   Because our paper is of first-order relevance to reservations, we extend the analysis in several

ways. First, we add tribal land to the analysis (without a claim to causal identification) as it still

constitutes the majority of reservation land today. We find that land utilization on tribally owned

land is higher than on allotted-trust plots, although significantly lower than on fee-simple plots.

In the panel, tribally owned plots appear to be on a more positive dynamic trajectory than allotted-

trust plots. In short, transfer restrictions render land use on private land less efficient than even

on communally owned land. We discuss tradeoffs between either returning allotted-trust land to

tribal control or converting it to fee-simple. Lastly, we develop a back-of-the-envelope estimate of

the negative impact of transfer restrictions on land values. To do so, we combine the estimated

effect of fee-simple title on land utilization with an estimate of the effect of land utilization on land

values using county assessor data. This exercise suggests that fee-simple title would add between

$973 and $4,765 in value to an acre of allotted-trust land, or between $156,000 and $762,000 to a

160-acre plot, with the wide range determined by surrounding land values.


                                                    5
2       Background

Historical Backdrop:          Following the establishment of the reservation system, "Friends of the In-

dian" reformers became concerned with the question of assimilation (Carlson, 1981, p80).7 Private

property was viewed as the path towards assimilation, and reformers viewed land allotment as

the best way to introduce real property to Indians (Otis 2014).8 The government concurred, and

in 1886 Henry Dawes introduced an allotment bill to the Senate. On February 8, 1887, President

Grover Cleveland signed the Dawes General Allotment Act into law. The Dawes Act authorized

the president, through the Office of Indian Affairs (the BIA's precursor), to survey and allot reserva-

tion lands (Banner, 2009). Heads of household received 160 acres, and single persons over the age

of 18, as well as orphans, received 80 acres. Part of the government's favorable view of allotment

could be explained by the fact that after allotting a reservation, and selling the surplus land, the

reservation itself would constitute no more than a spatial cluster of Native American individuals.

As such, the tribes themselves would lose their raison d'^
                                                         etre as polities. This view was reflected

in Theodore Roosevelt's first annual message to Congress in December 1901, when he stated that

"the time has arrived when we should definitely make up our minds to recognize the Indian as an individual

and not as a member of a tribe. The General Allotment Act is a mighty pulverizing engine to break up the

tribal mass. It acts directly upon the family and the individual."

        Indian land allotment was supported by a political coalition of Yandle's proverbial "bootleg-

gers and baptists." The "baptists" were the reformers, while the "bootleggers" were an alliance of

state and local politicians and land speculators who wanted to free up Native American-owned

land for white settlement.9 To protect allottees from the "bootleggers," the "baptists" designed

allotment with some safeguards against land loss; in particular the policy prohibited the transfer

of property rights until such a time that the allottees could acquire sufficient experience ("com-

petence" was the word used) with private property. In practice, this was achieved by putting the

land into an "allotted trust" with a reservation's local BIA agent for 25 years, or until allottees were
    7
     The two main reformist groups were the Indian Rights Association and the National Indian Defense Association, re-
spectively formed in 1882 and 1885.
   8
     Most tribes had norms of private property, and the majority of tribes viewed their land as their tribal property, but
no tribe had traditionally had private property rights over land (Demsetz, 1967).
   9
     Unallotted reservation land was designated as surplus and could be made available for outside settlement (see
Appendix-Figure A1). Proceeds from the sales of the surplus land were held in trust and appropriated at the discre-
tion of Congress for "education and civilization" (Banner, 2009). We exclude surplus land inside modern reservation
boundaries from our analysis.


                                                            6
declared competent by their agent and granted full (i.e. fee simple) rights. Critically, land held in

allotted trust could not be transferred or alienated.

    Selection of Land into Allotment:             On an allotted reservation, allotments were mandatory.

There was no explicit policy about selecting land for allotment. Allottees could select a plot, but

often did not, in which case the allotting agents determined the assignment of allotments (Banner,

2009; Otis, 2014; Carlson, 1981). Allotting agents often did not know much about the quality of

the land because they were typically distinct from the reservation's permanent BIA agent, and as

such they only visited the reservations for the specific task of allotment (Bureau of Indian Affairs

, 1887­1926). The 1928 Meriam report, which came out after the vast majority of allotments had

been issued (see Appendix-Figure A2), characterized the process as follows: "The original allot-

ments of land to the Indians were generally made more or less mechanically. Some Indians exercise their

privilege of making their own selections [...]; others failing to exercise this right where assigned land. Often

Indians who exercise the privilege made selections on the basis of the utility of the land as a means of con-

tinuing their primitive mode of existence. Nearness to the customary domestic water supply, availability of

firewood, or the presence of some native wild food were common motives" (Meriam, 1928, p470).10 When

we compare never-allotted tribal land to allotted (trust or fee-simple) land in the data, we do find

some evidence for positive selection of land into allotment, with lower elevation, less ruggedness,

and better soil quality on allotted land compared to never-allotted land. Small differences remain

on these dimension even within small geographic neighborhoods; suggesting some positive se-

lection of the land by either Native allottees, the allotting agents, or both.11

    Selection into Fee Simple:            The more important question for our study, which compares

two different types of initially-allotted plots, is whether those plots that local BIA agents ended

up converting to fee simple were different from the plots they did not convert. It is, for example,

plausible that allotted plots that were more suitable for farming could have been either more or

less likely to be be converted to fee simple by the BIA agent. One may expect the former, i.e. pos-

itive selection. However, the latter is equally possible, given the Meriam report's alleged racism

and corruption of the process, and given McChesney's (1990) characterization of the process of

allotment as one where the BIA acted as a Peltzman-style self-serving bureaucracy that was pri-
  10
     Meriam's report was written for the Institute of Governmental Research, a precursor of Brookings Institution. The
report was concerned with the socio-economic conditions on reservations, with special attention to allotment.
  11
     See Panel A in Appendix-Table A6.


                                                          7
marily trying to maximize the budget it controlled (Peltzman, 1976). Either way, differences in

observable land characteristics between allotted-trust and fee-simple plots disappear within the

finer spatial fixed effects (2 × 2-miles) that we will use as our empirical baseline specification.

   There may nonetheless be other sources of potential selection, especially on the characteris-

tics of the allottees themselves. If BIA agents only had the Native American allottees' interests at

heart, then better farmers may have been more likely to see their land converted into fee simple.

However, the opposite could again have been the case if the BIA wanted to maximize its control

over rents, in line with McChesney's account of allotment. Lastly, selection could have also oc-

curred on personal characteristics that may only spuriously correlate with later land utilization.

For example, Dippel and Frye (2020) argue that allottees responded to the incentives of the allot-

ment policy by signaling their cultural assimilation to the BIA agents through acts like going to

church and wearing "civilized dress." In our estimation exercises, we will address these selection

concerns with an IV strategy that generates exogenous variation for whether allotted land was

converted to fee simple.

   The 1934 IRA:      By the 1930s, sentiment within the BIA had turned against allotment. One

reason may have been the failures of allotment reported in the Meriam report. Another reason

may have been that the BIA tried to protect its own relevance as a trustee of the land (McChesney,

1990). Either way, in 1934 the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, John Collier, introduced the Indian

Reorganization Act (IRA), which ended allotment: reservations that the BIA had not yet managed

to survey by 1934 were never allotted (unallotted reservations play no role in our empirics); the

IRA froze allotted-trust land in its trusteeship status indefinitely; already-converted fee-simple

land remained fee simple; and unallotted lands remained under tribal ownership. Because much

of the allotted land had not yet passed through its trust period by 1934, the IRA's legacy was to

create a patchwork land tenure pattern on reservations of (i) individually owned allotted-trust

plots, (ii) individually owned fee-simple plots, and (iii) tribally owned plots. This patchwork

persists to the present day.

   Transfer Restrictions and the Fractionation of Interests:        The original allottees' heirs that

own allotted-trust plots today hold usufruct rights (beneficial title) to their land, but the federal

government retains the legal title to it. This means the owners cannot transfer or alienate their

rights. This is as true today as it was 100 years ago. As noted in the introduction, these transfer-


                                                   8
restrictions shape economic choices and options on reservations directly (e.g. through the collater-

alizability problem) as well as indirectly by creating fractionated ownership claims. To understand

how this fractionation-effect occurs, start with the observation that when property in the U.S. is

bequeathed without a will, all heirs have an equal undivided interest in it (as "tenants in com-

mon").12 With transfer rights, this issue is easily resolved: heirs either sell the inherited property

and divide the proceeds, or one heir takes out a mortgage on the property to buy out the others.

In this way, American farms have historically been able to remain at their efficient size and own-

ership structure, thanks in large part to well-developed rural financial markets (Alston and Ferrie,

2012). On allotted-trust land, however, where the property is non-transferable, both of these paths

are closed and when there is no will explicitly bequeathing the property to one heir, all heirs are

stuck sharing the property in equal undivided interest. This issue was particularly pronounced

for allotments whose original allottees passed away earlier, because will-writing was uncommon

among Native Americans in the early parts of the twentieth century; in fact it was prohibited until

1913 (Stainbrook 2016, p2, Shumway 2017, p648).

       Once started, interest-fractionation has the tendency to snowball over time as each heir may

have multiple heirs themselves, and the owners of already-fractionated interests may themselves

have lower incentives to write a will to prevent further fractionation. Today, the average allotted-

trust plot has 13 claimants, but there are many instances of trust plots with hundreds of claimants

on them (Department of Interior, 2013). Shoemaker (2003, p746) cites a 1987 report prepared for

the Supreme Court according to which "Tract 1305 (on the Sisseton-Wahpeton Lake Traverse Sioux

reservation) is 40 acres. [...] It has 439 owners, one-third of whom receive less than $0.05 in annual

rent and two-thirds of whom receive less than $1. The largest interest holder receives $82.85 annually."

This problem did not get better after 1987; for instance, Russ and Stratmann (2014) show that

fractionation doubled from 1992 to 2010. Post-dating our 2012 satellite data, there have since been

some improvements due to the Cobell settlement of 2014, which we discuss in the conclusion.
  12
     An important piece to this is that the court presumption in U.S. states is common heirship into equal undivided
claims (i.e. tenancy in common) on a property. An alternative court presumption, which holds in India today, and
held in most of continental Europe in the 19th century, is common heirship into divided interests. This results not in
ownership fractionation, but instead in a fracturing of the property itself, giving rise to farm sizes that are too small to
operate at efficient scale (Libecap and Alter, 1982; Foster and Rosenzweig, 2011, 2017).




                                                             9
3    Data Sources

Allotment data:        Following approval from the President, each patent issued on a reservation was

filed with the General Land Office (GLO). These patents--subsequently digitized by the Bureau

of Land Management (BLM)--record the transfer of land titles from the federal government to

individuals. Each patent contains information regarding the patentee's name, the specific location

of the parcel(s), the official signature date, total acreage, and the type of patent issued. These

patents include cash sales, all homestead entries, and Indian allotments. An important feature of

the GLO data is that we can see the date on which each allotment was issued and the date on

which it was converted into fee simple, if ever. This ability to follow the individual allotments

and when they were converted to fee simple allows us to identify them as either allotted-trust

or fee-simple lands today. Appendix-Figure A2 depicts the aggregate annual flow of allotments

issued and converted into fee simple from 1887­1934.

    The Public Land Survey System:           The GLO allotment data also describe the location of each

land allotment within the Public Land Survey System (PLSS), a rectilinear grid that divides (most

of) the United States into 36-square mile townships, each with a unique identifier.13 Each township

is composed of 36 square-mile sections numbered 1 to 36. Hence, any individual square mile of

land within the PLSS can be referenced using the township identifier and section number. These

numbered sections, which are 640 acres, were often divided into smaller "aliquot parts" when

transferred to private ownership. The most common division is the quarter section, which is a 160-
        1    1
acre,   2   ×2 -mile square referenced by a direction within a section (e.g., NE refers to the northeast

corner of the section). Land could be further subdivided smaller than a quarter section, but the

relevant quarter section can still be extracted from the aliquot part listed in the BLM allotment. For

example, an allotment with an aliquot part of SW 1
                                                 4 NW is the southwest quarter of the north-west

quarter-section.

    We focus on 160-acre quarter sections, which we refer to as plots, as the basic unit of analysis

because quarter sections were the size of a standard Indian allotment and because quarter-sections

are a standard unit of analysis that has been used previously in the literature to analyze land use

decisions with satellite data (see, e.g., Holmes and Lee 2012). Of the universe of allotments with
  13
     Each township is referenced by a township number and direction that indicate its North-South position and a
range number and direction that identifies its East-West position relative a prime meridian.


                                                      10
a potentially matchable aliquot part variable in our data, we successfully matched over 95% to

quarter sections in the PLSS using a shapefile from the BLM.14 Figure A3 depicts the location of all

allotted plots across the Western United States. In most cases, these clusters of allotments trace out

the boundaries of present-day reservations. In some rare cases, clusters of allotments trace out the

boundaries of a former reservation that was later terminated. This is true, for example, of the more

dispersed looking clouds of allotments in Central and Northern California. Oklahoma, which is

in fact densely covered by allotments, is the only gap in our spatial allotment data.15 Eastern

Oklahoma was covered by reservations for the `Five Civilized Tribes' (the Cherokee, Chickasaw,

Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole) who had been relocated there in the 1830s. These tribes were fully

allotted and we have their individual allotment records, but for some reason their allotments were

either not filed with the General Land Office or not digitized by the BLM.

       Once allotments are geo-located, we track the history of BIA transactions associated with each

allotment to code whether it was converted from allotted trust to fee simple. Figure 1 depicts an

example of our data on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota.16 Dark/orange plots are still

in allotted-trust status, whereas light/grey plots have been converted to fee simple. The larger

square outlines are the boundaries of 6×6-mile PLSS townships (nearly 150 can be seen on Pine

Ridge). Unshaded areas correspond to quarter sections that are not associated with an allotment

and therefore do not play a role in our analysis. There are three types of quarter sections for

which this is true: (i) land was never allotted and is thus tribally owned; (ii) surplus land that was

made available to white settlers (Appendix-Figure A4 shows a version of Figure 1 that separately

identifies such surplus land on Pine Ridge);17 (iii) quarter sections which we are unable to match

to the BLM data.18 In our empirical analysis, we will focus on progressively finer spatial variation

and compare only nearby plots of different tenure regimes. It is therefore important to note that
  14
      In some cases the aliquot part is either missing, corrupted, or not not formatted in a way that allows matching
to quarter-sections. Some quarter sections in our data are associated with more than one allotment, but we only use
quarter sections that are mapped to a unique land tenure type.
   15
      Our match rate is above 99% for most states, with notably lower match rates for New Mexico (where the PLSS grid
is less cleanly defined) and Wisconsin.
   16
      To simplify the analysis, we focus on plots which are matched to either all fee simple or all allotted trust, but not
a mix. We also omit observations that converted from allotted-trust to fee-simple title after 1934, a rare occurrence that
required special approval from the Secretary of the Interior. (See footnote 2).
   17
      We always omit surplus land from our analysis. The vast majority of surplus lands is outside of reservations, be-
cause it was ceded from reservations as large tracts. See discussion in footnote 9 and reference to Appendix-Figure A1.
   18
      Reservation-level data obtained from Anderson and Parker (2008) indicates that 32% of the land on Pine Ridge is
held in tribal trust and therefore falls into cateogry (i).




                                                            11
                                        Figure 1: Checkerboard Pattern of Land Tenure on the Pine Ridge Reservation




12
     Notes: Distribution of Land tenure on the Pine Ridge reservation by allotment parcel (quarter-section) in the GLO data. Overlaying the reservation is a township grid.
     Each township is 36 square miles and contained in each are 144 (= 36 × 4) quarter sections, each of which is 160 acres (one-quarter of a square mile) large. The figure
     depicts only the allotted quarter sections.
land tenure regimes vary within close proximity of one another in Figure 1; i.e. most allotted-trust

plots have at least one fee-simple direct neighbor and vice versa. This pattern is representative of

most reservations.

    Land use satellite imagery data:                 Our
                                                                       Figure 2: NWALT Land Use Data
main outcome data on land use come from the

National Wall-to-Wall Land Use Trends Database

(NWALT). A collection of federal agencies

known as the Multi-Resolution Land Charac-

teristics Consortium produces the NWALT by

combining satellite images from the Land-

Sat database with remote processing tech-

niques. The resulting database provides es-

timates of land cover at a 60×60-meter res-

olution for 1974, 1982, 1992, 2002, and 2012.

We focus our attention on two main land

cover classes in the NWALT: development and

cultivated crops.19         These two measures--
                                                             Notes: This figure depicts our outcome measure of cultivated and
development and cultivation--comprise the                    developed land in the NWALT data. The figure depicts 16 quarter-
                                                             sections of 160 acres each. A one quarter-section plot is our unit
                                                             of analysis (compare figure-notes in Figure 1). The 16-plot, 2 × 2-
majority of "productive" uses of land that may               mile neighborhood depicted here is our favored fixed effect, and
                                                             corresponds to panel (c) of Figure 3.
be affected by restrictions on transferability.20

Developed pixels in NWALT reflect capital investments in the construction of durable structures

that may be associated with manufacturing, commercial activity, or private residences, and other

scholars have used similar measures to study economic activity and growth at a fine spatial scale

(Burchfield, Overman, Puga, and Turner, 2006; Saiz, 2010).

    Figure 2 depicts our coding of land use from the NWALT data on a subset of the Fort Berthold

reservation in North Dakota. The figure depicts four PLSS sections comprised of sixteen individ-
    19
       Pixels coded as cultivated by the NWALT include annual crop production, orchard crops, and any land that is being
tilled. The NWALT also codes a variety of other land cover types including pasture, scrub/brush, forests, wetlands,
perennial snow/ice, water, and "barren" land comprised of bedrock, talus, or sand dunes. For our land use measures,
we exclude water from a plot's area: the denominator of each parcel's share-variable is land only.
    20
       Another productive land use is extraction of natural resources such as coal or oil, but this is highly dependent on
the location of valuable deposits.




                                                           13
ual 160-acre plots, which are our unit of analysis. We express land use as a share of total usable

parcel area, and define this denominator as the total number of pixels in a parcel excluding water

and perennial snow/ice. We recognize that the NWALT data only allow us to capture changes

in land use at the extensive margin; i.e, bringing new land into agricultural production or devel-

opment. Intensive-margin improvements such as intensifying irrigation and agricultural use, or

buildings constructed over an empty parking lot are not measured. As a result, our estimates will

likely understate the full effect of non-transferability. As an alternative outcome measure, we also

use the National Land Cover Database (NLCD). The NLCD data have slightly higher resolution than

NWALT, but are only available from 2001, whereas NWALT is available from 1974. Below, we

show that our main results are robust to the use of the NLCD data rather than the NWALT data.

   Constructing a land utilization index:       Investigating development and agricultural cultiva-

tion separately is interesting, but is econometrically harder to interpret because the two land uses

are obvious substitutes. In our core specification, we will therefore focus on a single unified land

utilization index, although we also separately investigate the different uses later in the paper. We

construct a single land utilization index Z (U se) that aggregates information over both measures

following Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007). The index is the weighted average of standardized

z-scores from both components. We calculate each z-score separately by reservation and year by

subtracting the reservation-year-specific mean and dividing by the reservation-year-specific stan-

dard deviation. Following the approach in Kling et al. (2007) and Hoynes, Schanzenbach, and

Almond (2016) of calculating standardized indices relative to the control group, we calculate the

mean and standard deviation from allotted-trust land in each reservation-year. The allotted-trust

quarter sections therefore have a mean index value of 0 and a standard deviation of 1 by construc-

tion (see the top-left cell in Table 1).

   Geographic covariates:        As controls, we construct terrain characteristics and soil quality for

each plot. We use 30×30-meter elevation data from the National Elevation Dataset (NED) to mea-

sure the mean and standard deviation of elevation in each plot. We define the variable rugged-

ness as the standard deviation of elevation, a commonly-used measure of terrain ruggedness (As-

cione, Cinque, Miccadei, Villani, and Berti, 2008). We use the soil productivity index developed

by Schaetzl, Krist Jr, and Miller (2012) and estimate the average of the soil index within each plot.

The soil productivity index ranges from 0 to 21, with soil index values greater than 10 representing


                                                   14
highly productive soils (Schaetzl et al., 2012).



4     The Effect of Transferable Property Rights

Section 4.1 presents our baseline identification strategy and results, where we use fine spatial fixed

effects to address concerns about geographic selection in the historical conversion of allotments

from allotted trust to fee simple. While we view geographic selection as the primary identication

threat, we are also concerned about selection on allottees' characteristics. Section 4.2 addresses

this concern in two ways. First, we condition our results on (reservation-specific) allottee last

names to absorb potential confouding variation from unobservable family-traits on a reservation.

Second, we pursue an IV strategy that addresses remaining selection concerns arising primarily

from unobserved allottees' actions and characteristics which may have played a role in the BIA

agents' historical decision to covert trust land into fee simple.


4.1     Baseline Identification Strategy

We estimate the effect of tenure on land utilization, using the following linear regression model


                               yij =  × FeeSimplei + j +  Xi + ij ,                                (1)


where yij is the outcome of interest on plot i in spatial region j . As detailed in section 3, we

focus on a standardized land utilization index yij = Z (U se) that aggregates the share of land

classified as developed and the share of land in cultivation. FeeSimplei is an indicator equal to

1 if a plot is under fee-simple ownership. The coefficient of interest is , which represents the

average difference in land use for fee simple versus nearby allotted-trust plots within the same

spatial neighborhood j . The vector of controls Xit includes the three land quality characteristics

elevation, ruggedness, and soil quality.

      One concern with the comparison in equation (1), which we discuss in Section 2, is that the

geographic characteristics of a plot could have played a role in BIA agents' historical decision to

convert it from allotted-trust to fee simple, and could have at the same time influenced contempo-

rary land utilization directly. Our approach to address this is to choose the spatial neighborhood



                                                   15
                                Figure 3: Visualization of Spatial Fixed Effects
                                      Figure 3: Quarter-Section Lines




            (a) Township FE                      (b) 1/4 Township FE                      (c) 1/9 Township FE

Notes: This figure depicts three spatial fixed effects used in the paper. All three panels depict one township of 36 square
miles. (As a point of reference, the Pine Ridge reservation in Figure 1 contains around 150 townships.) Each township
contains 144 (= 36 × 4) individual plots, our unit of analysis. Panel (a) depicts one full-township fixed effects. Panel
(b) depicts four 1/4-township fixed effects. Panel (c) depicts nine 1/9-township fixed effects. The spatial extent of one
fixed effect in Panel (c) corresponds to the 16 plots depicted in Figure 2.




j within which land characteristics Xit are balanced across allotted-trust and fee-simple plots.

Figure 3 illustrates this approach. From left to right, it depicts increasingly more fine-grained
                           Figure
spatial fixed effects j . Each    4: Quarter-Section
                               panel                  Lines & Section
                                     depicts a single township        #s 36 × 4 = 144 plots. In
                                                               comprising

panel (a), j is a whole township of 144 plots. In panel (b), j is a "1/4-township" fixed effect that

divides each township into four sub-areas and leverage comparisons of 36 plots in a 3 × 3-mile

neighborhood. In panel (c), j is a "1/9-township" fixed effect that compares 16 plots in 2 × 2-mile

neighborhoods. (Figure 2 is one such neighborhood.) In panel (c), even plots in opposite corners

of a neighborhood j are only 1.4 miles apart.

       Table 1 presents means and standard deviations (in brackets) for the estimation sample, re-

ported separately for allotted-trust (column 1) and fee-simple plots (column 2). Columns 3­6 re-

port the difference between fee-simple and allotted-trust plots, beginning with an unconditional
            (a) Township FE                      (b) 1/4 Township FE                      (c) 1/9 Township FE
difference in column 3 and progressing to within-1/9-township in column 6; with standard er-

rors reported in parentheses.21 The unconditional differences reported in column 3 of Table 1
  21
     There were 119,000 allotments made in Oklahoma. which is home to the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek,
and Seminole. As we discuss in Section 3, Oklahoma is not included in the data because its allotments were adminis-
tered separately (through the so-called Dawes Rolls), and­as a result of the separate process­every single allotment was
converted to fee simple, so that Oklahoma allotments would not contribute to the allotted trust vs fee simple compari-

                                                            2
                                                            16
suggest that when all data are pooled, higher-quality lands were more likely to transition out of

allotted-trust status: fee simple lands are at lower elevation, are less rugged (by about a stan-

dard deviation), and have higher soil quality (by half a standard deviation).22 This is consistent

with previous findings by Leonard et al. (2020). Importantly, these differences are much less pro-

nounced in column 4 within townships: the difference in ruggedness falls by roughly 30% and the

difference in soil quality falls by an order of magnitude. This pattern continues with progressively

finer fixed effects, and the within-1/9-township differences are all statistically indistinguishable

from zero. Moreover, these differences are at least an order of magnitude smaller than the un-

conditional differences. The 1/9-township fixed effect in column 6 is our preferred specification

throughout the paper because it delivers balance across all three observable land characteristics,

elevation, ruggedness, and soil quality.

                                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                         Trust            Fee                           Difference: Fee - Trust
                                           (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
   Elevation                            938.100         734.241         -203.859*          -8.973          -4.347          -0.694
                                        [459.61]        [357.32]         (83.906)          (5.054)         (2.363)        (0.918)
   Ruggedness                            14.010          12.575           -1.435           -1.179         -0.675**         0.058
                                         [21.26]         [38.84]          (2.598)          (0.627)         (0.230)        (0.275)
   Soil Quality                           9.704          11.603          1.899***         0.444***        0.225***         0.026
                                          [4.43]          [3.88]          (0.389)          (0.119)         (0.064)        (0.032)
   Observations                          42,164          26,393           68,557           68,557          68,557         68,557
   Township Fixed Effects                                                                   Yes
   1/4 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                                                 Yes
   1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                                                                 Yes
Notes: Baselines differences in land utilization, development and cultivation are from the 2012 NWALT. Columns 1­2 present mean
and standard deviations by land tenure. The index Z(Use) is normalized to have a mean of zero and standard deviation of one for
allotted-trust land. Column 3 reports unconditional differences of fee-simple vs allotted-trust land, and columns 4­6 report differences
conditional on fixed effects. Significance levels are denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

    In summary, adding progressively finer spatial fixed effects helps to compress differences in

land quality that could confound comparisons of land use across ownership regimes. With the

1/9-township fixed effect in column 6, there are no significant differences left in observed land

quality across allotted-trust and fee-simple plots.
son (Office of Indian Affairs, 1935).
  22
     Elevation and ruggedness are expressed in 1,000s of meters in our regression models.




                                                                   17
                                      Table 2: Outcome: Land Utilization Index

                                          (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)
   Fee Simple                          0.385***         0.335***         0.291***        0.269***         0.216***        0.214***
                                        (0.052)           (0.045)         (0.050)          (0.048)         (0.049)         (0.050)
   Ruggedness                                            -6.670**                         -8.289**                        -8.192***
                                                          (2.848)                          (3.264)                         (2.677)
   Elevation                                            -1.687***                         -1.111**                         -0.939*
                                                          (0.331)                          (0.422)                         (0.505)
   Soil Quality                                         57.895***                        49.393***                        43.178***
                                                          (8.455)                          (7.812)                         (7.448)
   Adj. R2                              0.2844           0.2949           0.4280          0.4335           0.4696           0.4729
   Observations                         67,049           67,049           66,195          66,195           65,408           65,408
   #Fixed Effects                       2,445            2,445            6,705           6,705            10,702           10,702
   Geographic Controls                     .               Yes               .              Yes               .               Yes
   Township Fixed Effects                 Yes              Yes
   1/4 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                Yes              Yes
   1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                                                  Yes              Yes
   Spatial HAC SEs (10 mi)               0.033            0.031           0.031            0.031            0.031            0.031
   Spatial HAC SEs (25 mi)               0.041            0.037           0.037            0.036            0.036            0.037
   Spatial HAC SEs (100 mi)              0.050            0.043           0.044            0.044            0.044            0.043
Notes: This table introduces increasingly finer spatial fixed affects across columns: Columns 1­2 use township fixed effects (panel a
of Figure 3), columns 3­4 use 1/4-township fixed effects (panel b of Figure 3), columns 5­6 use 1/9-township fixed effects (panel c of
Figure 3). Significance levels are denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

    Table 2 presents our baseline results. Columns 1­2 use the township fixed effects (column 4

of Table 1), columns 3­4 use the 1/4-township fixed effects (column 5 of Table 1), columns 5­6

use the 1/9-township fixed effects (column 6 of Table 1). The even-numbered columns 2, 4 and 6

add geographic controls to the odd-numbered columns 1, 3 and 5. As we add more fine-grained

spatial fixed effects, our coefficient of interest  decreases from a 0.385 standard deviation increase

in land utilization in column 1 to a 0.214 standard deviation increase in column 6.

    Considering that the balance of geographic characteristics increases with finer-grained spatial

fixed effects in Table 1, we expect the effect of adding geographic controls on the estimated 

to decline as we go left to right towards finer-grained spatial fixed effects. This is exactly what

we find: with township fixed effects, adding geographic controls reduces  by twelve percent
        -0.335
( 0.385
     0.385     ) going from column 1 to 2, with 1/4-township fixed effects, adding geographic controls
                                         -0.269
reduces  by around eight percent ( 0.291
                                      0.291     ) going from column 3 to 4, and with 1/9-township

fixed effects, adding geographic controls does not reduce  at all in going from column 5 to 6.



                                                                  18
       For large reservations, clustering by reservation allows all plots within a reservation to be

arbitrarily correlated. However, some reservations are quite small, meaning that spatial clustering

may insufficiently address spatial correlation (Kelly, 2019, 2020). At the bottom of the table, we

therefore also report spatial HAC standard errors following Conley (2008) and Hsiang (2010). In

areas such as Washington State and the Southwest, Conley standard errors effectively allow the

error terms to be correlated across nearby but distinct reservations.

                                           Figure 4: Randomization Inference
                            40
                            30
                         Density
                          2010
                            0




                                   -0.04          0.02                0.09                0.15       0.21

                                              Distribution Placebo Coefficient: 1,000 Permutations
Notes: The figure shows the distribution of 1,000 coefficients from randomization inference estimations where we re-
place the actual fee-simple plots with an equal number of randomly drawn plots. In contrast to the distribution, the
vertical line shows the magnitude of the actual estimated coefficient.




       As a further robustness check, we use randomization inference to rule out spuriously cor-

related effects through a permutation test. For this purpose, we replace the actual over 26, 000

fee-simple plots with an equal number of randomly drawn plots (from all plots), and then re-

estimate our preferred specification with geographic controls and 1/9-township fixed effects from

column 6 of Table 1. We repeat this experiment 1,000 times, comparing the distribution of the

estimated placebo effects to the fee-simple effect. Figure 4 shows the result of this permutation ex-

ercise: the permuted distribution is centered around a mean of zero, and even the 99-th percentile

of the distribution is far to the left of the actual estimate in column 6 of Table 1.23

       Lastly, as discussed in Section 3, the National Land Cover Database NLCD offers an alternative

data-source to the NWALT. Appendix-Table A2 shows that we obtain practically identical results

when we measure land utilization in the NLCD rather than NWALT.
  23
     If we randomly assign fee-simple status to 26, 000 of the allotted-trust plots, the distribution of estimated placebo
effects naturally shifts more towards the negative.


                                                                  19
4.2      Selection on Allottees instead of Geography

A remaining challenge that is not addressed by our identification strategy so far is that allottees'

characteristics (or actions) could have played a role in the BIA agents' historical decision to convert

trust land into fee simple, and that these same characteristics or actions could have had some

independent long-run effects on the allottees' heirs' future land utilization. Our first approach

to addressing this concern is to condition equation (1) on (reservation-specific) fixed effects for

allottees' last names. This is becoming a common way of addressing unobservable producitivity

differences in the literature on land tenure and productivty; see e.g. Deininger and Ali (2008).

The results are presented in Table 3. The Adjusted R2 suggesst that family-name fixed effects

add considerable explanatory power to the regressions, but their effect on our core estimates is

marginal.24

            Table 3: Adding (Reservation-Specific) Fixed Effects for Allottees' Family Names

                               (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
    Fee Simple              0.361***          0.309***           0.259***           0.235***         0.187***          0.184***
                             (0.048)           (0.036)            (0.053)            (0.051)          (0.061)           (0.061)
    Ruggedness                               -11.640***                           -12.146***                           -9.397***
                                               (2.699)                               (2.561)                            (2.319)
    Elevation                                 -1.281***                             -0.851*                             -0.453
                                               (0.426)                               (0.430)                            (0.527)
    Soil Quality                             57.993***                             48.463***                           43.306***
                                               (7.671)                               (7.132)                            (6.657)
    Adj. R2                  0.3746            0.3866             0.4984            0.5050            0.5349            0.5386
    Observations             54,167            54,167             53,096            53,096            51,994            51,994
    #Fixed Effects           12,877            12,877             16,471            16,471            19,733            19,733
Notes: This table has the same structure as Table 2, with the addition of (reservation-specific) fixed effects for allottees' last names.
Significance levels are denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

       Our second approach is to predict conversion into fee simple with an instrumental variable

(IV) that plasuibly has no direct effect on land utilization today. This IV is a transformation of

the original allottees' birthyear, motivated by three facts: (i) earlier allotments were mechanically

more likely to convert to fee simple (because of the 25-year trust window), (ii) all allottees who

were of age on a given reservation received their allotments at essentially the same time, and

(iii) birth-cohorts that were not of age when a reservation was originally allotted received their

allotments considerably later. We document the latter two facts in Appendix D.1, using a data
  24
       The number of observations drops because of singletons.


                                                                  20
source called the Indian Census Rolls (ICR), which we can record-link to the BLM data by allotment-

number, and which allows us to assign an allottees' birthyear to an allotment. Because a portion

of the original allottees had already died at the time the ICR was collected in the mid-1930s, we

find only about two-thirds of our allotments in the ICR, i.e. around 40,000 allotments. For this

reason, we use an allotment's issuance year as our IV, and use the ICR only to show that within

a reservation, variation in allottments' issuance year is explained by allottees' birthyears. The

instrument's exclusion restriction is that the birth year of the original allottee has no direct effects

on the long-run land utilization of their heirs eighty to one hundred years later. We estimate the

first-stage relationship


                              FeeSimplei(j ) = 1 × issue-yeari + j +  Xi + ij .                      (2)


The results are reported in Table 4. Column 1 includes only 1/9-township fixed effects, column 2

includes linear geographic controls, and column 3 uses a flexible binned specification with sepa-

rate fixed effects for each decile of each geographic control. In all three specifications, allotment

year is a strong predictor of fee-simple property rights--the coefficient estimate implies that re-

ceiving an allotment one year later reduces the probability of conversation to fee simple by 1.8

percentage points.

       A natural concern is that issuance year may be correlated with land characteristics because

earlier allotments may have occurred on better land. Table A3 indeed shows that later allotments

are more rugged, at higher elevations, and have worse soil. The differences are small, and the

fact that the first-stage coefficient in Table 4 is very stable across columns 1­3 suggests this is

not a major concern. Nonetheless, because differences are statistically significant, we introduce

a second instrument that is uncorrelated with land characteristics. This second instrument will

lacks sufficient power to be used as a stand-alone instrument, but adds enough predictive power

to perform over-identification tests to confirm the validity of our main instrument. The second

instrument is based on the exogenous rotation of BIA allotting agents across reservations and

their varying propensity to convert land from allotted-trust into fee-simple title. To construct it,

we coded up the universe of BIA allotting agents on reservations from 1897­1934.25 We construct
  25
       For a description of sources, see Appendix D.2.



                                                         21
a duration panel that tracks each allotment from its issuance year until it is either converted to fee

simple, or up to the 1934 IRA. An allotment's outcome in year t is an indicator Di(r)t that takes

value 1 if allotment i in reservation r was converted into fee simple in year t, and 0 otherwise.

Consider the following duration-style regression


                         Di(r)t = µj (rt) + µr + µt +  · (t - issue-yeari ) +       i(r)t ,                    (3)


where t - issue-yeari is the time that had passed since allotment i's initial issuance, µr is a reser-

vation fixed effect, and a year fixed effect µt controls for the possibility that the process of land

conversion may also have been faster at certain times than others. With the estimated coefficient

 and fixed effects {µj (rt) , µr , µt }, we compute an estimated probability of conversion into fee

simple P(Di(r)t = 1) for each allotment i in each year t.26 To turn the estimation of equation (3)

into a cross-sectional instrument Zi we calculate the cumulative probability that an allotment was

converted into fee simple, by summing over the probability tree from i's issue-year through to

1934:


                         Zi = P(Di(r),t= = 1)

                              +[1 - P(Di(r),t= = 1)] · P(Di(r),t= +1 = 1)
                                                                                                               (4)
                              +[1 - P(Di(r),t= +1 = 1)] · P(Di(r),t= +2 = 1) + ...

                              +[1 - P(Di(r),t=1933 = 1)] · P(Di(r),t=1934 = 1).


       Columns 4 through 6 of Table 4 (Panel A) add "2 × Zi " into the estimation of the first-stage

equation (2).27 The estimated Zi is indeed highly predictive of conversion to fee-simple own-

ership. Furthermore, Table A3 shows that the second instrument Zi is uncorrelated with land

characteristics within 1/9-township fixed effects.
  26
    We estimate one µj (·) per agent j ; notation j (rt) only clarifies that agents rotate across r over time.
  27
    When estimating 2SLS using a generated regressor like Zi , under very weak assumptions the point estimates are
consistent and the standard errors and test statistics asymptotically valid. See Pagan (1984) and Wooldridge (2010,
pp116­117).




                                                        22
                                       Table 4: Instrumental Variables Estimates

   Panel A:                                                                         First Stage

                                           (1)               (2)              (3)                 (4)           (5)              (6)
   Allotment Year                       -0.018***        -0.018***        -0.018***         -0.018***        -0.018***        -0.017***
                                         (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)
   Zi                                                                                        0.318**          0.318**          0.317**
                                                                                             (0.128)          (0.128)          (0.127)
   Ruggedness                                             0.536*                                              0.528*
                                                          (0.277)                                             (0.275)
   Elevation                                               0.068                                                0.071
                                                          (0.064)                                             (0.063)
   Soil Quality                                           -0.338                                               -0.347
                                                          (0.842)                                             (0.820)
   Adj. R2                               0.6118           0.6119           0.6124             0.6126          0.6127           0.6131
   Geographic Controls                                    Linear           Binned                             Linear           Binned
   1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                Yes              Yes              Yes                  Yes           Yes              Yes

   Panel B:                                                               Second Stage IV Results

                                           (1)               (2)              (3)                 (4)           (5)              (6)
   Fee Simple                           0.596***          0.542***         0.512**           0.565***        0.512***          0.481**
                                         (0.204)           (0.202)         (0.207)            (0.185)         (0.184)          (0.188)
   Observations                          65,408           65,408           65,408             65,334          65,334           65,334
   1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
   Geographic Controls                                    Linear           Binned                             Linear           Binned
   p-value Hausman Test                  .03607           .05629           .06638             .08604          .1476             .1758
   p-value Hansen J stat                                                                       .2667           .2735            .2759
   Kleibergen-Paap F stat                 86.42            87.33            86.79              43.28          43.73             43.46

Note: Columns 1­3 investigate the correlation of each instrument with an allotment's geographic characteristics; the main instrument
is the year of an allotment's issuance in Panel A; in Panel B we add Zi from equation (4). Columns 4­6 report on the first stage results
of regressing an allotment's fee-simple status on the instruments Significance levels denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

       As Table 4 reports, the Kleibergen-Paap F statistic for weak instruments is above 40 when both

instruments are included. However, before proceeding to the second stage, we discuss two more

questions surrounding Zi . The first is whether the key component in equation (3), and hence

in expression (4), is indeed the agent fixed effects µj (rt) , as we have so far assumed. In other

words, we assumed that the identifying variation of Zi in columns 4­6 of Table 4 (Panel A) is

driven by µj (rt) and not by, say, simply a non-linear transformation of issue-year. Implicit in this

assumption is that the BIA agents had sufficiently dispersed idiosyncratic propensities to convert

land to fee simple, as well as enough discretion to make these propensities matter.28 In Appendix
  28
       One can think of this as the usual conditions in the `judge fixed effect' literature. See, for example, Kling (2006);



                                                                    23
D.3, we document the observed dispersion of these propensities to convert, and discuss a case

study of Indian agents with differing propensities to convert land to fee simple. To validate our

assumption more directly, we re-estimate equation (3) without agent fixed effects, and re-construct

the resulting expression (4) as a "Placebo-Zi ". Appendix-Table A4 is the equivalent of Panel B

in Table 4, and shows that this "Placebo-Zi " has no predictive power whatsoever for a plot's

conversion into fee simple, thus confirming that the identifying variation of Zi is driven by µj (rt) .

    The second question concerns the validity of Zi as an instrument, which requires that the

assignment of BIA agents to reservations was not endogenous, e.g., to reservations' character-

istics. In Appendix D.3, we document and show that the timing of BIA agents' rotation was

largely explained by the pattern of turnover inside the general federal administration (Appendix-

Figure A8). Furthermore, we document that the land converted by high-µj (rt) BIA agents was

not different from the land converted by low-µj (rt) agents, even within the same reservation

(Appendix-Table A5).

    Panel B of Table 4 reports on the two-stage least squares estimation of the second-stage equa-

tion (1). Columns 1­3 use issuance year as the only instrument, columns 4­6 use both instruments.

Columns 1 and 4 omit land quality controls, columns 2 and 5 use linear controls, and columns 3

and 6 use binned controls. The instruments are strong across specifications, as indicated by the

Kleibergen-Paap F statistic. The p-value on Hansen's over-identification J-statistic in columns 4­6

provides a critical test of the validity of our IV strategy. It suggests that the local average treat-

ment effects of the two instruments are closely aligned. Therefore, while our primary instrument

is not uncorrelated with geographic characteristics of the allotment, the data suggest that this

correlation does not invalidate the exclusion restriction on the instrument.

    The IV estimate of the effect of fee-simple title is stable across specifications. It is roughly dou-

ble the OLS estimate (consistent with McChesney's account of allotment in Section 2), although in

our preferred setup using both instruments the Hausman test for the equality of the OLS estimate

and the IV estimate is not rejected in columns 5 and 6. As a consequence, we view 0.481 as our

preferred point estimate of the paper's core coefficient of interest.
Di Tella and Schargrodsky (2013); Galasso and Schankerman (2014); Aizer and Doyle Jr (2015); Melero, Palomeras, and
Wehrheim (2017); Dobbie, Goldin, and Yang (2018); Frandsen, Lefgren, and Leslie (2019). Our setup departs from the
standard `judge fixed effect' setup in that our setup is naturally estimated as a duration analysis because the decision
to convert land from allotted-trust to fee-simple status was taken repeatedly.




                                                          24
5     Mechanisms

In this section, we explore the mechanisms underlying the difference in land utilization between

fee-simple and allotted-trust land. In Section 5.1, we break land utilization down into develop-

ment versus agricultural cultivation, and use panel variation to show that the advantages of fee-

simple title for development are a recent phenomenon, while the effects on agricultural cultivation

were largely already present forty years ago. In Section 5.2, we provide evidence that transfer re-

strictions affect land use through at least three channels: reducing access to credit, impeding land

assembly, and creating problems associated with competing ownership claims.


5.1     Decomposition of Land Uses and Evolution over Time

As we discuss in Appendix E, agriculture was the dominant form of economic activity on reserva-

tions prior to the 1980s, but non-agricultural forms of development have subsequently taken off

in a pattern that mirrors the standard path of structural transformation that is well-known from

other contexts. Hence, it is useful in this section to break the index measure Z (U se) into its com-

ponents (agricultural land use vs. economic development) so that we can separately consider the

evolution of these two forms of productive land use on allotted trust vs. fee simple plots. Given

that structural transformation did not start on reservations until at least the 1970s, we expect the

dynamics to be especially important for economic development.

      We utilize the five waves of NWALT data from 1974­2012 to examine the dynamic evolution

of land use on allotted-trust vs. fee-simple land by estimating the following equation

                                        2012
             yijt =  × F eeSimplei +            t (F eeSimplei × t ) + j +  Xit + t + ijt ,           (5)
                                       t=1982


                                        2012
where t are year fixed effects, and     t=1982 t (F eeSimplei   × t ) is a series of interactions between

these and the fee-simple indicator.  captures the difference between allotted-trust and fee-simple

plots in 1974, while over-time divergence in this difference is captured by the t coefficients. An

advantage of the panel data is that they also allow us to let j be plot fixed effects, and thus absorb

all unobserved differences in invariant characteristics (of both the land and the original allottees).

      Table 5 presents the results of examining the coefficients from equation (5). In columns 1 and



                                                     25
2, the dependent variable is the land utilization index Z (U se). To conserve space, Table 5 presents

only two spatial fixed effects: the 1/9-township fixed effect that was our preferred specification in

the cross-section (in columns 1, 3, and 5), and a plot fixed effect (in columns 2, 4, and 6). Plot fixed

effects absorb all unobserved differences in fixed characteristics, i.e. there are as many spatial fixed

effects as there are units of observation in the cross-sectional analysis.

   Column 1 shows a significant difference in overall land use Z (U se) in 1974, as well as a mono-

tonic increase in this difference over time (i.e. ^t > ^t-1 > 0), even relative to an overall monotonic

increase in land use across all tenure regimes (i.e. ^t > ^t-1 ). As points of reference, column 1's

^ +^2012 + ^2012 = 0.116+0.102+0.07 = 0.288 is a comparison of 2012 fee-simple land to 1974 trust

land, while ^+^2012 = 0.116 + 0.102 = 0.218 is a comparison of 2012 fee-simple land to 2012 trust

land, which approximates the cross-sectional OLS estimate in column 5 of Table 2. This pattern

remains robust to the plot fixed effect specification in column 2.

   In column 3­6, we break the index measure Z (U se) into its components to explore whether

fee-simple rights have differentially affected agricultural land use vs. development over time. The

dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 is a plot's share of land under development in year t.

This can measure a manufacturing plant, barn, casino, or any other permanent structure or paved

road. The dependent variable in columns 5 and 6 is the share of a plot used for agriculture in year

t. Column 3 shows no difference in development in 1974 (-0.098  0), but column 5 shows a

significantly higher share of agricultural land on fee-simple parcels in 1974 (3.593 > 0). Column 3

shows that land development has monotonically increased since then, even on trust land, (i.e.

^t > ^t-1 > 0). However, land development increased differentially more on fee-simple land, (i.e.

^t > ^t-1 > 0). Importantly, the coefficients are practically unchanged from column 3 to 4.




                                                  26
                                Table 5: Effect of Tenure on Development Over Time

                                                            Z(Use)                   Development                     Cultivation
                                                      (1)            (2)            (3)       (4)                  (5)          (6)
  ^ : Fee Simple
                                                   0.116***                       -0.098                        3.593***
                                                    (0.016)                       (0.076)                        (0.224)
  ^1982 (F eeSimplei × 1982 )
                                                   0.039***       0.038***       0.132***       0.130***       0.179***         0.151***
                                                    (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.007)        (0.003)        (0.030)          (0.005)
  ^1992 (F eeSimplei × 1992 )
                                                   0.052***       0.049***       0.209***       0.199***         -0.037        -0.101***
                                                    (0.003)        (0.008)        (0.007)        (0.013)        (0.029)          (0.017)
  ^2002 (F eeSimplei × 2002 )
                                                   0.089***       0.086***       0.322***       0.314***        0.137**           0.051
                                                    (0.003)        (0.010)        (0.007)        (0.023)        (0.030)          (0.034)
  ^2012 (F eeSimplei × 2012 )
                                                   0.102***       0.099***       0.436***       0.434***       0.369***         0.262***
                                                    (0.003)        (0.010)        (0.006)        (0.027)        (0.029)          (0.039)
  ShareDevelopedit                                                                                             -0.332***       -0.122***
                                                                                                                (0.018)          (0.025)
  ShareCultivatedit                                                             -0.021***       -0.039***
                                                                                 (0.002)         (0.008)
  ^1982                                            0.024***       0.024***      0.083***        0.087***        0.202***       0.185***
                                                    (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.013)        (0.005)
  ^1992                                            0.036***       0.036***      0.125***        0.133***        0.456***       0.432***
                                                    (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.004)         (0.006)         (0.013)        (0.012)
  ^2002                                            0.057***       0.057***      0.177***        0.192***        0.838***       0.804***
                                                    (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.005)         (0.011)         (0.014)        (0.022)
  ^2012                                            0.070***       0.070***      0.229***        0.245***        0.919***       0.875***
                                                    (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.005)         (0.013)         (0.013)        (0.023)
  Adj. R2                                           0.5630         0.8935         0.6277         0.9135          0.7478         0.9887
  Observations                                     326,063        325,873        344,368        344,183         344,368        344,183
  #Fixed Effects                                    12,367         65,348         13,069         69,010          13,069        69,010
  1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                            Yes                           Yes                            Yes
  Allotment Fixed Effects                                           Yes                           Yes                            Yes
  p-value(1982
           ^ = 1992^ )                             0.00002        0.11020        0.00000        0.00336         0.00000        0.00028
  p-value(1992
           ^ = 2002^ )                             0.00000        0.00034        0.00000        0.00036         0.00000        0.00110
  p-value(2002
           ^ = 2012^ )                             0.00000        0.00001        0.00000        0.00001         0.00000        0.00000
  Trust Land's 1974 Share Developed                                              0.61794        0.61792
  Fee Land's 1974 Share Developed                                                1.32954        1.32988
  Trust Land's 1974 Share Agricultural                                                                         10.32865        10.32841
  Fee Land's 1974 Share Agricultural                                                                           27.12638        27.12391
Notes: This table shows how the effect of fee simple on land use has changed since 1974. Columns 1­2 consider the land utilization
index as the outcome, columns 3­4 consider land development as the outcome, columns 5­6 consider agricultural cultivation. In
columns 1, 3, and 5, this table uses the more fine-grained spatial fixed effects in Table 2. In columns 2, 4, and 6, it adds plot fixed
effects, focusing solely on within-plot variation. The coefficient-estimates on year fixed effects are the   ^t in equation (5). Further, the
`Fee-Simple × year' coefficients report on the ^t in equation (5). s.e. are clustered at the township level, significance levels are denoted
by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                     27
      Figure 5 plots the coefficient estimates from column 4 of Table 5 to depict the decade-on-decade

changes in development on fee-simple land. Interestingly, this figure highlights that the diver-

gence between fee-simple and allotted-trust land was least pronounced during the 1980s, which

is consistent with the generally depressed economic opportunities on reservations during that

period, discussed in Appendix E.

                                            Figure 5: Decade-Specific Fee-Simple Coefficients Relative to 1974
              Estimated Fee-Simple Effect
                                            .5
                                            .4
                                            .3
                                            .2
                                            .1
                                            0




                                                 1972          1982             1992          2002               2012

                                                                         NWALT Decade
Notes: This figure plots the coefficient estimates and confidence bands on ^t in column 4 of Table 5


      The dependent variable in columns 5 and 6 is a plot's share of land under agricultural cul-

tivation in year t. While the share of land in agricultural use has also increased monotonically

over time (i.e. ^t > ^t-1 > 0 in columns 5­6), there is no pattern of monotonic divergence

on fee-simple land (i.e. ^t  ^t-1  0 in columns 5­6). Even in years when ^t > 0, this fee-

simple growth-rate difference was small in agriculture relative to development, e.g. comparing

^2012 /^2012 = 0.262/0.875  0.3 in column 6 to 0.434/0.245  1.8 in column 4.


5.2     Mechanisms: Collateralizability, Assembly, & Fractionation

Transfer restrictions on allotted-trust land may reduce investment and economic activity directly

because they reduce access to capital (collateralizability), because of the inability to liquidate any

sunk investments (realizability), and because they prevent farms from being aggregated to op-

timal scale (assembly). While it is difficult to gauge the importance of the realizability effect in

our setting, collateralizability has long been viewed as a significant impediment to investment on




                                                                           28
reservations (Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, 2001).29 Similarly, the assem-

bly problem is viewed as important on reservations, which are often located in arid areas where

optimal farm sizes can be large (Anderson and Lueck 1992; Leonard and Parker 2021). In addition,

transfer-restrictions may also impact investment and economic activity indirectly by creating frac-

tionated and competing ownership claims on the same plot (see Section 2). Fractionation increases

transaction costs because each claimant can undermine whatever production other claimants want

to engage in, and it creates free-riding problems because each claimant has a claim on rents earned

from the productive activities of the other claimants.

       Collateralizability Channel:          To study the collateralizability, we investigate access to two

kinds of financial institutions: in the first instance, we consider specialized Native American fi-

nancial institutions (NAFI), whose business is specifically geared towards helping Native-owned

businesses on reservations. We obtain data on all NAFIs from the Federal Reserve's Center for

Indian Country Development (CICD), and assign each NAFI an opening date as well as the reser-

vation in which it operated. These institutions are likely to have the most direct impact, but their

opening on a reservation is unlikely to be fully exogenous to underlying local conditions and

trends. In the second instance, we therefore alternatively consider the stock of all off-reservation,

regular commercial banks within a 10-mile radius around each reservation. While off-reservation

commercial banks are likely to be less impactful on the reservation, their opening and closing is

more likely to be exogenous to the reservation itself. We obtain data on the opening dates and

precise locations of all commercial banks from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), to

determine which banks opened within 10 miles of a reservation, and when.

       For each of the two data-sets, we construct two reservation-year measures of banking: Bankedrt

is the number of banks associated with reservation r (and plot i in it) in decade t,30 FeeSimplei ×

Banked-Rezrt is a plot's fee-simple indicator interacted with the same. Figure A10 shows the ex-

pansion of these banks in our data over time. Given the dynamic time-path of development in Ta-

ble 5, we utilize our preferred panel specification of equation (5) with individual plot fixed effects

to study the effect of banking access over time. We add a reservation-year specific baseline mea-
  29
      It also creates distortions. For example, Native Americans have by far the highest rate of mobile-home ownership
in the U.S. because mobile homes can be repossessed whereas permanent structures built on trust land cannot be
repossessed any more than the land itself (Treuer, 2012; Feir and Cattaneo, 2020).
   30
      For NAFI-Bankedrt this is banks on the reservation, for FDIC-Bankedrt this is banks around the reservation.



                                                         29
sure of banking to absorb any overall changes in land utilization that may coincide with changes

in banking, and the plot-year-specific measure that tests whether land utilization on fee-simple

plots relative to allotted-trust plots diverged because of banking.

   We hypothesize that the collateraliz-
                                                          Table 6: The Collateralizability Channel
ability and credit-access channel should

primarily curtail development because                                            Share Cropt           Share Devt
                                                                                 (1)      (2)          (3)     (4)
building structures is much more capital-
                                               FeeSimplei                      -1.347**              1.989**
intensive than agricultural cultivation           ×NAFI-Bankedrt                (0.431)              (0.618)
                                               NAFI-Bankedrt                  -0.372***               0.280
(De Soto, 2000).      Given the findings                                        (0.071)              (0.150)
                                               FeeSimplei                                   -0.009              0.043***
in Table 5, this also suggests that the
                                                  ×FDIC-Bankedrt                           (0.009)               (0.009)
collateralizability-effect is more likely to   FDIC-Bankedrt                               -0.008*              0.009**
                                                                                           (0.003)               (0.003)
be dynamic in nature.        Columns 1­4       ^1982 (FeeSimplei × 1982 ) 0.136***
                                                                                          0.154***   0.125***   0.093***
                                                                            (0.004)        (0.008)    (0.002)    (0.006)
of Table 6 present the results of our
                                               ^1992 (FeeSimplei × 1992 ) -0.127***
                                                                                          -0.097**   0.205***   0.139***
tests for the credit access mechanism--                                     (0.017)        (0.023)    (0.014)    (0.016)
                                               ^2002 (FeeSimplei × 2002 ) 0.030
                                                                                             0.064   0.290***   0.154**
columns 1­2 for agricultural cultivation,                                   (0.033)        (0.056)    (0.023)    (0.035)
                                               ^2012 (FeeSimplei × 2012 ) 0.282***
                                                                                           0.265**   0.323***   0.200**
and columns 3­4 for development. In
                                                                            (0.043)        (0.089)    (0.038)    (0.053)
columns 1 and 3, we consider the NAFI          ^1982                       0.175***       0.199***   0.080***   0.069***
                                                                            (0.005)        (0.006)    (0.002)    (0.005)
measure of banking that is likely to be        ^1992                       0.417***       0.455***   0.117***   0.103***
more directly impactful on reservations,                                    (0.012)        (0.016)    (0.005)    (0.010)
                                               ^2002                       0.784***       0.865***   0.161***   0.115***
but is less plausibly exogenous to con-                                     (0.021)        (0.033)    (0.009)    (0.023)
                                               ^2012                       0.862***       0.991***   0.202***    0.100*
ditions on a reservation. In columns 2                                      (0.023)        (0.051)    (0.011)    (0.041)
and 4, we consider the FDIC measure of         Adj. R2                   0.9886 0.9887 0.9136 0.9142
                                               Observations             344,183 344,183 344,183 344,183
banking that is likely to be less directly     Average(Outcome)           17.3     .     1.093     .
                                               1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects
impactful on reservations, but is more
                                               Allotment Fixed Effects     Yes    Yes     Yes     Yes
plausibly exogenous to conditions on a         Notes: This table reports on the results of estimating an expanded version
                                               of equation (5), with measures of banking access added. Significance levels
reservation.                                   are denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


   Comparing columns 1­2 versus 3­4, the difference across outcomes is striking and suggestive

of strong substitution patterns: increasing financial access (NAFI-Bankedrt or FDIC-Bankedrt ) is

associated with across-the-board increases in a plot's share of land in development and decreases

in a plot's share of land in agricultural cultivation. Consistent with our predictions, these pat-


                                                     30
terns are much larger on fee-simple plots, where access to banks causes agriculture to decrease

more and development to increases more by a factor of five. On the overall changes, the pos-

itive development effects and negative cultivation effects roughly offset each other (|-0.372| 

0.280; |-0.008|  0.009). On the fee-simple interactions, the positive development effects domi-

nate the negative cultivation effects (|-1.347| < 1.989; |-0.009| < 0.043).

       Comparing the two banking measures, the NAFI-coefficients are about fifty times larger than

FDIC-coefficients. There are three reasons for this: first, the NAFI banks are specifically designed

to help Native-owned businesses and can thus be expected to have a larger effect; second, the

NAFI banks may be endogenously placed where they are likely to succeed whilst the FDIC banks

primarily serve an off-reservation clientele; third, and most important, there is a large difference

in the overall prevalence of each type of bank. As Figure A10 shows, the total number of NAFI

banks increased from 12 to 45 from 1974­2012, while the total number of FDIC banks around

reservations increased from 3,416 to 11,552 in the same time.

       Land Assembly Channel:              Transfer restrictions may also prevent landowners from ag-

gregating land ownership to an efficient size for agricultural production.31 For example, Hansen

and Libecap (2004) find that small, 160-acre land allocations contributed to farm failures in arid

regions of the United States before land was subsequently assembled into much larger, more ef-

ficient farms. In principle assembly problems could also arise due to the capital constraints dis-

cussed above. However, the transfer restrictions on allotted-trust land would prevent assembly

even if ample capital was present, so that we think of assembly as a distinct problem.

       Figure A11 depicts the distribution of adjacent-county average farm size--a proxy for optimal

farm size--in 2012 for the parcels in our main sample.32 Average farm size exceeds 160 acres (the

size of most allotments) for over 98% of our sample, suggesting that the assembly problem is a

plausible mechanism for the effect of non-transferability on agriculture. To test for the presence of

a land assembly mechanism, we create a plot-level measure of land aggregation from the NWALT

data. First, we dissolve each contiguous cluster of NWALT crop pixels into a unique polygon that

we call a "synthetic farm." We then create a plot-level indicator variable "D(Crop Spilloveri )" that
  31
     By contrast, assembly is not a plausible constraint for development because very few (if any) building projects
would require assembling contiguous plots of land exceeding 160 acres, which would allow a developer to construct a
building that is 1
                 2
                   -mile× 1
                          2
                            -miles.
  32
     Data on average farm size come from the 2012 Census of Agriculture.



                                                        31
is equal to one if plot i is connected to other plots through overlap with a shared synthetic farm.

To avoid coding spurious spillovers that are due to measurement error, we only associated a plot

with a synthetic farm if CropsSharei > 10% for that plot.33 In Figure 2, for example, this criterion

ensures that none of the plots are connected because the synthetic farm spillovers account for less

than 10% of a neighboring plot. Figure A12 provides an example for which "D(Spilloveri )" = 1

because a large contiguous block of agricultural pixels spills across several plots.

       Table 7 presents the results of our tests for the land assembly mechanism. Column 1 mimics

our preferred specification of equation (1) but uses "D(Crop Spilloveri )" as the dependent variable.

Column 2 interacts the fee-simple coefficient with adjacent-county average farm size (measured in

thousands of acres) to test whether the effect of fee simple on assembly is greater on reservations

where optimal farm size is larger.

       The results in column 1 of Table 7 indicate
                                                                        Table 7: The Land Assembly Channel
that fee-simple plots are 4.8 percentage points

more likely than allotted-trust plots to be part                                                         D(Crop Spilloveri )
                                                                                                          (1)          (2)
of a synthetic farm spanning multiple plots.
                                                                     Fee Simple                         0.048***         0.018
Despite the fact that optimal farm size exceeds                                                          (0.007)        (0.013)
                                                                     Fee Simple × Farm Size                             0.011**
160 acres for 98% of the sample, just 30.9% of                                                                          (0.004)
                                                                     Adj. R2                             0.7312         0.7313
plots are associated with a farm that includes
                                                                     Observations                        63,672         63,672
multiple plots. Hence, the fee-simple effect in                      Average(Outcome)                     .309           .309
                                                                     1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects              Yes            Yes
column 1 represents a 15% increase in land as-
                                                                 Notes: This table reports the results of estimating equation (1) with
                                                                 D(Crop Spilloveri ) as the dependent variable. The adjacent-county
sembly relative to the mean. The column 2 re-                    farm size interaction in column 2 is measured in thousands of acres.
                                                                 Significance levels are denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p <
sults suggest that differences in land assembly                  0.01.

are more pronounced on reservations with a larger optimal farm size: a 1,000-acre increase in

adjacent-county average farm size increases the effect of fee-simple on assembly by 1.1 percent-

age points. The relative magnitudes of the baseline fee-simple coefficient and the interaction term

imply that the probability of spillovers is not different for fee-simple plots unless optimal farm

size exceeds about 1,600 acres (1000 × 0.018/0.011). This may suggest that agricultural leases can

solve the land assembly problem when a small number of plots are involved, but that assembling

larger numbers of plots becomes infeasible without transferability.
  33
       Our results are not sensitive to the choice of cutoff.



                                                                32
       Fractionation Channel:             While the credit-access channel should affect all allotted-trust

plots equally (because they are all equally non-transferrable), fractionation should affect allotted-

trust plots differentially depending on the number of competing interests on a plot. Hence, we

test for the fractionation channel at the intensive margin, i.e. by comparing allotted-trust plots of

differing degrees of fractionation to one another. Russ and Stratmann (2014) show that the extent

of fractionation on an allotment negatively impacts agricultural income, and we hypothesize that

a similar effect might be observable for land utilization. We expect any effect of fractionation

to be concentrated in agriculture because all allotted-trust plots lack access to the credit needed

to finance development, regardless of how fractionated they are. In agriculture, by comparison,

fractionation increases the transaction costs of reaching leasing agreements as well as agreement

on the various recurring decisions involved in agricultural land use (e.g., crop choice, irrigation

strategies, and fallowing rotations).

       Records of interests associated with each allotted-trust plot are confidential,34 so we instead

construct a measure of a plot's latent potential for fractionation. Specifically, we assume that al-

lotments that we cannot find in the mid-1930s Indian Census Rolls (ICR) belonged to allottees that

had already passed away by then, implying that those allotments were more likely to become

highly fractionated over time because the process of fractionation started earlier and because ear-

lier deaths were more likely to occur without a will, as discussed in Section 2. We validate this

assumption in Appendix E.4, where we show that (i) sequential allotment numbers are highly

correlated with age within a reservation and (ii) it is systematically the early allotment numbers

that we cannot find in the ICR (Figure A13).

       Let the indicator "D(not in ICR)i " denote whether plot i's allotment number can be found in

the mid-1930s ICR. This indicator is almost evenly distributed across fee-simple and allotted-trust

lands: we match 47 percent of all fee-simple plots and 53 percent of all allotted-trust plots to

the ICR. Given the evidence in Figure A13, we interpret this indicator as a measure of latent or

potential fractionation, which we use in the absence of observable plot-level measures of fraction-

ation. We gain confidence in this interpretation from relating the indictor to reported reservation-

aggregate measures of fractionation today. Specifically, we obtain from a 2013 BIA report a reser-

vation's share of trust plots that are classified as highly fractionated, i.e. with more than 50 inter-
  34
       These records are managed by the BIA through the so-called Trust Asset Accounting Management System.



                                                          33
ests per plot (Department of Interior, 2013). Figure A14 shows that this share correlates well with

a reservation's average number of plots not linked to the mid-1930s ICR.

   To determine whether fractionation contributes to the effect of non-transferability, we estimate

a modified version of our preferred specification of equation (1) with 1/9-township fixed effects:


                                A × Allotted × D(not in ICR) +
          yij =  × FeeSimplei + frac        i               i
                                                                                                                     (6)
                                     F
                                     frac   × FeeSimplei × D(not in ICR)i + j +  Xi + ij ,

                             A < 0, and  F
where our hypothesis is that frac       frac = 0, because latent fractionation is much more

likely to cause actual fractionation on allotted-trust plots than on fee-simple plots for the reasons

discussed at the end of Section 2.

   Table 8 shows the results of estimating
                                                              Table 8: The Fractionation Channel
equation (6). Our hypotheses are borne out:

when yij is a plot's share of land under agri-                               Share Cropi Share Devi D(Spilloveri )
                      A < 0, and  F = 0, im-                                     (1)         (2)        (3)
cultural cultivation; frac       frac                Fee Simple                4.315***          0.179        0.049***
plying that allotted-trust parcels with higher                                  (0.802)        (0.178)         (0.007)
                                                     A
                                                     frac                      -0.644**        -0.023          -0.005
latent fractionation see less agricultural culti-                               (0.319)        (0.060)         (0.003)
                                                     F
                                                     frac                        -0.277         -0.022          -0.009
vation than allotted-trust parcels with lower
                                                                                (0.542)        (0.160)         (0.006)
latent fractionation (the omitted category).         Adj. R2                    0.6833         0.6123          0.7364
                                                     Observations               67,103         67,103          67,103
Moreover, the difference in latent fractionation     Average(Outcome)            17.92          1.24              1
                                                     1/9 Twnshp F.E.              Yes            Yes             Yes
is not important for fee-simple plots (as pre-
                                                     Notes: This table reports on the results of estimating equation (6).
dicted). When yij is a plot's share of land in       Significance denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

development, both interactions are near zero and statistically insignificant, consistent with the

fractionation problem being secondary to the collateralization problem for development.

   One interesting question is whether fractionation amplifies the assembly problem on reser-

vations. This stands to reason: the only way to assemble allotted-trust lands into larger units

is through agricultural leases, and Anderson and Lueck (1992, 434) make it clear that fractiona-

tion can create substantial roadblocks to leasing: "since leasing and other land use decisions require

unanimous agreement by all shareholders, costs of negotiating leases can be prohibitive." In column 3,
                                                                          A < 0 here as well,
were therefore add D(Crop Spilloveri ) as an outcome. Indeed, we see that frac



                                                    34
although the effect is imprecise, with a t-statistic of 1.5 ( 0.005/0.003). This suggests that the

effect of fractionation on agricultural cultivation is likely to be in part mediated by its preventing

optimal assembly.



6     Extensions

In this section, we explore two extensions to our core estimation. First, we investigate land use on

tribally owned (i.e. unallotted) lands. Second, we develop a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the

effect of transfer-restrictions on land values.


6.1    Tribally Owned Land

The majority of all reservation land remains tribally owned today. While an investigation of land

use on tribal lands is somewhat outside of the scope of our focus on transfer restrictions on private

land, it is certainly of intrinsic interest for understanding Native American economic develop-

ment. We therefore report the tables from this investigation in Appendix E, while discussing the

key results here. As discussed in Section 2, Panel A in Appendix-Table A6 shows little evidence

for selection of land into initial allotment, or stated conversely, little evidence for selection of land

into remaining under tribal control. Appendix-Table A7 reports results of estimating equation (1),

with tribal land-plots added to the data, and an indicator for tribal land added to the regression.

Adding spatial fixed effects across columns in the same way as in the baseline, we find that tribal

land is utilized more than allotted-trust land, but this difference is only about 15 percent of the

difference between allotted-trust land and fee-simple land, and teeters on the edge of statistical

significance, with an average p-value of 0.12 across columns.

      In the panel, Appendix-Table A8 shows that in 1974, tribal lands had about the same (low)

level of development as allotted-trust lands and fee-simple lands. In column 5 of that table, tribal

plots and fee-simple plots have about the same positive agricultural land-use difference relative

to allotted-trust lands. Over time, agricultural land utilization on tribal lands actually falls behind

relative to allotted trust. This is compensated, however, by tribal land increasing in land devel-

opment in each decade from 1974­2012 at the same relative rate as fee-simple plots (column 3­4).

In combination, these patterns indicate that, even when considered relative to tribal land, allotted-


                                                   35
trust plots appear to be largely locked out of structural transformation towards manufacturing or

services, instead remaining locked into relatively low value-added farming and ranching activities.


6.2     Estimating the Effect of Property Rights on Land Values

As a second extension, we develop a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the impact of trusteeship

on land values. Because county assessors rarely assess allotted-trust land and do not assess even

fee-simple land on reservations in a consistent manner, we are forced to use assessors' data just off

the reservation for this analysis.35 To construct an estimate of how much fee-simple title would

increase the (inherently unobserved) value of allotted-trust land, we estimate the relationship be-

tween land utilization Z(Use) and assessed land values per acre for parcels immediately adjacent to

reservations, and multiply this relationship, call it ^ , with the previously estimated effect of own-

ership on land utilization  on reservations. This gives us ^ ×  as a back-of-the envelope estimate

of the effect of ownership on land values.

       We estimate ^ using a linear regression model--described in Appendix Appendix F.2--where

we include our preferred 1/9-township fixed effects and determine the relationship between Z (U se)

and the natural log of the land value per acre for property i. Because land values and land uti-

lization are clearly jointly determined, we view the resulting ^ as a transformation factor rather

than a causal effect; i.e. higher land use Z(Use) reflects more economic activity, and we use the

corresponding higher land values to approximate the net present value of this increased activity.

Following this logic, because increases in land utilization Z(Use) obviously require costly invest-

ments, the back-of-the envelope measure we construct should be interpreted as a measure of the

counterfactual value-creation from moving allotted-trust plots into fee simple, and not of counter-

factual increase in net wealth for land owners.
  35
      Even where we do observe assessor data on reservations, many trust parcels are simply treated as "exempt" by
county assessors because they are legally owned by the federal government. Estimated values for trust parcels (when
they exist) are systematically different because trust parcels can never have actual transactions from which to estimate
market value. By design, there are zero transactions of trust parcels on which to base value estimates. The upshot is
that trust parcels are likely to be valued systematically differently than fee simple parcels for reasons other than land
utilization. Moreover, the treatment and valuation of reservation lands varies from one county to the next, even within
reservations.




                                                           36
                                 Table 9: Estimated Effects on Land Value Per Acre

                                                Montana                            Washington                           Utah
                                          (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)             (5)              (6)
                                        0.173*           0.182**           0.021           0.025***            0.039           0.054**
                                        (0.096)          (0.072)          (0.012)           (0.008)           (0.030)          (0.021)
                                         0.481            0.481            0.481             0.481             0.481             0.481
    ×                                   0.0832           0.0875           0.0101            0.0120            0.0188            0.0260
    Median LVPA ($)                     35,021           25,077           96,321           121,138           108,224           183,448
     LPVA/ Fee Simple ($)                2,914            2,195             973             1,457             2,030             4,765
    Adj. R2                              .8784            .877            .8016             .8134              .7868            .8086
    Observations                        70,477          199,767          522,043          1,361,192           50,932           208,992
    Distance Cutoff (mi)               10 Miles         25 Miles         10 Miles         25 Miles           10 Miles          25 Miles

Note: Columns 1,3,5 use all properties within 10 miles of a reservation, columns 2,4,6 use all properties within 25 miles of a reservation
After estimating ^, it is multiplied by ^ , and the Median(LVPA) in the 10- or 25-mile radius of a reservation.

     Table 9 presents our estimates of ^ across three states that make statewide assessor data avail-

able and are home to 49 reservations in our sample. We also using two different criteria for defin-

ing parcels "near" a reservation (10 vs. 25 miles). Across nearly all samples, there is a statistically

significant increase in land values associated with an increase in the land utilization measure.

There is considerable variability in the magnitude of ^ . This is largely explained by ^ being a

semi-elasticity, i.e. there is a mechanically higher percentage-effect on lands of lower base-value;

^ is highest in Montana where the reported median LVPA is the lowest. To obtain our back-of-


the-envelope calculation we combine ^ with ^ with a state's median LVPA: this product ranges

from a low of $973 per acre in Washington to a high of $4,765 per acre in Utah. By multiplying this

number by 160, we obtain the value of converting a plot from allotted trust into fee simple. This

estimate ranges from $156,000 to $762,000.



7      Conclusion

This paper estimates the long-run cost of non-transferable property rights, comparing land with-

out transfer rights to land with full property rights on Native American reservations from 1974 to

today. We leverage a natural experiment in the allocation of property rights to individual house-

holds in the early part of the 20th century that left a patchwork of different land tenures on reser-

vations which persists to the present day. We find that land utilization on fee-simple land is about


                                                                   37
0.5 standard deviations higher than on non-transferable trust land. When we break this down by

land-use, fee simple increases both the share of land under development and the share of land

under agricultural cultivation. A panel analysis reveals that the development effect is entirely

driven by dynamic structural transformation over the last four decades, whereas the agricultural

cultivation effect was mostly already present present in 1974.

   We provide evidence that transfer restrictions affect land use through at least three channels:

reducing access to credit, impeding land assembly, and creating problems associated with compet-

ing ownership claims. External credit conditions accentuate the difference between allotted-trust

and fee-simple plots, and this difference primarily affects development. In agriculture, allotted-

trust plots are less likely than fee-simple plots to be part of a satellite-measured "synthetic farm"

that spans multiple plots, especially on reservations in arid areas with larger average farm sizes.

We also find that an exogenous predictor of ownership-fractionation inhibits agricultural land use

on allotted-trust plots (where it cannot be resolved) but not on fee-simple plots (where it can).

   Finally, we develop a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the negative impact of trusteeship on

land values; this estimate indicates that fee-simple title adds between $973 and $4,765 in value to

an acre of land, or between $156,000 and $762,000 (160 times as much) to the typical allotted plot.

   While our core focus is on comparing different forms of private property rights we also extend

the analysis to include tribally owned land. In the cross-section, tribally-owned land is closer to

allotted-trust than to fee-simple land in land development and agricultural production. However,

the panel reveals that this is a mix of tribally owned land being worse than allotted-trust land in

1974, but being on a dynamic trajectory that is as positive as that of fee simple in recent decades.

   In summary, land with non-transferable private property rights fares worse than either fully

private land or communally held land, and it is on a significantly worse dynamic trajectory than

both. It is important to be careful when considering the implications of these findings. Our results

indicate that converting allotted-trust land to full fee-simple individual property rights would

generate the biggest economic efficiency gains. However, the alternative--returning allotted trust

to tribal control--would also deliver some efficiency gains and it may better safeguard the territo-

rial integrity of tribes' land base. This creates tradeoffs. Our view is that (a) both the conversion

to fee simple or the return to tribal control would be preferable to keeping land in allotted trust,

and that (b) the choice of which (if either) path to pursue must be that of individual tribes.


                                                 38
   From a practical standpoint, there is a workable precedent for conversion to tribal control

because it is already happening on some reservations: under the 2014 `Cobell settlement', the

Department of Interior (DOI) has been allocated 1.9 billion dollars to buy fractionated allotted-

trust claims and return them to tribal control, in close consultation with tribes.

   In contrast, conversion to fee simple is currently legally impossible under the 1934 IRA. Even

if an act of congress paved the way for conversion to fee simple in principle, there would remain

the practical difficulty of untangling the potentially hundreds of claims on some plots. Fortu-

nately, there is a related legal precedent that is paving the way for changing this: so-called `heir's

property' is a pervasive problem for Black-owned land in the U.S. South where it makes up thirty-

five to fifty percent of all parcels (Emergency Land Fund, 1980). Like allotted-trust land, heir's

property is hampered by high transaction costs from fractionated ownership claims, and by an in-

ability to collateralize; it is viewed as a major contributor to rural poverty (Graber, 1978; Mitchell,

2000; Shoemaker, 2003; Chandler, 2005; Rivers, 2006; Gaither and Zarnoch, 2017). The Uniform

Law Commission's Uniform Partition of Heirs Property Act (UPHPA) has recently been enacted into

law in 14 states for the purpose of untangling fractionated claims on heir's property (Mitchell,

2019). Given the similarities between heir's property and allotted-trust land, legal statutes mod-

eled on the UPHPA could be applied to untangling claims on reservations, and the ULC is actively

working on a uniform Indian probate code to apply to reservations.

   Lastly, it is worth noting that any movement away from allotted-trust land need not be a bi-

nary choice. One can imagine giving owners of trust land fully transferable property rights (thus

maximizing the value from these lands) but leaving it to tribes to decide whether this transferabil-

ity should extend only within the tribe or beyond. Mexico's second land reform (Procede) offers

a useful template in this regard: from 1993­2006, indigenous farmers were given full title to the

land that they had long held usufruct rights to, but it was the communities ejidos who then de-

cided whether these rights would be transferable only within the ejido or whether land could

also be transferred to non-ejidatarios (De Janvry et al., 2015). We see such a solution as eminently

workable on American Indian reservations.




                                                  39
References
Aizer, A. and J. J. Doyle Jr (2015). Juvenile incarceration, human capital, and future crime: Evi-
  dence from randomly assigned judges. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(2), 759­803.

Akee, R. (2009). Checkerboards and Coase: The Effect of Property Institutions on Efficiency in
 Housing Markets. The Journal of Law and Economics 52(2), 395­410.

Akee, R. and M. Jorgensen (2014). Property Institutions and Business Investment on American
 Indian Reservations. Regional Science and Urban Economics 46, 116­125.

Alcantara, C. (2007). Reduce Transaction Costs? Yes. Strengthen Property Rights? Maybe: The
  First Nations Land Management Act and Economic Development on Canadian Indian Reserves.
  Public Choice 132(3-4), 421­432.

Alston, E., L. J. Alston, B. Mueller, and T. Nonnenmacher (2018). Institutional and Organizational
  Analysis: Concepts and Applications. Cambridge University Press.

Alston, L. J. and J. P. Ferrie (2012). Family Matters: The Agricultural Ladder, Inheritance, and
  Rural-to-Urban Capital Mobility. NBER working paper.

Alston, L. J., G. D. Libecap, and B. Mueller (2000). Land Reform Policies, the Sources of Violent
  Conflict, and Implications for Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon. Journal of environmental
  economics and management 39(2), 162­188.

Anderson, T. L. (1995). Sovereign Nations Or Reservations? An Economic History of American Indians.
 Pacific Research Institute.

Anderson, T. L. and D. Lueck (1992). Land Tenure and Agricultural Productivity on Indian Reser-
 vations. The Journal of Law and Economics 35(2), 427­454.

Anderson, T. L. and D. P. Parker (2008). Sovereignty, Credible Commitments, and Economic Pros-
 perity on American Indian Reservations. The Journal of Law and Economics 51(4), 641­666.

     ´ F. M. and A. S. Kessler (2020). Property Rights on First Nations' Reserve Land. Canadian
Aragon,
  Journal of Economics 53.

Ascione, A., A. Cinque, E. Miccadei, F. Villani, and C. Berti (2008). The Plio-Quaternary Uplift of
  the Apennine Chain: New Data from the Analysis of Topography and River Valleys in Central
  Italy. Geomorphology 102(1), 105­118.

Banerjee, A. V., P. J. Gertler, and M. Ghatak (2002). Empowerment and Efficiency: Tenancy Reform
  in West Bengal. Journal of Political Economy 110(2), 239­280.

Banner, S. (2009). How the Indians Lost their Land: Law and Power on the Frontier. Harvard University
  Press.

Besley, T. (1995). Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from Ghana.
  Journal of Political Economy 103(5), 903­937.

Besley, T. and M. Ghatak (2010). Property Rights and Economic Development. In Handbook of
  Development Economics, Volume 5, pp. 4525­4595. Elsevier.



                                                 40
Besley, T. J., K. B. Burchardi, and M. Ghatak (2012). Incentives and the de Soto Effect. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 127(1), 237­282.

Brasselle, A.-S., F. Gaspart, and J.-P. Platteau (2002). Land Tenure Security and Investment Incen-
  tives: Puzzling Evidence from Burkina Faso. Journal of Development Economics 67(2), 373­418.

Burchfield, M., H. G. Overman, D. Puga, and M. A. Turner (2006). Causes of Sprawl: A Portrait
  from Space. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2), 587­633.

Bureau of Indian Affairs (1887-1926). Annual Reports of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs .

Carlson, L. A. (1981). Indians, Bureaucrats, and Land: the Dawes Act and the Decline of Indian Farming.
  Number 36. Praeger Pub Text.

C.F.R.150.1-150.11 (1981). Code of Federal Regulations.

Chandler, A. B. (2005). The Loss in My Bones: Protecting African American Heirs' Property with
  the Public Use Doctrine. Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 14, 387.

Community Development Financial Institutions Fund (2001). The Report of the Native American
  Lending Study. Technical report, U.S. Department of the Treasury.

Conley, T. G. (1999). GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence. Journal of Economet-
  rics 92(1), 1­45.

Conley, T. G. (2008). Spatial Econometrics. In The New Plagrave Dictionary of Economics.

Cornell, S. and J. P. Kalt (2007). Two Approaches to the Development of Native Nations: One
  Works, the Other Doesnt. In M. Jorgensen (Ed.), Rebuilding Native Nations: Strategies for Gover-
  nance and Development. University of Arizona Press.

Cornell, S. E. and J. P. Kalt (1987). The Redefinition of Property Rights in American Indian Reservations:
  a Comparative Analysis of Native American Economic Development, Volume 3. Malcolm Wiener
  Center for Social Policy, John F. Kennedy School of .

Cornell, S. E. and J. P. Kalt (1992). What Can Tribes Do? Strategies and Institutions in American Indian
  Economic Development. American Indian Studies Center, UCLA.

De Janvry, A., K. Emerick, M. Gonzalez-Navarro, and E. Sadoulet (2015). Delinking Land Rights
 from Land Use: Certification and Migration in Mexico. American Economic Review 105(10), 3125­
 49.

De Soto, H. (2000). The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere
 Else. Basic Civitas Books.

Deininger, K. and D. A. Ali (2008). Do Overlapping Land Rights Reduce Agricultural Investment?
 Evidence from Uganda. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 90(4), 869­882.

Demsetz, H. (1967). Toward a Theory of Property Rights. American Economic Review 62, 347­359.

Department of Interior (2013). Updated Implementation Plan: Land Buy-Back Program for Tribal
 Nations.

Di Tella, R. and E. Schargrodsky (2013). Criminal recidivism after prison and electronic monitor-
  ing. Journal of Political Economy 121(1), 28­73.

                                                   41
Dippel, C. (2014). Forced Coexistence and Economic Development: Evidence from Native Ameri-
  can Reservations. Econometrica 82(6), 2131­2165.

Dippel, C. and D. Frye (2020). The Effect of Land Allotment on Native American Households
  During the Assimilation Era. UCLA mimeo.

Dobbie, W., J. Goldin, and C. S. Yang (2018). The Effects of Pretrial Detention on Conviction,
 Future Crime, and Employment: Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges. American Economic
 Review 108(2), 201­40.

Ellickson, R. C. (1993). Property in Land. Yale Law Journal, 1315­1400.

Emergency Land Fund (1980). The Impact of Heir Property on Black Rural Land Tenure in the
 Southeastern Region of the United States. The Emergency Land Fund.

Feir, D. and L. Cattaneo (2020). The Price of Mortgage Financing for Native Americans. Journal of
  Race, Economics, and Policy, Forthcoming.

Fenske, J. (2011). Land Tenure and Investment Incentives: Evidence from West Africa. Journal of
  Development Economics 95(2), 137­156.

Foster, A. D. and M. R. Rosenzweig (2011). Are Indian Farms too Small? Mechanization, Agency
  Costs, and Farm Efficiency. Unpublished Manuscript, Brown University and Yale University.

Foster, A. D. and M. R. Rosenzweig (2017). Are There Too Many Farms in the World? Labor-
  Market Transaction Costs, Machine Capacities and Optimal Farm Size. Technical report, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research.

Frandsen, B. R., L. J. Lefgren, and E. C. Leslie (2019). Judging Judge Fixed Effects. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gaither, C. J. and S. J. Zarnoch (2017). Unearthing Dead Capital: Heirs Property Prediction in Two
 US Southern Counties. Land Use Policy 67, 367­377.

Galasso, A. and M. Schankerman (2014). Patents and Cumulative Innovation: Causal Evidence
 from the Courts. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 130(1), 317­369.

Ge, M., E. C. Edwards, and S. B. Akhundjanov (2019). Irrigation Investment on an American
 Indian Reservation. American Journal of Agricultural Economics.

Goldstein, M. and C. Udry (2008). The Profits of Power: Land Rights and Agricultural Investment
 in Ghana. Journal of political Economy 116(6), 981­1022.

Graber, C. S. (1978). Heirs Property: the Problems and Possible Solutions. Clearinghouse Rev. 12,
  273.

Habakkuk, H. J. (1955). Family Structure and Economic Change in Nineteenth-Century Europe.
 The Journal of Economic History 15(1), 1­12.

Hansen, Z. K. and G. D. Libecap (2004). The Allocation of Property Rights to Land: US Land Policy
 and Farm Failure in the Northern Great Plains. Explorations in Economic history 41(2), 103­129.

Herrendorf, B., R. Rogerson, and A. Valentinyi (2014). Growth and Structural Transformation. In
 Handbook of economic growth, Volume 2, pp. 855­941. Elsevier.

                                                  42
Holmes, T. J. and S. Lee (2012). Economies of Density versus Natural Advantage: Crop Choice on
 the Back Forty. Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1), 1­19.

Hornbeck, R. (2010). Barbed Wire: Property Rights and Agricultural Development. The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 125(2), 767­810.

Hoynes, H., D. W. Schanzenbach, and D. Almond (2016). Long-Run Impacts of Childhood Access
 to the Safety Net. American Economic Review 106(4), 903­34.

Hsiang, S. M. (2010). Temperatures and Cyclones Strongly Associated with Economic Production
 in the Caribbean and Central America. Proceedings of the National Academy of sciences 107(35),
 15367­15372.

Johnson, R. N. and G. D. Libecap (1980). Agency Costs and the Assignment of Property Rights:
  The Case of Southwestern Indian Reservations. Southern Economic Journal, 332­347.

Jorgensen, M. (2007). Rebuilding Native Nations: Strategies for Governance and Development. Univer-
  sity of Arizona Press.

Kelly, M. (2019). The Standard Errors of Persistence. Technical report.

Kelly, M. (2020). Understanding Persistence.

Kling, J. R. (2006). Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings. American Economic Re-
  view 96(3), 863­876.

Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.
  Econometrica 75(1), 83­119.

Leonard, B. and D. Parker (2021). Fragmented Ownership and Natural Resource Use: Evidence
  from the Bakken. Economic Journal.

Leonard, B., D. P. Parker, and T. L. Anderson (2020). Land quality, land rights, and indigenous
  poverty. Journal of Development Economics 143.

Libecap, G. D. and G. Alter (1982). Agricultural Productivity, Partible Inheritance, and the Demo-
  graphic Response to Rural Poverty: An Examination of the Spanish Southwest. Explorations in
  Economic History 19(2), 184­200.

Libecap, G. D. and R. N. Johnson (1980). Legislating Commons: The Navajo Tribal Council and
  the Navajo Range. Economic Inquiry 18(1), 69­86.

Massey, C. and A. M. Carlos (2019). Reindeer and Aboriginal Economic Development: Alaska
 1940.

McChesney, F. S. (1990). Government as Definer of Property Rights: Indian Lands, Ethnic Exter-
 nalities, and Bureaucratic Budgets. The Journal of Legal Studies 19(2), 297­335.

Melero, E., N. Palomeras, and D. Wehrheim (2017). The Effect of Patent Protection on Inventor
 Mobility.

Meriam, L. (1928). The Problem of Indian Administration: Report of a Survey Made at the Request of
 Honorable Hubert Work, Secretary of the Interior. Number 17. Johns Hopkins Press.



                                                43
Migot-Adholla, S., P. Hazell, B. Blarel, and F. Place (1991). Indigenous Land Rights Systems in
 Sub-Saharan Africa: a Constraint on Productivity? The World Bank Economic Review 5(1), 155­
 175.

Mitchell, T. W. (2000). From Reconstruction to Deconstruction: Undermining Black Landowner-
 ship, Political Independence, and Community Through Partition Sales of Tenancies in Common.
 Nw. UL Rev. 95, 505.

Mitchell, T. W. (2019). Historic Partition Law Reform: A Game Changer for Heirs Property Own-
 ers. Texas A&M University School of Law Legal Studies Research Paper No. 19-27.

Office of Indian Affairs (1935). Indian Land Tenure, Economic Status, and Population Trends. In
  Part X of the Report on Land Planning. Washington: Department of Interior.

Otis, D. S. (2014). The Dawes Act and the Allotment of Indian Lands, Volume 123. University of
  Oklahoma Press.

Pagan, A. (1984). Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated Regressors.
  International Economic Review, 221­247.

Peltzman, S. (1976). Toward a More General Theory of Regulation. The Journal of Law and Eco-
  nomics 19(2), 211­240.

Place, F. and B. M. Swallow (2000). Assessing the Relationship between Property Rights and
  Technology Adoption in Smallholder Agriculture: A Review of Issues and Empirical Methods.
  Technical report.

Rivers, F. R. (2006). The Public Trust Debate: Implications for Heirs' Property Along the Gullah
  Coast. Se. Envtl. LJ 15, 147.

Rose-Ackerman, S. (1985). Inalienability and the Theory of Property Rights. Columbia Law Re-
  view 85(5), 931­969.

Russ, J. and T. Stratmann (2014). Creeping Normalcy: Fractionation of Indian Land Ownership.
  CESifo Working Paper No. 4607.

Saiz, A. (2010). The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 125(3), 1253­1296.

Schaetzl, R. J., F. J. Krist Jr, and B. A. Miller (2012). A Taxonomically Based Ordinal Estimate of
  Soil Productivity for Landscape-Scale Analyses. Soil Science 177(4), 288­299.

Sen, S. (2016). Indentured Labour from India in the Age of Empire. Social Scientist 44(1/2), 35­74.

Shoemaker, J. A. (2003). Like Snow in the Spring Time: Allotment, Fractionation, and the Indian
  Land Tenure Problem. Wis. L. Rev., 729.

Shumway, S. B. (2017). Intestacy law - the dual generation dilemma - wyoming 's interpretation
  of its 130-year-old intestacy statute - matter of fosler. Wyoming Law Review, 641­674.

Stainbrook, C. (2016). Message from the indian land tenure foundation president.

Taylor, G. D. (1980). The New Deal and American Indian Tribalism: The Administration of the Indian
  Reorganization Act, 1934-45. U of Nebraska Press.

                                                44
Treuer, D. (2012). Rez Life: An Indian's Journey Through Reservation Life. Grove/Atlantic, Inc.

Treuer, D. (2019). The Heartbeat of Wounded Knee: Native America from 1890 to the Present. Riverhead
  Books.

Trosper, R. L. (1978). American Indian Relative Ranching Efficiency. The American Economic Re-
  view 68(4), 503­516.

United States Government Printing Office (1879-1932). Official Register of the United States, Execu-
 tive, Legislative, Judicial. Department of State.

Wooldridge, J. M. (2010). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data.

Yandle, B. (1983). Bootleggers and Baptists-the Education of a Regulatory Economists. Regulation 7,
  12.




                                                 45
           Figure A1: 1910 Advertisement for Reservation Lands Left from Allotment




Appendix A          Appendix to Section 2

Figure A1 shows an advertisement for the sale of surplus land, discussed in Section 2.

Figure A2 tracks the flow of total acres that were allotted and the flow of acres subsequently

converted into fee simple in the BLM data; discussed in Section 2.

Below Figure A2, we discuss the relationship between inheritance laws and land fractionation.

   Intestacy Laws and Fractionation       In this section, we discuss the relationship between in-

heritance laws and land fractionation. In the classic treatment by Habakkuk (1955), impartible

(`unigeniture') single-heir practices intend to keep the family property intact, while partible (`com-

mon heirship') practices intend to keep the extended family intact. Land fractionation is always

caused by partible inheritance (i.e. `common heirship') practices and laws. The practice of partible

inheritance refers to parents (the testator) writing common heirship into their will. laws of partible

inheritance refers to a court presumption of common heirship that applies under intestacy, i.e. in


                                                 46
                                            Figure A2: Flow of Allotments and Transfers into Fee Simple



               500 1000 1500 2000 2500              Annual Acres Allotted and Fee-Simple




                                                                                                                                                 1500
                                                                                                                          Fee-Simple Acres (1,000s)
             Allotment Acres (1,000s)




                                                                                                                                500     1000
                          0




                                                                                                                         0
                                         1887                        1906                       1924       1934   1940
                                                                        Year of Transfer
                                          1887: Dawes Act; 1906: Burke Act; 1924: Citizenship; 1934: IRA
                                          Dashed:Allotments; Solid: Fee-Simple



Notes: This figure tracks the flow of total acres that were allotted and the flow of acres subsequently transferred into fee
simple in the BLM data.




the absence of a will. The practices or the legal presumption of partible inheritance can cause land

fractionation in two forms: when either the testator's preference or the court's presumption under

intestacy is common heirship into divided interests, the result is farm sizes that are potentially too

small to operate at efficient scale, causing under-development and agricultural poverty. Such is

the case in India today, and most of continental Europe in the 19th century (Libecap and Alter,

1982; Foster and Rosenzweig, 2011, 2017). When the testator's preference or the court presump-

tion under intestacy is common heirship into undivided claims on the same property, the result is

ownership fractionation over the same asset under tenancy in common. In the U.S., the court pre-

sumption is partible inheritance but land fractionation has nonetheless historically been mostly

avoided because (a) many landowners wrote wills to keep the farm intact, and because (b) well-

developed financial markets would allow one heir to mortgage the farm to pay out the other heirs

and thus maintain the farm at its efficient scale (Alston and Ferrie, 2012). Heir's property is the ex-

ception to this general rule and it was the result of a lack of will-writing (`intestacy'), a reluctance

to go through the courts' probate systems, and historically limited access to credit.




                                                                                  47
Appendix B             Appendix to Section 3

Figure A3 depicts the location of allotments matched to quarter sections. In most cases, these

clusters of allotments trace out the boundaries of present-day reservations (with the gaps filled

in mostly by tribal lands). In some rare cases, clusters of allotments trace out the boundaries of

a former reservation that was later terminated. This is true, for example, of the more dispersed

looking `clouds' of allotments in Central and Northern California. Oklahoma, which is in fact

densely covered by allotments, is the only gap in our spatial allotment data.36 Eastern Oklahoma

was covered by reservations for the `Five Civilized Tribes' (the Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw,

Creek, and Seminole) who had been relocated there in the 1830s. These tribes were fully allotted

and we have their individual allotment records, but for some reason their allotments were either

not filed with the Government Land Office or not digitized by the BLM.

       Figure A4 shows a version of Figure 1 where we separately identify surplus land in the reser-

vation. The vast majority of surplus lands is outside of reservations, because it was ceded from

reservations as large tracts. See discussion in footnote 9 and reference to Appendix-Figure A1.

The larger black outlines are the boundaries of 6×6-mile PLSS townships.
  36
      Our match rate is above 99% for most states, with notably lower match rates for New Mexico (where the PLSS grid
is less cleanly defined) and Wisconsin.




                                                         48
                                                      Figure A3: Allotted Quarter Sections and Reservations




49
     Notes: This figure depicts the location of allotments across the U.S. The main omission is Oklahoma, where the Five Civilized Tribes (and the Osage) were allotted, but
     their allotments where not included in the GLO data. The parcels depicted include land in allotted-trust as well as fee-simple lands.
                                        Figure A4: Checkerboard Pattern of Land Tenure on the Pine Ridge Reservation




50
     Notes: This is a version of Figure 1 that includes `Surplus Fee' land.
Appendix C                 Robustness Checks to Section 4

Table A1 re-estimates columns 2, 4, 6 of Table 2 with deciles of each land characteristics (i.e. 30

fixed effects) instead of linearly adding the geographic controls. Table A2 re-estimates Table 2 with

the NLCD outcome data discussed in footnote 3.

                                     Table A1: Outcome: Land Utilization Index

                                                         (1)                      (2)                      (3)
        Fee Simple                                    0.292***                 0.242***                 0.194***
                                                       (0.047)                  (0.050)                  (0.050)
        Adj. R2                                       0.3087                   0.4420                    0.4783
        Observations                                  67,049                   66,195                    65,408
        #Fixed Effects                                 2,475                    6,735                    10,732
        Geographic Controls                           Deciles                  Deciles                   Deciles
        Township Fixed Effects                          Yes
        1/4 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                  Yes
        1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                                           Yes
        Spatial HAC SEs (10 mi)                        0.031                     0.031                    0.031
        Spatial HAC SEs (25 mi)                        0.037                     0.036                    0.037
        Spatial HAC SEs (100 mi)                       0.044                     0.044                    0.043
Notes: This table introduces increasingly finer spatial fixed affects across columns: Columns 1­3 use township fixed effects (panel a of
Figure 3), columns 4 and 5 correspond to the fixed effects depicted in panels b and c of Figure 3. Significance levels are denoted by *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                  51
                               Table A2: Outcome: Land Utilization Index (NLCD)

                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)
   Fee Simple                           0.410***        0.351***          0.290***         0.264***         0.174***         0.198***
                                         (0.058)          (0.047)          (0.045)          (0.043)          (0.035)           (0.035)
   Ruggedness                                            -7.434**                          -9.761**                         -10.505***
                                                          (3.280)                           (3.838)                            (3.219)
   Elevation                                            -1.857***                         -1.124***                           -0.871**
                                                          (0.339)                           (0.406)                            (0.427)
   Soil Quality                                         73.266***                         61.028***                          48.780***
                                                          (9.630)                           (8.318)                            (7.376)
   Adj. R2                               0.2870           0.2977          0.2951           0.3005           0.3212            0.3172
   Observations                          65,409           65,408          64,580           64,579           63,824            63,824
   #Fixed Effects                        2,337            2,337            6,473            6,473           10,396            10,366
   Geographic Controls                      .             Linear          Binned           Binned           Binned            Binned
   Township Fixed Effects                  Yes              Yes
   1/4 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                 Yes              Yes
   1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                                                   Yes               Yes
Notes: This table introduces increasingly finer spatial fixed affects across columns: Columns 1­3 use township fixed effects (panel a of
Figure 3), columns 4 and 5 correspond to the fixed effects depicted in panels b and c of Figure 3. Significance levels are denoted by *
p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                   52
Appendix D          Additional Materials Related to Section 4.2

Appendix D.1       The Indian Census Rolls

This section verifies our claim that within a reservation issuance year is explained by birth year.

To be able to attach an allottee's characteristics like birth year to an allotted plot, we digitized an

additional data source called the Indian Census Rolls (ICR). The ICR were censuses collected by

the BIA on reservations; they contained basic demographic information such as age, and critically

also included allotment numbers, which allows us to link allottee birth years to allotment issuance-

years recorded in the BLM data. We digitized a single mid-1930s ICR volume for each reservation,

which amounted to digitizing about 18,000 pages like the one in Appendix-Figure A6.

   The Indian Census Rolls (ICR) contained individuals' allotment numbers, which we can then

match to our allotment data. Figure A6 shows a snapshot of one page of the ICR. In any year,

The records are organized by reservation, reported on the top of the page. (The top of the page

also reports on the identity of the local BIA agents, which we peruse in Appendix D.2.) On the

left, individuals are grouped by households, and sex, age and family relations are reported. In

the far right column, the ICR report the allotment number, which--coupled with a reservation

identifier--can be linked to the BLM allotment records we discuss in Section 3.

   Because a portion of the original allottees had already died by the mid-1930s, we find only

about three-quarters of our allotments in the ICR, i.e. around 45,000 allotments. (This affects the

number of observations used to generate Figure A5, but does not affect our IV estimates based on

issuance year, because issuance year is observed directly in the BLM patent data.)

   To verify our claim, we define for each reservation a year t = 0 as the year of the first major

wave of allotments. On average, over seventy percent of a reservation's allotments were issued

in that year, consistent with the narrative above. Figure A5 shows the coefficients that result from

regressing allotments' issuance year (normalized relative to year t = 0) on reservation fixed effects

and on allottees' age in year t = 0 (with negative ages for the later born), in 5-year bins. The figure

shows that all allottees who were alive in year 0 received their allotment in year 0; i.e. the average

allotment year is not statistically different from year t = 0 for any cohort born before year 0.

Allottees that were not yet alive in year t = 0 received their allotment some years later (t > 0 on

the vertical axis). In summary, this figure verifies that issuance-year variation is explained fully by


                                                  53
birthyear, so that the exclusion restriction is that the birthyear of an original allottee has no direct

effects on their heirs' land utilization eighty or a hundred years later.

                       Figure A5: Allotments' Issuance Year Explained by Allottees' Birthyear
                                                 20
               Allotment Year Relative to Year 0
                    0      5     10
                                  -5      15




                                                      -20 -15 -10 -5 0   5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
                                                                                  Age at Year 0

Notes: This figure depicts the coefficients from a regression of allotments' issue-year on reservation fixed effects and
allottees' ages, both normalized to year t = 0 in which the majority of a reservation's allotments were issued. The
pattern shows that all allottees who were alive in year 0 indeed received an allotment in year 0, and later allotments
were made as new cohorts were born. The omitted category is allottees aged 5-9 at year 0. Confidence bands are for
s.e. clustered at the reservation-level.




                                                                                    54
                                                                                                                                Figure A6: Sample Page of the Indian Census Rolls

     ....                                                                                                                                          INDIAN CENSUS ROLL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -                                             ..._,,,
         I
     I
     0         iM
                                                                                                            -                                                                      ..
                    of &Jil _ _ _...JC!n:lialJIUAllaili?kk....;......_!;.;____,.· ...a&Jota ol &Jil _ _ _-lilQnw·LJQillllllllSalkr.__ _ _ _ _Juriedic&ioll, · ol---.,,J=,....._.,._1 1.___.1._=-...,_                                                                       -J.Ja-·eLJIL,-''ll
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &UIA b7·                 _ · .______,.,_.,~t0.1.'···I-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            · 8uperiatndelll.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~                  ...,. 1016 ,
                                      .                                            .
             -               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a_.,lll!Oa                                                         ....,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ..
             '"7llllU
                                                                                                                ·       ·
                                                                                                                                ftlUll                          ·
                                                                                                                                                                       _
                                                                                                                                                                    ......                          At
                                                                                                                                                                                                   · W 'R M'M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .a. ....... ,                                                      =   I   I
                                                                               .                                                                                                                                                                    '                  ~                                                             Y·w·
                                                                                                            ... ·wr                                            -            ~c- ,                                                                   r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ....   _                    0-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i&
                                                                           '   I

                I
                                            -- -· -                            .                                   I            ··
                                                                                                                                                               - ....                                 ...                              u            ;                           .                          II        ~.....-    .. . ..
                                                         ·                                       ·           ·                                                  '    ·                                 ..                          -                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                 .-                                                                                                                                 1                                                                  '-.. I/
                                                                                                                                ,_                                                 -                                                       -   ,,   ::                                             -       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,.__
                 JI_                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~--
                                                                                                     -      ·                                                  ,,.. ..       ..                          .                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               . "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .. ......
                                                         i\~C        .,!                                                                                                                                                           t ··
                                                             c
                                                                                                                 ·1· 11
                                                                                                                                                                                           - -                                                                                        .-               .       t .         .                 ... '1
                                                         .                             ----.·a.      r_              ,.                                                                                                            ~-·
                                                                                                            ·                   ·                                    ·       ··            .....                             f                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -                     ·      ··
                    ·            ---                                                                                                                           ·                                     ··-                                                                              .                                                            ·---
                     .                     .c.   fl.                                                                                      ·        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,t     _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   i .. ' }
                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                  1M1                                                        ..                                              ;_~   -                                                                                                         ... ti
                    ....                         I                                     -....-NJ             .. ..                             ·'                I    ·                     ....                                    I ·                                                                                 .                     ··
                             ~
                         -                                           ·;;· -
                                                                                                                                ··                                                                       ·   ill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ·            ---
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ~I'
                                 ---                                                                                                                                                                 '        '    ..       " ;    i




55
                                                     .                                 _    ..   i .. _ .        i-11-0
                    ....                                                                                                    '·' ii                 (            I                          .....
                                 --          .                                                   I.
                                                                                                            .. ....
                                                                                                                                >
                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                     ~
                                                                                                                                                                    .... ..                              · " "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ··                                              ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ··
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ·-
                         v                                                                                                           ,,                                                                       ".                                    ..
                                                                                                                 1111                                                                                        j_·
                                                 "'-                                   -·
                                                                                                                            -                                   I
                    ...' -       ..._ -                                                                     .. ....             ·                      .             ..                    ...           .   - "'           r~ ~~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -                                                ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r                                                   ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .....
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .. .. -
                                                                      ·                                          lllD           ·                                                -
                                          {ftn-tull                                    J\&lie               r                                                   r                                                                                                                                                                            .1.1.. . . .
                                  ·                                                                                ··           ·                      '             ·            wt       ·             ·    ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                              -               -·   ·f               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                  ·                                                lillarie                 r
                                                                                                                 .....
                                                                                                                   ll                              i           r                 ._                      · r' .                            y                                                                                          ·
                                                                                                                                                       .
                                                                                                                                ·
                ..
                                                                                        -
                                                                                                 11.
                                                                                                                 ~ l-11
                                                                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                                                                                     ·                                                                              "'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                          ·-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ...
                                  ·                                                                                             ·                              r                                         ·                                                                                                                            ·       . .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ..
                                                                 r    >
                ..                                                                                          ·     ·
                                                                                                              ......                                                 ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                      · ·    J
                .                ·                                                 . . .lotte               r
                                                                                                              ~
                                                                                                                                ·                              r    ....L
                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                 ...                                               1i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ~                                                                             ·      "'·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ~
                .,               ·                               ---~·             Al"-·
                                                                                                            ·      9/ 1
                                                                                                                            .   ·                              · ·          I·             -             ·                                 '                                                                    ..                    ·
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                                                           I                                                                       ~-.




                                                                                   ,....._                       9.....0        -
                                                                                                                                                                                 -                           ·                                                                                                  .                            All. II
                                      1. ·- -·. .-                                                          ..         a1   ~ .                                                                          ·   ·                                                                                                                               .I.\. \\AIL
                .                                                                                                                                              .,,,, .. ..                                                         -...                                                                                               ·
                                                                                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                           -
               Notes: This page shows 7 allottees with allotment numbers (as well as some `annuity numbers' which related to other treaty obligations like ration payments). We
               collected about 18,000 pages like this to get one complete cross-section. A large chunk of the full data we collected was on un-allotted reservation so that we have a
               total of almost 45,000 allotment numbers across 18,000 pages.
    Columns 1­3 of Table A3 show that the IV discussed in Appendix D.1 displays some corre-

lation with land characteristics; columns 4­6 show that the IV discussed in Appendix D.2 does

not.

                       Table A3: Correlation of Geographic Controls with Instruments

                                         Ruggedn.            Elev.          Soil Q.        Ruggedn.             Elev.         Soil Q.
                                            (1)               (2)             (3)             (4)                (5)            (6)
    Allotment Year                        0.000***          0.000**         -0.000*
                                           (0.000)          (0.000)         (0.000)
    Zi                                                                                        0.001            -0.004         -0.000
                                                                                             (0.001)           (0.003)        (0.000)
    Adj. R2                                0.9204           0.9953          0.8421           0.9203            0.9952         0.8423
    Observations                           67,103           67,103          67,102           67,019            67,019         67,018
    1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                 Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes
Notes: Across columns, this table shows the second stage results of instrumenting fee-simple status with the year of an allotment's
issuance (column 1­3) and additionally with Zi from expression (4) (in columns 4­6). Significance levels are denoted by * p < 0.10, **
p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                 56
Appendix D.2             The Indian Agents

To gain identification we construct an instrument based on the exogenous rotation of Indian

Agents across reservations, and their varying propensity to transfer land into fee simple. To op-

erationalize this strategy, we construct a complete reservation-year panel of Indian Agents from

1879­1940. Our primary source of agent information is from the Department of Interior employ-

ment rosters recorded in the Official Register of the United States (1932).37 The records provide

agent name, birthplace, position title, and annual pay. Each agent is listed by agency and city,

which we link to reservations. We supplement these records with agent narratives included in the

Bureau of Indian Affairs Reports published annually from 1879 to 1907. Each agent was required

to produce an annual summary of agency events. We recorded each agents name from the end of

the summary. As well, we compare these records with the agent names listed on the ICR discussed

in Appendix D.1 above.


Appendix D.3             The Identifying Assumption of the Instrument

Two elements need to be in place for judge fixed effect type strategies: For precision and statistical

power, (i) the BIA agents needed to have sufficient discretion for their idiosyncratic preferences

matter, as well as enough discretion to make these propensities matter. For exogeneity, (ii) the

assignment of BIA agents to reservations should not have been endogenous to reservations' char-

acteristics.

       For (i), the historical and institutional narrative surrounding allotment makes it clear that the

BIA agents possessed considerable discretionary room over the assignment of allotments (Banner,

2009; Otis, 2014; Carlson, 1981). For illustration, the left panel of Figure A7 shows the distribution

of the roughly 450 agent fixed effects µj (·) estimated in equation (3). The right panel of Figure A7

shows how the rotation of agents over time induces different time-paths in the propensity to con-

vert land into fee simple on two different reservations. In the initial years after the Burke Act, Salt

River had an Indian Agent whose propensity to convert land was about average, with a µj (·)  0

(Charles E. Coe From 1906­1917); but from 1917 until the end of the allotment era in 1934, Spirit

Lake, had a series of agents who all had higher than average propensities to transfer land into
  37
       The Official Registers were published biennially from 1879­1940.




                                                           57
fee simple (Byron A. Sharp, 1917­1921, Frank A. Virtue, 1921­1925, Charles S. Young 1925­1927,

John B. Brown 1927­1932, Arthur J. Wheeler, from 1932). Salt River, by contrast, had agents with a

higher propensity to convert land to fee simple in the early years (Charles M. Ziebach 1906­1917,

Samuel A. M. Young, 1917­1921), but then had a succession of three agents with a lower propen-

sity towards the end of the allotment process (William R. Beyer 1921­1928, John S. R. Hammitt

1928­1930, and Orrin C. Gray 1930­1934).

                                                            Figure A7: Distribution of Estimated µj (·)

                                     Kernel density estimate                                                 Estimated Agent FE on 2 Reservations
            6


                                                                                                .04                                                         .04

            4                                                                                   .03
  Density




                                                                                                                                                            .02
                                                                                                .02

                                                                                                .01
            2                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                                                            -.02
            0
                -.6   -.5    -.4    -.3   -.2   -.1    0     .1   .2   .3   .4   .5   .6                                                                    -.04
                                   Agent Fixed Effects in Equation (1)                                1905   1910   1915     1920    1925     1930   1935
                kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0500                                                                    year



Notes: The left panel of this figure shows the distribution of roughly 450 agent fixed effects µj (·) estimated in equa-
tion (3). The right panel shows how the rotation of agents over time induces different time-paths in µj (rt) , i.e. the
propensity to convert land into fee simple, on Spirit Lake (red triangles, solid line) and on Salt River (blue crosses,
dashed line).



        To ensure that whatever variation in expression (4) will contribute to identification is in fact

driven by µj (rt) rather than, say, by a non-linear transformation of issue-year, we re-estimate equa-

tion (3) and re-construct expression (4) without agent fixed effects, and compare the resulting

"Placebo-Zi " to the Zi we use in our estimation. We show the results in Table A4, which is the

equivalent of Panel B in Table 4 with the "Placebo-Zi " replacing Zi . Table A4 shows that when

expression (4) is constructed without agent fixed effects, it has no predictive power whatsoever

for a plot's conversion into fee simple.




                                                                                           58
  Table A4: Instruments: Correlation of "Placebo-Zi " with Land Characteristics, and First Stage

                                       Ruggedn.           Elev.         Soil Q.                      Fee Simple

                                           (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)
   Allotment Year                                                                     -0.018***       -0.018***        -0.017***
                                                                                       (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)
   Placebo-Z i                            -0.001          -0.008         0.000          0.187           0.188            0.186
                                         (0.001)         (0.008)        (0.000)        (0.230)         (0.230)          (0.230)
   Adj. R2                               0.9203          0.9952         0.8423         0.6118          0.6119          0.6124
   Observations                          67,019          67,019         67,018         67,019          67,018          67,018
   Geographic Controls                                                                                 Linear          Binned
   1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

Note: This table reports on a version of Table 4, Panel B where we construct a "Placebo-Zi " (defined in equation (4)) without using
agent fixed effects in the estimation of equation (3). The purpose is to validate assumption (i) by showing that without µj (·) , Zi does
not add predictive power to the first stage.




                                                                   59
                                     Figure A8: Turnover of BIA Agents over Time

                        200



                        150
 # agents turned over




                        100



                        50



                         0
                              1880     1890           1900               1910           1920       1930
                                                                  year
Notes: This figure shows the count of agent-turnover (agents switching reservations) over time.




               For (ii), we require that the assignment of a BIA agent to a reservation was conducted in a

manner that was exogenous to the allotments that were considered for transfer into fee simple on

that reservation. In terms of timing, the historical record shows that the timing of rotation was

anchored on the federal administration cycle: the majority of BIA agents were rotated with the

federal electoral cycle, i.e. after two, four, six or eight years. This is documented in Figure A8,

which shows aggregate turnover in the agent panel and displays a clear pattern of turnover spik-

ing every two years with each new congressional term

               Of course, exogenous timing is not enough for exogeneity because it does not preclude the pos-

sibility of selection. The particular worry is that BIA agents with a higher propensity for convert-

ing land into fee simple were transferred to reservations with certain characteristics, particularly

over land. The historical record does not suggest that this was the case because the primary job of

BIA agents was to foster education and public health on the reservations, and there is no reason

to expect these characteristics to have been correlated with the propensity to convert allotments.

To approach this question more formally, we test whether the agent fixed effects µj (rt) that we es-

timated in equation (3) correlate with the characteristics of the land that the agents converted. We


                                                             60
also investigate the relation between agent fixed effects and land characteristics in a panel setting.

To do so, we aggregate the plot-year duration-panel up to a reservation-year (r, t)-panel where we

average over the plots that were converted to fee-simple in year t. In


             geo-characteristicsrt =  · µj (rt) +  · (t - issue-yearrt ) +  Xr + µr + t +                            jrt          (7)


we regress the average of each observable geo-characteristicsrt of plots converted in year t on the

fixed effect µj (rt) of the agents in charge in t, conditional on reservation and year fixed effects,

as well as the average years since issuance (t - issue-yearrt ) of these plots. Xr controls for the

average of the land characteristic under investigation for allotted plots that had not yet converted

into fee simple. If higher propensity-to-convert agents were selectively converting better land, we

should see a negative correlation between µj (rt) and ruggedness, a negative correlation between

µj (rt) and elevation, and a positive correlation with soil quality. The coefficients in Table A5 are

sign-consistent with this hypothesis, but the correlations are nowhere near statistically significant.

In the even columns, we add Xr controls, which adds explanatory power but does not change the

overall pattern.


                            Table A5: Correlation of µj (rt) with Land Characteristics

                                                       Ruggedness                      Elevation              Soil Quality

                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)               (4)       (5)           (6)
  µj (rt)                                           -2.564        -0.367       -58.553        -33.062        0.887      0.824
                                                  (12.248)      (12.649)      (47.620)       (48.159)      (1.243)     (1.253)
  avg t - issue-year                                0.060         0.103         -0.765         0.770        -0.032     -0.021
                                                   (0.228)       (0.235)       (0.888)        (0.906)      (0.023)     (0.023)
  Ruggedness on trust-plots in rez-year                         0.405***
                                                                 (0.115)
  Elevation on trust-plots in rez-year                                                       0.493***
                                                                                              (0.059)
  Soil-Quality on trust-plots in rez-year                                                                              -0.084
                                                                                                                       (0.067)
  Adj. R2                                          0.8561        0.8584        0.9783         0.9791       0.6878       0.7001
  Observations                                     1,342         1,313         1,342          1,313        1,342        1,313
  Reservation Fixed Effects                          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes
  Year Fixed Effects                                 Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes          Yes

Note: This table shows the results of estimating equation (7), which tests whether agent fixed effects µj (rt) correlate with the land
characteristics of the plots converted.




                                                                 61
Appendix E            Appendix Materials for Section 5 (Mechanisms)

Appendix E.1         Evolution over Reservation Economies over Time

Here, we provide a background narrative on how economic activity on reservations evolved over

time. Land allotment was the cornerstone of the Assimilation Era, which lasted from the Dawes

Act in 1887 until the IRA in 1934. A spurt of economic growth followed the IRA, under John

Collier's leadership of the BIA from 1934 to 1945. What followed was the first period since the

establishment of reservations that many consider to have been one of positive changes, as Collier's

tenure at the helm of the BIA empowered tribes, and many young Native Americans received

training and found employment in the the Civilian Conservation Corps and in the Army.

       Unfortunately, the Truman and the Eisenhower administrations' attitudes towards reserva-

tions (1945­1961) were markedly different from those of the previous Roosevelt administration,

and there was a period of stagnation into the late 1960s. This period was defined by the passing of

two concurrent federal acts in 1953--the Termination Act, and Public Law 280-- which Treuer (2019,

p255) describes as "a dry pair of names for two exceptionally bloody acts." These acts put control

of federal funds back with the BIA. A tribal member who lived through this period recounts how

"in the 1950s, you couldn't get anything done without [the BIA's] approval. They controlled ev-

erything. They controlled the land and collected rents. All fees were paid to them. They paid out

the money. All leases, all business deals, all disputes, it went through them" (Treuer, 2012, p128).

       The late 1960s brought significant change, in part on the tails of the Civil Rights Movement

and the Johnson administration's War on Poverty. The Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO)

funded wide-ranging Community Action Programs (CAP) on reservations including investments

in litigation capabilities; the Indian Education Act of 1972 dramatically improved Indian educa-

tional resources; the Indian Financing Act of 1974 improved access to finance on reservations;

the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975 authorized federal agencies

other than the BIA to directly contract with, and make grants to, individual tribes; and in 1976 the

Supreme Court curtailed the sway of Public Law 280 over taxation and other civil law matters on

reservation (Cornell and Kalt 2007, ch1, Treuer 2012, p136, p384, p330, p220, p369).38 By the early
  38
     This period also brought non-economic change that empowered Native Americans: The late Sixties saw the rise of
the American Indian Movement, and in 1978 Congress passed the American Indian Religious Freedom Act.




                                                        62
1970s, tribes had begun to gain more independence from the BIA, and the 1970s were -- at least

economically -- a good decade for American Indians. The economic expansion of the 1970s was

followed by a period of relative stagnation in the early to mid 1980s, primarily because the Reagan

administration (1981­1989) dismantled the OEO and various other sources of federal grants and

funding in 1981. This stagnation was temporary, however. By the late 1980s, the sovereignty that

tribes had secured in the early 1970s began to bear fruit in the establishment of tribal businesses.

Tribes had developed the infrastructure to do well economically even without federal grants and

funding. And economic growth on reservations mirrored the usual pattern of structural transfor-

mation, transitioning from primarily agricultural production towards manufacturing and services

(Herrendorf, Rogerson, and Valentinyi, 2014). While until early 1970s, practically all economic ac-

tivity on reservations was agricultural (Carlson, 1981; Trosper, 1978; Anderson and Lueck, 1992),

the Harvard Project on American Indian Economic Development has carefully documented the subse-

quent emergence of wide-ranging manufacturing activities in electronics, cement, fish canneries,

saw mills, and auto parts, as well services, particularly a variety of tourism activities (two Apache

reservations each run their own ski resorts) (Cornell and Kalt, 1987, 1992). In 1988, Congress

passed the Indian Gaming and Regulatory Act. While only a handful of reservations have grown

rich from gambling, many have used the modest but steady casino revenues to finance and en-

courage the development of other businesses (Jorgensen 2007, Treuer 2012, ch6). The time-path of

development discussed here is depicted in Figure A9.




                                                 63
                                                  Figure A9: Economic Development on U.S. Reservations over time
                                          15000
            Real Per-Capita Income (2010)
                  5000        10000
                               0




                                                  1915          1938 1945               1970   1980   1990   2000   2010
                                                                                 Year

Notes: Reservation-level per capita income was collected from BIA reports held at the National Archives for 1915, 1938,
and 1945. From 1970­2010, on-reservation per-capita income aggregates are reported as part of the decennial census.




                                                                               64
Appendix E.2                         Banking Access

                                          Figure A10: Specialized Banks on Reservations over time



                                  12000                                                             50


                                  10000




                                                                                                         # NAFI Banks (light)
            # FDIC Banks (dark)




                                                                                                    40

                                  8000
                                                                                                    30

                                  6000
                                                                                                    20

                                  4000
                                                                                                    10
                                          1970        1980         1990        2000         2010
                                                                     year

Notes: This graph plots the number of specialized banks we see in the reservations in our data over time, increasing
from 12 in 1974 to 45 in 2012.




                                                                    65
Appendix E.3         Measuring Agricultural Spillovers

                 Figure A11: Distribution of Average Farm Size in Adjacent Counties




Notes: This graph plots the distribution of adjacent-county average farm size for the parcels in our main estimating
sample. The vertical dashed line corresponds to 160 acres, which is the size of a single quarter-section and the size of
most allotments.




                                                          66
                               Figure A12: Measuring Agricultural Spillovers




Notes: This figure depicts an example of how we identify agricultural spillovers--contiguous polygons of crops that
intersect multiple quarter sections--from the NWALT data. The two plots in the upper right corner are considered to
be part of one "synthetic farm," as described in Section 5.2. This synthetic farm can be seen to spill over marginally
onto the second plot from the left in the top row, but this second plot from the left is excluded based on our cutoff rule,
also described in Section 5.2. The two plots in the middle of the figure also form a "synthetic farm" in our coding.




                                                            67
Appendix E.4                                                      Measuring Latent Fractionation

Our measure of latent fractionation rests on the assumption that allotments not matched to the

ICR correspond to individuals who are decreased by 1930. We can validate this assumption by

leveraging the fact that allotment numbers were issued sequentially, which allows us to show that,

within a reservation, smaller allotment numbers belonged to older allottees and were associated

with a higher likelihood of not being recorded in the mid-1930s ICR. Figure A13 bins each reser-

vation's rank-normalized allotment numbers into 25 bins on the horizontal axis and plots nor-

malized birth-year by bin to show that smaller allotment numbers were associated with earlier

birth-years for the allotments that we do match to the ICR.39 The figure also plots the distribution

of unmatched allotments to illustrate that it is skewed towards low allotment numbers, relative to

a distribution of all allotments that is uniform by definition (because it splits the data into equal-

sized bins). This is evidence that allotments that we do not find in the ICR disproportionately

belonged to older individuals who where more likely to be deceased by the mid-1930s.

                                             Figure A13: Original Allottees' Age and Sequential Allotment Number
                unmatched to ICR: deviation from uniform dist




                                                                                                                                                       crosses: YOB, normalized (0,1) by res.
                                                                                                                                                  .8
                                                                .042

                                                                                                                                                  .7
                                                                 .04

                                                                                                                                                  .6
                                                                .038

                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                .036

                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                .034
                                                                       0               5            10            15           20            25
                                                                           25 bins: sequential allotment number, rank-normalized by reservation

Notes: This figure shows that, within each reservation, smaller allotment numbers belonged to older allottees (see scatter
plot) and were associated with a higher likelihood of not being recorded in the mid-1930s ICR.



  39
       Normalization (0­1) by reservation is needed because some reservations were allotted decades before others.




                                                                                                          68
      Figure A14: Relating Today's Measured Fractionation to Finding Allotments in the ICR



                                                     .25
              share of trust plots with 50+ owners




                                                      .2



                                                     .15



                                                      .1



                                                     .05



                                                      0
                                                           0   .2              .4              .6               .8   1
                                                                    share of plots not found in mid-1930s ICR

Notes: This graph plots each reservation's average number of trust parcels that are classified as highly fractionated in
Department of Interior (2013) against the reservation's average number of plots not found in the ICR




                                                                                    69
Appendix F          Extensions to Section 6

Appendix F.1      Tribal Lands

Table A6 reports on an expanded version of Table 1 that includes tribal plots (in 160-acre quarter-

sections). Tribal quarter sections include the one-half of reservations that were never allotted.

(These reservations are included for completeness, but they play no role in our results because all

of our spatial fixed effects are considerably finer-grained than the reservation.)

Table A7 re-estimates Table 2 with tribal plots included.

Table A8 re-estimates Table 5 with tribal lands included. Similar to Table 5, development is esti-

mated to have grown at a rate of two and a half times as fast on fee-simple land as on allotted-trust
        ^ee
land; ( F                  ^2012 = (0.45 + 0.29)/0.29. Development on tribal land also grew faster
            2012 + ^2012 )/

than on allotted-trust land, at about twice the rate; ( T^
                                                         ribe
                                                              2012 + ^2012 )/^2012 = (0.34 + 0.29)/0.29.




                                                   70
                      Table A6: Summary Statistics (Table 1) with Tribal Lands Added

   Panel A:                            Unallotted        Allotted                         Alloted vs. Unallotted

                                           (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
   Elevation                            1446.696          858.445         -588.251***       -19.349*        -10.914*       -6.605*
                                        [661.03]          [434.15]         (121.037)         (8.188)         (5.274)       (3.344)
   Ruggedness                            19.462            13.450           -6.013**         -1.451          -0.661         -0.178
                                         [25.09]           [29.41]           (2.223)         (1.348)         (1.134)       (1.040)
   Soil Quality                           7.406            10.446           3.041***         0.263*          0.192*         0.143*
                                          [5.22]            [4.33]           (0.814)         (0.117)         (0.087)       (0.070)
   Observations                         295,139            68,557

   Panel B:                               Trust            Tribal                             Tribal vs. Trust

                                           (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)
   Elevation                            938.100          1446.696         508.595***         18.977*        11.610*         7.283
                                        [459.61]         [661.03]          (112.819)         (8.008)        (5.907)        (3.942)
   Ruggedness                            14.010           19.462            5.452**          2.447**        1.678*          1.171
                                         [21.26]          [25.09]            (2.074)         (0.947)        (0.770)        (0.615)
   Soil Quality                           9.704            7.406            -2.299**          -0.151         -0.127        -0.114
                                          [4.43]           [5.22]            (0.798)         (0.132)        (0.099)        (0.080)
   Observations                          42,164           295,139
   Township Fixed Effects                                                                      Yes
   1/4 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                                                   Yes
   1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                                                                  Yes
Note: Panel A repeats Table 1. Panel B adds tribal quarter sections. Tribal quarter sections include the one-half of reservations that
were never allotted. (These reservations are included for completeness, but they play no role in our results because all of our spatial
fixed effects are considerably finer-grained than the reservation.) (b) Columns 1­2 present mean and standard deviations by land
tenure. Column 3 reports unconditional differences of fee-simple vs trust land, and columns 4­7 report differences conditional on
fixed effects. Significance levels are denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                   71
                                       Table A7: Table 2 with Tribal Lands Added

                                             (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)              (6)
   Fee Simple                             0.377***         0.360***          0.273***          0.268***          0.229***         0.232***
                                           (0.055)           (0.055)          (0.039)           (0.040)           (0.031)           (0.032)
   Tribal Land                              0.018             0.046            0.023             0.040             0.025            0.036*
                                           (0.028)           (0.028)          (0.025)           (0.026)           (0.020)           (0.021)
   Ruggedness                                               -4.153**                           -3.661**                            -3.265**
                                                             (1.587)                            (1.486)                             (1.469)
   Elevation                                               -0.620***                          -0.463***                           -0.480***
                                                             (0.126)                            (0.118)                             (0.120)
   Soil Quality                                            54.058***                          53.141***                           35.863***
                                                            (17.597)                           (19.967)                            (11.965)
   Adj. R2                                 0.4986            0.4989           0.5764            0.5765            0.6657            0.6657
   Observations                           267,340           267,340          266,420           266,420           265,819           265,819
   #Fixed Effects                          4,339             4,339           14,255            14,255            23,807            23,807
   Geographic Controls                        .             Linear           Binned            Binned            Binned            Binned
   Township Fixed Effects                    Yes               Yes
   1/4 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                     Yes               Yes
   1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                                                                                        Yes               Yes
Notes: This table has the exact identical structure to Table 2. This table introduces increasingly finer spatial fixed affects across columns:
Columns 1­3 use township fixed effects (panel a of Figure 3), columns 4 and 5 correspond to the fixed effects depicted in panels b and
c of Figure 3. Significance levels are denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




                                                                      72
                            Table A8: Adding Tribal Lands to Panel Results in Table 5

                                                            Z(Use)                  Development                    Cultivation
                                                      (1)            (2)           (3)       (4)                 (5)         (6)
  ^
  F : Fee Simple Land                             0.149***                       -0.046                        4.206***
                                                    (0.018)                      (0.064)                        (0.189)
  ^
  F
    1982 (F eeSimplei × 1982 )                     0.038***      0.038***       0.132***       0.137***        0.151***       0.142***
                                                    (0.002)       (0.002)        (0.007)        (0.003)         (0.029)        (0.004)
  ^
  F
    1992 (F eeSimplei × 1992 )                     0.051***      0.049***       0.207***       0.193***        -0.084**      -0.116***
                                                    (0.003)       (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.013)         (0.029)        (0.017)
  ^
  F
    2002 (F eeSimplei × 2002 )                     0.088***      0.086***       0.321***       0.314***         0.069*          0.028
                                                    (0.003)       (0.010)        (0.008)        (0.023)         (0.029)        (0.033)
  ^
  F
    2012 (F eeSimplei × 2012 )                     0.099***      0.099***       0.431***       0.445***        0.285***       0.231***
                                                    (0.003)       (0.010)        (0.007)        (0.027)         (0.028)        (0.038)
  ^
  T : Tribal Land                                  0.031**                        -0.135                        0.499**
                                                    (0.008)                      (0.074)                        (0.174)
  ^
  T
    2012 (T ribali × 1982 )                          -0.002      -0.002***      0.133***       0.123***       -0.135***      -0.146***
                                                    (0.001)        (0.000)       (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.017)       (0.004)
  ^
  T
    2012 (T ribali × 1992 )                       -0.006***       -0.006**      0.207***       0.185***       -0.313***      -0.329***
                                                    (0.001)        (0.002)       (0.004)        (0.008)         (0.018)       (0.012)
  ^
  T
    2012 (T ribali × 2002 )                       -0.007***        -0.007       0.334***       0.293***       -0.580***      -0.607***
                                                    (0.001)        (0.004)       (0.005)        (0.015)         (0.018)       (0.022)
  ^
  T
    2012 (T ribali × 2012 )                          -0.002         -0.002      0.386***       0.344***       -0.595***      -0.626***
                                                    (0.001)        (0.006)       (0.005)        (0.017)         (0.018)       (0.023)
  ShareDevelopedit                                                                                            -0.127***      -0.050***
                                                                                                                (0.007)       (0.007)
  ShareCultivatedit                                                             -0.025***      -0.089***
                                                                                 (0.003)        (0.015)
  ^1982                                            0.024***      0.024***       0.084***       0.095***       0.186***       0.179***
                                                    (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.016)        (0.004)
  ^1992                                            0.036***      0.036***       0.127***       0.154***       0.432***       0.423***
                                                    (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.004)        (0.008)        (0.016)        (0.012)
  ^2002                                            0.057***      0.057***       0.181***       0.231***       0.805***       0.792***
                                                    (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.005)        (0.015)        (0.016)        (0.021)
  ^2012                                            0.070***      0.070***       0.233***       0.288***       0.876***       0.860***
                                                    (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.005)        (0.017)        (0.016)        (0.022)
  Adj. R2                                           0.4925         0.8521        0.5851         0.8320         0.7521         0.9890
  Observations                                     907,167        906,973      1,820,067      1,819,878      1,820,067      1,819,878
  #Fixed Effects                                   19,321         181,568       33,745         364,149        33,745         364,149
  1/9 Twnshp Fixed Effects                            Yes                          Yes                           Yes
  Allotment Fixed Effects                                            Yes                          Yes                           Yes
  Trust Land's 1974 Share Developed                                               .6179          .6179
  Fee Land's 1974 Share Developed                                                  1.33           1.33
  Tribal Land's 1974 Share Developed                                              .5797          .5797
  Trust Land's 1974 Share Agricultural                                                                          10.33          10.33
  Fee Land's 1974 Share Agricultural                                                                            27.13          27.12
  Tribal Land's 1974 Share Agricultural                                                                         3.806          3.806
Notes: This table shows how the effect on land utilization of being held under fee simple or being held by a tribe has changed since
1974. Columns 1­2 consider the land utilization index as the outcome, columns 3­4 consider land development as the outcome,
columns 5­6 consider agricultural cultivation. In columns 1, 3, and 5, this table uses the more fine-grained spatial fixed effects in
Table 2. In columns 2, 4, and 6, it adds plot fixed effects, focusing73solely on within-plot variation. The coefficient-estimates on year
fixed effects are the ^t in equation (5). Further, the `Fee-Simple × year' coefficients report on the ^t in equation (5). Significance levels
are denoted by * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
Appendix F.2         Land Values

County assessor data are normally published at the county-level, and tend not to be available in

counties that are close to, or overlap with, reservations. Fortunately, Montana, Utah and Wash-

ington are the exception to this rule in that of each makes the state-universe of assessed prop-

erties available.40 What is more, these three states are home to a combined total of 55 reserva-

tions (representing nearly half our main sample of reservations that were ever allotted), and they

represent a broad spectrum of distinct land markets with varying degrees of development and

agriculture. To make the comparison as relevant as possible, we restrict our attention to parcels

within 10 or 25 miles of reservations. The choice of 10 or 25 miles presents a trade-off: lands

closest to the reservation likely form the best comparison group in terms of unobservables, but

land values in the most restrictive samples are likely dominated by the effect of the reservation

itself.41 Figure A15 depicts the set of parcels used for this analysis. After excluding tax-exempt

land we are left with roughly 1.7 million individual properties for which we know both land uti-

lization Z(Use) and land values per acre (LVPA). We estimate the following linear regression model:

ln(LVPAij ) =  × Z (U se)i + j +  Xi + ij ,                where the outcome is the natural log of the land

value per acre for property i, j is our preferred 1/9-township fixed effects, and Z (U se)i is the

same standardized land utilization index as before.




  40
     These data include individual property boundaries with valuations for the most recent tax year.
  41
     Somewhat surprisingly, in Montana land just outside reservations is more valuable than land a little further away
from reservation boundaries. This is explained by Montana reservations' proximity to amenities like Glacier National
Park, Flathead Lake, and several ski resorts. Washington and Utah exhibit the more expected pattern of lower land val-
ues closer to reservations. In Washington, expanding to a larger distance can mean including highly valuable properties
within the Seattle metropolitan area.


                                                          74
                                      Figure A15: Assessor Data Properties




           Reservations

           Parcels




Notes: This figure depicts assessed properties (grey) and reservations (pink) in Montana, Utah, and Washington State; 3
states that together have 55 reservations. We include parcels that satisfy two criteria: i) they are in reservation-adjacent
counties, and ii) they are within 25 miles of a reservation. Large, un-subdivided grey areas are government-owned
property that we exclude from the estimation sample.




                                                            75
