                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          COMPETITION AND QUALITY:
               EVIDENCE FROM HIGH-SPEED RAILWAYS AND AIRLINES

                                         Hanming Fang
                                          Long Wang
                                          Yang Yang

                                      Working Paper 27475
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27475


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




We thank Sumit Agarwal, Chong-En Bai, Jan Brueckner, Edward Coulson, Thomas Davidoff,
Edward Glaeser, Lu Han, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Ruixue Jia, Sanghoon Lee, Yatang Lin, Torsten
Persson, Wenlan Qian, Yu Qin, Thomas Ross, Tsur Somerville, Zheng Song, Kjetil Storesletten,
Matthew Turner, Ralph Winter, Anming Zhang, Junfu Zhang, Siqi Zheng, and Fabrizio Zilibotti
for helpful comments. We also benefited from discussants and participants at the AREUEA-
ASSA and TPUG-ASSA meeting 2020, NBER Summer Institute (2019), China Meeting of the
Econometric Society (2019) as well as seminar participants at the UBC, Fudan, ShanghaiTech
and Tsinghua. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hanming Fang, Long Wang, and Yang Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Competition and Quality: Evidence from High-Speed Railways and Airlines
Hanming Fang, Long Wang, and Yang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 27475
July 2020
JEL No. L1,L91,O18,R4

                                          ABSTRACT

The entry of High-Speed Railways (HSR) represents a disruptive competition to airlines,
particularly for short- to medium-distance journeys. Utilizing a unique dataset that contains the
details of all flights departing from Beijing to 113 domestic destinations in China since January
2009, we employ a difference-in-differences approach to examine the effects of HSR entry on the
quality of service provided by airlines as proxied by their on-time performance, and to identify
the channels through which competition leads to quality improvement. We document two main
findings. First, the competition from the entry of HSR leads to significant reductions in the mean
and variance of travel delays on the affected airline routes. Second, the reductions in departure
delays--which are controlled mostly by airlines, and the duration of taxi-in time--which are
controlled mostly by destination airports, are identified as the main sources of the improvement in
the airlines' on-time performance.

Hanming Fang                                     Yang Yang
Department of Economics                          CUHK Business School
Ronald O. Perelman Center                        The Chinese University of Hong Kong
for Political Science and Economics              12 Chak Cheung Street
133 South 36th Street                            Hong Kong SAR
Suite 150                                        China
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           zoeyang@cuhk.edu.hk
and NBER
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu

Long Wang
ShanghaiTech University
421 SEM, No.393 Middle Huaxia Road
Pudong district
Shanghai
China
wanglong@shanghaitech.edu.cn
1     Introduction
    There has been a long-standing interest in the effects of competition, which is widely
recognized as the drivers of improved product quality, operational efficiency, innovation, and
economic growth (Nickell, 1996; Holmes and Schmitz Jr, 2010; Amiti and Khandelwal, 2013;
Buccirossi et al., 2013). Establishing a causal impact of competition on productivity or
efficiency presents substantial challenges due to the difficulty of identifying a clean source of
exogenous variation in competition; it is even more challenging to isolate the mechanisms
through which competition impacts quality or productivity (Holmes and Schmitz Jr, 2010).
In this paper, we use the entry of Beijing-Shanghai high-speed rails (HSR) as an exogenous
increase in competition for the commercial airlines, and investigate whether competition
spurs quality improvement, and if so, how?
    The entry of High-Speed Railways (HSR) represents a disruptive competition to airlines
in the past decade, particularly for short- to medium-distance journeys (Adler et al., 2010;
Yang and Zhang, 2012; Fu et al., 2012; Behrens and Pels, 2012; Albalate et al., 2015).
Besides its exceptional punctuality, HSR offers improved traveling experiences, stable prices,
energy efficiency, and environmental sustainability compared to other modes of intercity
transportation.1 China is a perfect testing ground to analyze the competition between HSR
and airlines for several reasons. First, China has the largest and most extensively used HSR
network in the world; second, the airline industry in China is rapidly growing both in the
number of scheduled flights and passengers, yet it suffers from serious and chronic flight delays
which makes HSR a particularly attractive alternative mode of intercity transportation once
they are introduced; third, the data on flights' on-time performance (OTP) is available, and
OTP is well accepted as the key quality indicator for airlines; fourth, the staggered entries of
HSR lines in China offer unique opportunities to address the potential issues of non-random
placement of HSRs, and thus offer a clean identification of the causal effects of competition
on quality improvement.
    More specifically, we argue that the exact date of entry of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR
on June 30, 2011 is likely exogenous, and use it to construct treatment and control flights.
The Beijing­Shanghai HSR line was the first and only Beijing-outbound HSR line linking
Beijing to other cities during our main study period between January 1, 2009 and December
25, 2012. The second Beijing-outbound HSR line, named Beijing­Guangzhou line, began its
operations on December 26, 2012, 18 months after the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai
HSR line. Thus, our sample period covers both long pre- and post-HSR time windows, and
yet ensures that the estimated treatment effect is free of the possible contamination effects
    1
      The Green New Deal, proposed on February 7, 2019, advocates converting domestic air travel to inter-
city HSR travel in the US. It calls for a "10-year national mobilization." See https://apps.npr.org/
documents/document.html?id=5729033-Green-New-Deal-FINAL.


                                                    1
from other Beijing-outbound HSR entries. To address the concern that cities on the Beijing-
Shanghai HSR are selected, we conduct a robustness test that limits our control flights to a
subset of destination cities that are on the Beijing-Guangzhou line. The Beijing-Shanghai
line and the Beijing-Guangzhou line were planned at the same time, and their constructions
were also initiated in the same year; but the former began operating 18 months earlier only
because it was shorter and thus construction was finished sooner.2
    In this study, we use a proprietary and comprehensive dataset containing 865,967 non-
stop Beijing-outbound flights scheduled by 41 airlines to 113 domestic destinations in China
between January 1, 2009 and December 25, 2012. The richness of this flight data enables
us to study the impact of HSR competition on the airlines' quality improvement proxied by
their OTP, and to pinpoint the sources of the quality improvement. We use a difference-in-
differences (DID) strategy that exploits the variation in competition caused by HSR entry
across cities. The treatment group is flights that depart from Beijing Capital International
Airport (BCIA) for cities connected by the Beijing-Shanghai HSR, and the control group is
flights departing from Beijing for non-HSR destinations. Following Mayer and Sinai (2003)
and Prince and Simon (2015), we employ six different OTP measures as outcome vari-
ables, namely, the arrival/departure delay in minutes (the difference between the actual
arrival/departure time and scheduled arrival/departure time, which measures the intensive
margin of the flight delay), an indicator for whether a flight arrives/departs 15 minutes later
than the scheduled arrival/departure time (which measures the extensive margin of the flight
delay), as well as the actual travel time and excessive travel time.
    When we compare the OTP of the Beijing-outbound flights to the 11 destination cities
on the Beijing-Shanghai HSR (the treatment group) with Beijing-outbound flights to 102
non-HSR destinations (the control group) from January 1, 2009 to December 25, 2012, we
find that, at the intensive margin, the HSR entry leads to an average decrease of 2.54 minutes
(about 14.51%) in arrival delay minutes; and at the extensive margin, the HSR entry causes
a 2.5 percentage points reduction in arrival delays of 15 minutes or longer. We also find that
the entry of HSR significantly reduces the variance of flight arrival delay minutes. These
results are quantitatively similar when we restrict our control group to Beijing-outbound
flights to the nine cities on the Beijing-Guangzhou HSR that opened on December 26, 2012.
    To identify the source of improvement in quality, we investigate the impact of compe-
tition on each breakdown of flight schedule.3 We find that HSR entry leads to an average
reduction in departure delay by 5.28 minutes, which accounts for the largest decline among
   2
      See Table A1 in the Appendix for the gradual expansion of China's HSR system. Source: https:
//www.travelchinaguide.com/china-trains/high-speed/rail-network.htm
    3
      As illustrated in the flowchart in Figure 2, the departure delay is calculated as the time spent before
leaving the gate (the actual departure time minus the scheduled departure time) and the actual duration
consists of the taxi-out time (time spent on the departure runway), airtime, and taxi-in time (time spent on
the arrival runway).


                                                     2
all contributors to the post-HSR reduction in arrival delay minutes. In addition, HSR entry
leads to a reduction of the taxi-in time of 1.39 minutes on average at the destination airports
that are impacted by the HSR.
    We consider and rule out a variety of alternative explanations for our findings. First,
to address the possible contamination from the treatment to the control flights, we test the
impact of the HSR entry on air time and find that the HSR entry does not cause congestion
in the air corridor for the control flights. Second, to address the concern that the reduction
in arrival delays might be the result of a deliberately prolonged scheduled duration, rather
than a genuine improvement in OTP, we test the impact of the HSR entry on scheduled
duration and rule out this alternative explanation. Third, to examine whether a reduction
in the number of passengers on the treatment flights, which leads to faster check-ins, could
drive our findings, we use a subsample of flights during China's holiday periods when we are
ensured that all airports and airlines operate at full capacity. We still find that the HSR
entry leads to significant reductions in fight delays. Fourth, to address the possibility that our
results are driven by some flights with more serious delays being either eliminated or being re-
assigned with new flight numbers, we focus on a subsample of flights that existed both before
and after the HSR entry. We find that the improvement in the OTP of treated fights remains
in this subsample of flights. We also consider and rule out other alternative explanations,
such as more favorable military/air traffic control and more favorable scheduling to less busy
time slots, among others. Finally, we conduct placebo tests using a fictitious treatment
group, or a fictitious treatment date, and both placebo tests confirm that the competition
effects we estimated are not caused by other spurious factors.
    The richness of our flight data also allows us to better understand the heterogeneity in
the service quality response to the competition from the HSR entry. We find that non-
hub airlines and flights on short-to-medium routes (air distance within 1,200 km) are more
responsive to HSR entry than their respective counterparts. We also extend our analysis
to cover the sample period up to September 2015, by when 10 additional HSR lines were
introduced.4 We find that our results are robust to the extension of the larger sample.
Finally, we conduct a back-of-the-envelope calculation of a lower bound of the monetary
value of the time saving for air travelers on the routes affected by the HSR entries.
    This study adds to the literature that examines the causal effects of competition. Nick-
ell (1996), Schmitz Jr (2005) and Matsa (2011) present evidence of the positive effects of
competition on productivity and product quality, while Gal-Or (Gal-Or) suggests a negative
relationship. Aghion et al. (2005) and Hashmi (2013) document an inverted-U relationship
   4
    Table A1 in the Appendix summarizes the opening dates of all these HSR lines. Many cities were
connected to Beijing following the completion of some of these new HSR lines. For instance, the Beijing­
Guangzhou HSR line was launched on December 26, 2012, and the Shanghai­Kunming HSR line was launched
on September 14, 2014.


                                                   3
between import competition and innovation, whereas Cornaggia et al. (2015) reveal a nega-
tive impact of bank competition on innovation. Our findings also complement the literature
on airline competition. An extensive amount of empirical work shows that competition
within the airline industry improves the OTP of flights (Mazzeo, 2003; Rupp et al., 2006;
Prince and Simon, 2009, 2015; Greenfield, 2014; Goolsbee and Syverson, 2008). To the best
of our knowledge, ours is the first study that provides causal empirical evidence for how air-
line OTP is affected by a plausibly exogenous competition shock from a different sub-sector
in the transportation industry.
    This study also contributes to the growing literature on the economic impacts of transport
infrastructure projects. Much of the literature explored the effects of urban transportation
improvements in roads and railways on urban growth, urban form, congestion, and trade
cost (Baum-Snow, 2007; Duranton and Turner, 2011, 2012; Baum-Snow et al., 2017; Don-
aldson, 2018). In addition, the literature has shown that HSR has a positive influence on
intercity mobility (Chen, 2012; Tierney, 2012), market integration (Zheng and Kahn, 2013),
population density, and employment (Lin, 2017; Levinson, 2012). However, some studies
argue that HSR primarily benefits large cities, as opposed to small counties (Zheng and
Kahn, 2013; Qin, 2017). Moreover, recent studies that examined the impacts of HSR on the
airline industry focus on the market share and price response (Behrens and Pels, 2012; Yang
and Zhang, 2012; Fu et al., 2012). This study contributes to this strand of literature by
examining the causal impacts of China's HSR on the non-price characteristics of the airline
industry, which provides policy implications for other countries that may be contemplating
to build a HSR network.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief
background on the HSR networks and the airline industry in China. In Section 3, we
describe our dataset and present summary statistics. In Section 4, we present our empirical
strategies and the main results. In Section 5, we discuss various alternative explanations and
present falsification tests. In Section 6, we provide a back-of-the-envelope calculation for a
lower bound estimate of the time value from the improvement in OTP. Finally, in Section 7,
we conclude.


2    Background on the HSR and Flight Delays in China
   After 20 years of development and expansion, China's high-speed railways, which are
designed for speeds of 250 to 350 Kilometers per hour (kph), have become the largest and
most extensively used HSR network in the world. China's HSR network plan, which is often
dubbed "the Eight Vertical and Eight Horizontal plan," is based on eight major HSR lines
from the north to the south (the eight "verticals"), and another eight major HSR lines from


                                              4
the east to the west (the eight "horizontals"). Beijing is regarded as the most crucial starting
point of the vertical lines.
    The Beijing­Shanghai HSR line is the first medium- and long-haul Beijing-outbound HSR
track that links Beijing to 26 other domestic destinations (see Table A1 in the Appendix).5 11
of the 26 cities are linked with Beijing by non-stop commercial flights.6 The Beijing-Shanghai
HSR operates 45 trips in each direction on a daily basis. The opening of Beijing-Shanghai
HSR reduces the traveling time by train from around 13 hours to 4-5 hours for the 1,318 km
journey. Given that a direct flight between the two cities takes about two hours of air time,
so even with the longer travel time from the city to the airport than to the train station and
the longer boarding time for flights, train travel was clearly a much more time-consuming
option prior to the HSR entry. However, the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR
line on June 30, 2011 changed the situation completely by reducing the HSR travel time
substantially; moreover, the HSR is almost always punctual by the minute. In this sense, we
interpret the entry of HSR as a serious competition to the airline industry, particularly for
short-to-medium distance journeys.
    The Chinese airline industry has experienced tremendous growth in the past 30 years,
with air passenger traffic growing from 18.2 billion in 1987 to 837.8 billion in 2016.7 Despite
this huge growth, China's airline market is still in its nascent stage, and suffers from poor
operational efficiency and management. According to the 2018 world airport punctuality
report, none of China's airports is ranked in the top 20 in terms of OTP.8
    In this study, we focus on the flights departing BCIA. BCIA has been the world's sec-
ond busiest airport in terms of passenger traffic since 2010, but it ranked only 44th out of
China's 76 international airports in punctuality as of 2017. Specifically, of the 286,602 flights
departing BCIA in 2017, only 53.7% departed on time, and departure delays averaged at
around 48.5 minutes.9 The chronic and often unpredictable delays in BCIA are one of the
major complaints from travelers through BCIA.
   5
     Spanning a distance of 117 km, the Beijing­Tianjin HSR line is the first Beijing-outbound HSR. However,
owing to the short distance, there are no flights between Beijing and Tianjin.
   6
     These 11 cities are Changzhou, Hangzhou, Hefei, Jinan, Nanjing, Ningbo, Qingdao, Shanghai, Wenzhou,
Wuxi, and Xuzhou, which are denoted by the red train signs in Figure 1.
   7
     Source: http://www.caac.gov.cn/XXGK/XXGK/TJSJ/201702/t20170224_42760.html.
   8
     Source:                    https://www.oag.com/hubfs/Free_Reports/Punctuality_League/2018/
PunctualityReport2018.pdf.
   9
     The number is calculated using the data collected from Feichangzhun. Source: https://data.
variflight.com/analytics/OTPRankingbyAirport.




                                                     5
3         Data and Summary Statistics
    The flight data used in this analysis was obtained from a leading data company that
focuses on commercial aviation. The dataset in the baseline analysis contains 865,967 non-
stop flights, scheduled by 41 airlines, departing from Beijing to 113 domestic destinations
between January 1, 2009 and December 25, 2012.10 Figure 1 presents the 113 destinations
(denoted by the red, green and black train signs, as well as the blue airport signs) that
have non-stop flights from Beijing. Focusing on the sample period between January 1, 2009
and December 25, 2012 ensures that the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line, which opened on June
30, 2011, is the only Beijing-outbound HSR in the analysis; it also guarantees a sufficiently
long pre- and post-HSR time window. To ensure that the results can be generalized to the
full sample, we repeat the main analysis using an expanded sample from January 2009 to
September 2015. In one of the robustness checks, we also use international flights as a control
group.
                                    [Figure 1 About Here]
    For each flight in our sample period, we have the flight number, flight date, scheduled
departure and arrival times, actual gate departure and gate arrival time stamps, time spent
traveling from the gate to the runway (taxi-out time ), time spent traveling to the gate
after landing (taxi-in time ), and time spent in the air (air time ). We illustrate the various
components of flight duration in Figure 2. Following Prince and Simon (2015), we define a
route as a directional Beijing­destination pair for any carrier that provides non-stop services.
For instance, for flight CA1515, the destination city (e.g., Shanghai) refers to a route, CA
(China Air) stands for an airline company, and CA1515 represents a flight.
                                    [Figure 2 About Here]
    Following the existing literature, we construct two measures of OTP for both the arrival
and departure delays (Mayer and Sinai, 2003; Goolsbee and Syverson, 2008; Prince and
Simon, 2009, 2015). Specifically, Arrival Delay in minutes (ADM) represents the difference
between the scheduled and the actual arrival times. Arrival Delay 15 minutes (ADD15) is
a dummy variable equal to 1 if a flight arrives at the gate at least 15 minutes late, and 0
otherwise. We use the same approach to construct Departure Delay in minutes (DDM) and
Departure Delay 15 minutes (DDD15).
    To address the possibility that airlines could manipulate the OTP by artificially inflating
the scheduled duration (Mayer and Sinai, 2003; Prince and Simon, 2015), we construct two
alternative measures of OTP: Actual Travel Time (ATT) and Excessive Travel Time (ETT).
ATT is the time difference between the scheduled departure time and the actual arrival
time, which measures the actual travel time because any passenger needs to be at the gate
    10
         Cities without direct flights from Beijing are excluded from the analysis.


                                                          6
before the scheduled departure and will not leave the gate at the destination until the actual
arrival time. ETT is the difference between ATT and the minimum feasible travel time. The
minimum feasible travel time refers to the minimum travel time of the same flight observed
each month, which serves as a benchmark for determining the travel time when a flight
is free of any external influences such as air congestion, weather shocks, and air corridor
military controls. Therefore, ETT controls for any unobserved or observed time-varying
external influences and is immune to airline scheduling manipulations. In Figure 3, we plot
the distributions of ATT for the Beijing-outbound flights to the 11 destination cities along
the Beijing-Shanghai HSR, as well as that of the HSR trains.11 Figure 3 shows that the ATT
for flights (denoted by the black lines) exhibits large variations.
                                    [Figure 3 About Here]
    In Table 1, we provide the summary statistics of the OTP measures and other variables
at the individual flight level. In the post-HSR period, the mean values of ADM, DDM,
ATT, and ETT increase for both the treatment and control flights, which is a reflection of
the rapid growth of the passenger travel industry in China, but it is interesting to note that
the increases in the treatment group are smaller. The summary statistics at the aggregated
airline-route-month level (12,499 airline-route-month observations) are reported in Table A2
in the Appendix.
                                    [Table 1 About Here]


4      Empirical Strategies and Main Results
   In this section, we first present evidence that the HSR entry poses real competition to
the airline industry on the impacted routes. We then describe our empirical strategies, the
main empirical results, and various robustness checks.


4.1      HSR Entry as a Competition Shock: Evidence from Supply-
         Side Response
    We have argued that HSR is a disruptive transportation technology that poses compe-
tition to air travel, particularly for short-to-medium distance journeys. In this subsection,
we provide direct evidence that the HSR entry indeed is a competition shock to the airline
industry by examining the supply-side response of the airlines. Specifically, we examine the
impact of HSR entry on the number of flights operated in a given route at the flight-month,
   11
      According to the     latest World Bank report, the punctuality rate of HSR service in China is over 98
percent for departures     and over 95 percent for arrivals. Source: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/31801.        Therefore, we consider the travel time invariant for HSR travel, which is denoted by
the red vertical line in   Figure 3.


                                                        7
the airline-route-month, and the route-month levels. To study the average monthly flight
supply responses to the Beijing-Shanghai HSR entry, we run the following regressions:

                   Yi,m =  +  · Treatmenti · Afterm + µi + m +           i,m ,                     (1a)
                 Yj,d,m =  +  · Treatmentj,d · Afterm + j + d + m +               j,d,m ,          (1b)
                  Yd,m =  +  · Treatmentd · Afterm + d + m +              d,m ,                    (1c)

  where i, j , d, and m index the flight number, the airline, the route (or destination), and
year-month, respectively. Yi,m , Yj,d,m , and Yd,m represent the number of flights by flight-
month, by airline-route-month, and by route-month, respectively. Treatmenti , Treatmentj,d ,
and Treatmentd are dummy variables that takes value 1 if the flight i, the airline-route (j, d),
and the route d, respectively, belongs to the 11 HSR destinations connected to Beijing by the
Beijing-Shanghai HSR. Aftert is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 after June 30, 2011,
and 0 otherwise. Flight fixed effect µi is included in Eq. (1a); airline fixed effects j and
route (or destination) fixed effects d are included in Eq. (1b); and the route (or destination)
fixed effects d are included in Eq. (1c). Year-month fixed effects m are included in all three
equations. The standard errors are clustered at the flight-, airline-route-, and route-level in
Eqs. (1a), (1b) and (1c), respectively.
    Table 2 reports the results. It shows that the coefficients for the interaction terms are
negative and statistically significant, suggesting that the number of flights to the treated
destination cities decreases by 8.42% (= 1 - exp(-0.088)) to 17.47% (= 1 - exp(-0.192))
more than that of control destination cities in the post-HSR period. The results are consistent
with both the anecdotal evidence and the findings in Fu et al. (2012).12 We consider the
relative reduction in flight supply as direct evidence that the HSR entry poses a serious
competition shock to the airlines.13
                                     [Table 2 About Here]


4.2     HSR Entry and Flight Delays: Baseline Results
   Our basic specification to examine the causal effects of the Beijing-Shanghai HSR entry
on the OTP of the treated flights is a DID regression at individual-flight level:

             Delayi,j,d,t = +  · Treatmenti,j,d · Aftert + µi + hour + t +          i,j,d,t ,       (2)
  12
     Source: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-01-09/high-speed-rail-now-rivals-
flying-on-key-global-routes.
  13
     However, as we will show in Figure A2 , the overall number of flights departing BCIA has been going
up in this period because the Chinese air travel industry is proliferating.




                                                   8
where Delayi,j,d,t is one of the six OTP measures for flight i of airline company j departing
from Beijing to destination d on date t. Treatment is a dummy variable equal to 1 for treated
flights.  is the parameter of interest to be estimated, which captures the difference in the
average post-HSR delays of a treated flight relative to the post-HSR delays of a control flight.
µi refers to the flight fixed effect (flight number), capturing the unobserved factors that may
affect flight delays at the flight level. The term hour represents the hour fixed effects for the
flight's scheduled departure time, which account for any hourly variations that may affect
flight delays, such as the airport congestion and weather conditions.14 We also include the
date fixed effects t to eliminate any seasonal and national trends. The standard errors are
clustered at the destination city level to capture the potential heteroskedasticity of the error
terms across the destination cities.
                                      [Table 3 About Here]
    Table 3 presents the estimation results for Eq. (2). The estimated coefficients on
Treatment · After are consistently significantly negative in all columns, which suggests that
flights facing the new competition from the HSR entry improve their OTP in the post-HSR
period relative to control flights. Specifically, at the intensive margin (as shown in Columns
1 and 3), on average, the HSR entry reduces the arrival and departure delays for the treat-
ment flights by 2.54 minutes (about 14.51%) and 5.28 minutes (about 14.47%) more than for
the control flights. At the extensive margin (as shown in Columns 2 and 4), treated flights
in the post-HSR entry period are less likely than the control flights to experience arrival
(departure, respectively) delays longer than 15 minutes, by 2.5 (3.4, respectively) percentage
points. Using the alternative measures of OTP in Columns 5 and 6, we find very robust
results indicating that the HSR entry reduces ATT and ETT by 4.73 and 3.92 minutes,
respectively.
    Table A3 in the Appendix reports the estimation results when we include route fixed
effects interacted with the year-month fixed effects and airline fixed effects interacted with
the year-month fixed effects to address any omitted factors at the route (or destination) and
airline level. The results are consistent with our baseline results in Table 3.


4.3     Parallel Pre-Trends and Dynamic Effects of the HSR Entry
    In this subsection, we verify the parallel pre-trend assumption that is necessary for the
validity of the DID approach we used in estimating Eq. (2). We estimate the following
equation to verify the parallel pre-trends between the treatment and control flights, and to
  14
      Note that we do observe substantial changes in the scheduled departure time for the same flight because
of the rapid growth of the commercial airline industry in China in this period. Thus we can include both
flight fixed effects and departure hour fixed effects.




                                                     9
capture the dynamics of the improvement of the OTP to the entry of the HSR:

                      s=5
  Delayi,j,d,t =  +          s · Treatmenti,j,d · 1{t  Quarters } + µi + hour + t +   i,j,d,t   (3)
                      s=-4


where t  Quarters is a binary indicator which takes value 1 if the date t is in quarter
s  {-4, -3, -2, ..., 0, ..., 3, 4, 5} before/after June 30, 2011. The coefficient s measures
the difference in the response of OTP compared with the first 12 months (benchmark period
from January 1, 2009 to December 31, 2009) in our sample period between the treatment and
control flights. More specifically, the coefficient 0 measures the immediate response in OTP
during the quarter of the HSR entry. The coefficients 1 , . . . , 5 measure the responses in
the first to the fifth quarter following the entry of HSR, respectively. Similarly, coefficients
-4 , . . . , -1 capture the different trends of OTP response between the treatment and
control flights in each of the four pre-treatment quarters. We plot the estimated coefficients
of s for different measures of OTP in Figure 4. It shows that the treated flights start
responding to the entry of the Beijing-Shanghai HSR immediately after the introduction;
and the effects are persistent.
                                      [Figure 4 About Here]

   Figure 4 also shows that the parallel pre-trend assumption holds, as the -4 , ..., -1
coefficient estimates are statistically indistinguishable from 0, indicating that there is no
systematic difference in pre-trends between the treatment and control flights in their OTP
measures.


4.4    Effects on the Variance of the Delays
    The HSR entry may also result in a reduction in the variance of the delay minutes of the
treated flights, which can lead to substantial welfare gains if travelers are particularly wary
of unpredictable long delays. To examine the effect of HSR entry on the variance of flight
delays, we first compute, for each flight, the weekly variance of the OTP measures, ADM,
DDM, ATT and ETT; we then use them as the dependent variables in the DID analysis,
similar to the regression specification of Eq. (2), except that we control for the year-week and
flight fixed effects, instead of hour and date fixed effects. We also cluster the standard errors
at the destination city level. Table 4 reports that the interaction term Treatment · After is
negative and statistically significant, with the magnitude of the estimates indicating that
the standard deviation of the delays of the treatment flights reduces by around 23 to 24
minutes after the HSR entry. This suggests that the HSR entry reduces the unpredictable
long delays of the treatment flights.


                                                 10
                                       [Table 4 About Here]


4.5     Robustness Tests
Aggregate-Level Analysis. Our baseline results are conducted at the individual flight
level. To the extent that some flights may be eliminated or re-assigned, it is useful to
verify the robustness of our results at the airline-route-month level. For example, Air China
flight CA0000 from Beijing to Shanghai was changed to CA0123 in our sample period; the
individual flight level analysis will not be able to recognize that CA0000 and CA0123 are
in fact the same light.15 To deal with the complications from such unobserved changes,
we aggregate our individual-flight level data into the airline-route-month level using the
following specification:

               Delayj,d,m =  +  · Treatmentj,d · Afterm + j + d + m +                j,d,m            (4)

where Delayj,d,m is the average delay for airline company j departing from Beijing to des-
tination city d in year-month m. In the aggregate-level regressions, we control for airline
fixed effects, route (destination city) fixed effects, and year-month fixed effects. We estimate
weighted least squares (WLS) models using the number of flights on each airline-route-month
cell as the weight (Prince and Simon, 2009, 2015). The results are reported in Table 5. Con-
sistent with the baseline results, the coefficients on the interaction terms Treatmentj,d · Afterm
are negative and significant in all columns. The results are also quantitatively similar to the
results obtained at the individual flight level: the HSR entry leads to 3.4 minutes reduction
in the average arrival delay minutes of treated flights relative to the control flights.
                                     [Table 5 About Here]

A Narrower Control Group. In our baseline analysis, we assumed that the placement
of Beijing-Shanghai HSR is exogenous. Even though we provided evidence of parallel pre-
trend between the control and treatment flights in Figure 4, one may still be concerned that
the 11 destination cities affected by the Beijing-Shanghai HSR ­ the treatment group ­ are
different from the 102 destination cities in the control group, on factors such as the local
economy, industry distribution, and geographic characteristics. Such differences per se are
not an issue for DID approach to work, provided that the parallel pre-trend assumption is
satisfied. However, to ensure more comparable treatment and control groups, we create a
narrower control group consisting of only the nine destination cities (indicated by the green
train signs in Figure 1) along the Beijing­Guangzhou HSR line, which started operating on
  15
    In Section 5, we will also report results where we only include flights that appeared in both the pre-
and post-HSR entry periods. The results are robust.


                                                   11
Dec. 26, 2012.16
    Cities located along the Beijing­Shanghai and Beijing­Guangzhou HSR lines are defi-
nitely more comparable; in particular, both lines were initiated in the same plan in 2004,
and their constructions started at the same time in October 2008.17 The Beijing­Guangzhou
line was completed 18 months after the Beijing­Shanghai line only because of the difference
in length: the Beijing-Guangzhou and Beijing-Shanghai HSR lines are respectively 2,298 km
and 1,318 km in length. Indeed, as we report in Table A4 in the Appendix, the difference
between the treatment and control destinations in the key economic variables, such as popu-
lation, income, GDP, and the number of flights, etc. are economically small and statistically
indistinguishable from zero.
    Table 6 reports the estimation results using the narrower control group. The estimated
treatment effects  are statistically different from zero in all columns and the OTP improves
by 2.2 to 3.6 minutes depending on the delay measures. The results are both qualitatively
and quantitatively consistent with the baseline results reported in Table 3.
                                   [Table 6 About Here]


4.6    Sources of On-time Performance Improvement
    Tables 3-6 show that the airline industry reduces the mean and variance in flight delays
in response to the competition from the HSR entry. In this section, we attempt to isolate
the components in air travel, as depicted in Figure 2, that constitute the main contributing
sources of potential OTP improvement. As illustrated in Figure 2, we decompose the Actual
Travel Time (actual arrival time minus the scheduled departure time) into two parts: actual
duration for flight and departure delay ; and we can further decompose the actual duration
into taxi-out time, air time and taxi-in time. Note that the different components are subject
to the control of different parties: the departure delay, which measures the delay before
leaving the gate, is mostly under the airlines' control (Prince and Simon, 2009); the taxi-
out time and taxi-in time are, respectively, mostly under the control of the departing and
destination airport authorities; and air time is difficult to improve upon without sacrificing
safety or changing the plane models. Thus we expect that the major source of the OTP
improvement will be the reduction in departure delay.
    In Column 1 of Table 7, we find that departure delay decreases by 5.28 minutes in
response to the HSR entry. The coefficient is negative and statistically significant at the 1%
level. This confirms our intuition discussed above, as airlines could reduce the departure
delay by accelerating the check-in and boarding process and by better training the aircrews.
  16
     These nine cities are: Zhengzhou, Taiyuan, Luoyang, Wuhan, Yichang, Changsha, Xian, Guangzhou,
and Shenzhen.
  17
     Source: https://www.travelchinaguide.com/china-trains/high-speed/rail-network.htm


                                                12
    In Column 2 of Table 7, we find that indeed, the HSR entry does not seem to have a
statistically significant impact on the actual duration. In Columns 3-5 we examine the three
sub-components of actual duration, namely, taxi-out time, air time, and taxi-in time. The
results are somewhat surprising: we find that the HSR entry had a statistically significant
negative effect on taxi-in time and a statistically significant positive effect on air time. Since
the taxi-in time is likely to be substantially controlled by the airport authorities (Prince and
Simon, 2009), the result that the HSR entry reduces taxi-in time at a significant magnitude
(1.39 minutes on average) at the destination airports suggests that the destination airports
strive to optimize the usage of the runway resources in the post-HSR period for the treated
flights.
                                    [Table 7 About Here]


4.7    More HSR Entries After December 26, 2012
    Between December 26, 2012 and September 2015, 10 additional HSR lines entered service
in China. The number of destination cities that are connected to Beijing by HSR lines
increased from 11 to 33 during this period (see Table A1 in the Appendix for more details).
We examine the effects of all the HSR entries on the treated flights in this subsection.
Extending the analysis to include more HSR entries can also help us to address the concern
that the early HSR lines are selected to connect Beijing to the destination cities with the
most serious flight delays: if so, we would expect that the estimated treatment effects will
be smaller when we include later HSR entries in the analysis.
    Table 8 reports the results of regressing the different measures of OTP in the same
specification as Eq. (2) in the enlarged sample. The estimated coefficients of the interac-
tion term Treatment · After are both qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with our
estimates reported in Table 3. This provides additional evidence against the concern that
the baseline results reported in Table 3 are driven by the Beijing-Shanghai HSR line being
non-representative.
                                    [Table 8 About Here]


4.8    Heterogeneity Effects
   In this section, we explore the heterogeneity in the effects of HSR entry on hub versus
non-hub airlines, and on short-to-medium-haul versus long-haul flights.
   Hub airlines at BCIA may enjoy more market power than their non-hub peers, as a result,
hub and non-hub airlines may respond differently to the competition from the HSR entry.
According to the Civil Aviation Administration, China Air, China Southern Airlines, China
Eastern Airlines, Hainan Airlines, and Beijing Capital Airlines are the hub airlines of BCIA.


                                               13
    Panel A of Table 9 presents the estimated heterogeneity of the hub and non-hub flights.
Hub is a dummy equal to 1 if the flights belong to one of the five hub airlines, and 0 otherwise.
We use the sample period from January 2009 to September 2015 in this estimation. The
estimated coefficients on Treatment  After  Hub are significantly positive for all measures
of OTP, indicating that non-hub airlines are more responsive to the competition from the
HSR entry.
                                   [Table 9 About Here]

    Since the introduction of HSR imposes the most fierce competition for air routes within
1,200 km (Fu et al., 2012; Yang and Zhang, 2012), we use 1,200 km as a cutoff to categorize
flights into short-to-medium-haul and long-haul routes.18
    Panel B of Table 9 presents the results. STM is a dummy equal to 1 if the distance
between Beijing and the destination city is below 1,200 km, and 0 otherwise. The estimated
coefficients of Treatment  After  STM are significantly negative for all four measures of
OTP, implying that short-to-medium-haul flights are more responsive to competition from
HSR lines. Instead of using STM dummy, we also create indicators of different distance
categories. Figure 5 plots the coefficients of OTP response for the treatment flights for the
entire distribution of travel distances, ranging from 500 km to over 1,500 km, along with their
corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals. The coefficient estimates plotted in Figure 5
shows that, on average, the OTP improvement of treated flights upon the HSR entry is the
largest for short-haul flights.
                                     [Figure 5 About Here]


5        Alternative Explanations and Falsification Tests
    In this section, we consider several alternative explanations for our main findings reported
in Section 4, and also offer two falsification tests to further strengthen the causality of our
findings.


5.1      Alternative Explanations
Corridor and Airport Congestion. One concern is that, in response to the HSR entry,
airlines may allocate flights from treatment routes, i.e., routes that are now subject to the
    18
     According to Sachs (2010), HSR trains is the most efficient for journeys from three to four hours. Thus,
HSR trains impose the most fierce competition for journey distance within 1,200 km, given the average HSR
speed of 300 kph. Thus, the launch of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line serves as the strongest competition to
the airline routes between Beijing and the 11 destination cities along the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line given
the line's total track length of 1,300 km and total travel time of four to five hours.



                                                     14
HSR competition, to control routes. This may cause air corridor congestion in the control
routes and leads to a decrease in the OTP for the control flights. However, this alternative
hypothesis is inconsistent with our finding reported in Column 5 of Table 7, where we use
the air time as the dependent variable. We find that the HSR entry causes the air time of
the treatment flights to increase by 1.74 minutes on average relative to the control flights.
This suggests that air corridor congestion in the control routes is unlikely the source for our
main finding as reported in Table 3.
    In addition, we directly examine whether the HSR entry affects the allocation of the
departure hours of the control and treatment flights across different hours of the day. Figure
A1 in the Appendix plots the distribution of flights per hour at BCIA before and after
the HSR entry. We observe a similar number of treatment and control flights departing
throughout the day in the post-HSR period, especially in the peak hours (1 am, 6 am, 7 am,
9 am, 10 am and 10­11 pm). This suggests that our main findings in Table 3 are unlikely
due to the differential impact on the congestion delays in BCIA of the treatment and control
flights upon the HSR entry.

Schedule Manipulation. Another alternative explanation is that our finding of the re-
duced arrival delay minutes may be the result of a deliberately prolonged scheduled duration,
rather than an genuine improvement in the OTP, of the treated flights (Mayer and Sinai,
2003; Prince and Simon, 2015). However, this alternative explanation is inconsistent with
Column 6 of Table 7, where we report the response of scheduled duration to the HSR entry
of the treatment flights. We find that the estimated coefficient  for the interaction term is
not statistically significant, implying that the treatment flights do not adjust the scheduled
duration differentially from the control flights.

Fewer Air Travelers on the Treated Flights. Another alternative explanation for our
finding is simply that the treatment flights have fewer passengers after the HSR entry; fewer
passengers on the treatment flights can lead to faster check-in and boarding process, resulting
in a reduction in departure delays and better OTP.
    To address this alternative explanation, we use a subsample of flights around the three
most important Chinese holidays, specifically, the Spring Festival, the Mid-Autumn Day,
and the National Day. Due to the large scale migrant population movements around these
holidays, all modes of transportation, including airplanes, HSR, and intercity buses operate
at full capacity; thus for flights around these holidays, whether they are on the treated routes
or the control routes, the concern that fewer passengers on the treated flights is no longer
relevant.
    Specifically, we restrict ourselves to a subset of the observations seven days before and


                                              15
after the Spring Festival, three days before and after the Mid-Autumn day, and three days
before and after the National Day. The numbers of travelers taking flights during holiday
periods are comparable before and after the HSR entry. Table 10 shows significantly negative
treatment effects in this holiday subsample analysis, indicating that the decrease in the
departure delay is due to the entry of the HSR, rather than to a reduction in the number of
air travelers.
                                   [Table 10 About Here]

Flight Cancellation. Another alternative explanation is that, upon the HSR entry, the
airlines might have permanently culled some flights with poor OTP; thus, our findings could
result from a mechanical compositional change of the surviving flights, rather than genuine
quality improvement.
    To address this concern, we re-estimate Eq. (2) using only the subsample of flights that
operated continuously both before and after the HSR entry. We report the results in Table
11, and find that our findings are quantitatively and qualitatively robust to this subsample
analysis.
                                   [Table 11 About Here]

Delays of the Previous Flights. A further alternative explanation for our finding is
that the control flights in the post-HSR period experience more delays due to the delays of
incoming flights (so called "snowball" delays). We already controlled for flight hour fixed
effects in Eq. (2), but to further address this concern, we focus on a subsample of the
flights that depart from BCIA in the early morning (6 am to 9 am). It is well known that
fights departing early in the morning are less likely to be delayed due to the delays of the
incoming flights. The results in Table 12 show that the estimates of the interaction term are
significantly negative in all columns in this subsample analysis, with similar magnitudes.
                                   [Table 12 About Here]

Rescheduling to Less Congested Time Slots. Another alternative explanation is that,
facing the competition from the HSR entry, airlines may also improve the OTP of the treated
flights by rescheduling the treated flights to time slots that are less impacted by air traffic
congestion.
    In Figure A2 in the Appendix, we plot the average number of schedule flights between
January 2009 and December 2012 in 30-minute intervals throughout the day before and after
the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line on June 30, 2011. It indicates that the
number of flights increases in all time slots throughout the day after the HSR entry, which
is consistent with the fact that China's commercial aviation industry was in the process of


                                              16
rapid expansion in this period.
    To identify the peak and off-peak time slots, we divide the day into 24 slots. In Figure
A3 in the Appendix we plot the traffic volume and average departure delay minutes in each
of the 24 time slots before the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line. It shows that
the departure flights scheduled for the 1 am, 6 am, 7 am, 9 am, 10 am, 10 pm and 11 pm
slots have better OTP prior to the HSR entry. We call these time slots Better Slots in terms
of OTP of departures.
    We then estimate Eq. (2) using a binary variable Better Sloti,j,d,t as the dependent
variable. Better Sloti,j,d,t takes value 1 if the flight was scheduled to depart in one of the better
time slots described above, and 0 otherwise. In addition, we also calculate the aggregate
fraction of flights in the better time slots at the airline-route-month level and use it as
a new dependent variable. Results in Table 13 show that the estimated coefficients on
Treatment · After are neither positive nor statistically significant for both the individual
flight level analysis and the aggregate airline-route-month level analysis.
                                      [Table 13 About Here]

Outliers. One may also be concerned that our findings may be driven by outliers, for
instance, by some flights with extremely long delays. To examine whether the treatment
effects are driven by outliers, we also run a series of quantile regressions (Koenker and
Hallock, 2001). The estimated coefficients of the interaction term Treatment · After for the
nine deciles and the four OTP measures are plotted in Figure 6. We find that all four
measures of OTP show significant responses to the HSR entry in all deciles, and that the
OTP improvements are more substantial in the upper decile than in the lower quantile,
suggesting that flights with the poorest OTP are more responsive to the entry of HSR. This
also explains why the HSR entry reduced the variance of the delays as we reported in Section
4.
                                   [Figure 6 About Here]

Air Traffic Control. Finally, one may be concerned that our estimated treatment effects
may be driven from the military bases shifting their air traffic control on control routes in
the post-HSR period. It is a prori quite implausible, but to address it more formally, we
use an alternative control group consisting of only international flights, which are mostly
exempted from the air traffic control by the Chinese authorities, and are also not subject
to the competition from the HSR entry. Table 14 reports the results. It shows that the
estimated coefficients for the interaction term Treatment*After are qualitatively similar to,
and quantitatively even larger than, our baseline results reported in Table 3.
                                    [Table 14 About Here]


                                                 17
5.2    Falsification Tests
    As a final verification that our findings are not spurious, we conduct two falsification
tests. The first is a placebo test in which we create a fictitious treatment group that consist
of the nine destination cities linked to the Beijing­Guangzhou HSR line. As discussed above,
although these nine cities enter the HSR network after December 26, 2012, none of them was
linked to the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line between January 1, 2009 and December 25, 2012.
This test addresses whether the difference in the original DID regressions reflects the effect
of the HSR competition or the effect of just being chosen as an eventual HSR destination
city.
    In the second placebo test, we examine whether the original DID effects simply reflect
changes in the Chinese airline industry, or the effect of the broader planning and construction
of the HSR network. To do this, we create a fictitious treatment date. Specifically, we set the
introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line as occurring one year before when it actually
occurred, i.e. on June 30, 2010 (instead of the actual date of June 30, 2011). This fictitious
treatment date ensures that we still have long pre- and post-period data.
    In Tables 15-16, we report the regression results on the placebo treatment group and
placebo treatment date, respectively. In both placebo tests, we find that the estimated
coefficients of the interaction terms are not statistically significant. These findings reinforce
our interpretation that our results reported in Table 3 are driven by the treatment flights
responding to the competition from the HSR entry, and not spurious.
                                     [Tables 15-16 About Here]


6     The Back-of-the-Envelope Calculation
    In this section, we use our estimates to conduct a back-of-the-envelope calculation of a
lower bound of the value of the time savings resulting from the improvement in the OTP of
the treated flights for air travelers. Following Li et al. (2007) and Yang and Zhang (2012),
we consider two types of air travelers, i = 1 denotes the business travelers, and i = 2 the
leisure travelers. We calculate the hourly monetary cost of flight delay for type i  {1, 2},
which we denote by Vi , as follows:

                                                Wage
                                     Vi =  i         ,                                       (5)
                                                2000
where Wage denotes the average annual salary and i denotes conversion factors for type
i traveler relative to the average person in the population. According to the data released
by National Bureau of Statistics of China, the average yearly salary in Beijing in 2012 was



                                               18
CNY 62,676.19 The denominator, 2000, represents the average total hours worked in a
year.20 Following Li et al. (2007) and Yang and Zhang (2012), we set the conversion factor
for business and leisure travelers to be 1 = 9 and 2 = 3, respectively. Thus, the hourly
flight delay costs for business and leisure passengers are calculated according to Eq. (5) to
be CNY 282 and CNY 94, respectively. Note that, our estimated willingness to pay (WTP)
for reductions in flight delay is less than that in Gayle and Yimga (2018), which report that
travelers are willing to pay $1.56 per minute to avoid arrival delays; but they are close to
the WTP in Prince and Simon (2015), which show that the WTP for a one-hour reduction
in travel time is $36 and $15 for business and non-business travelers, respectively.
    We next calculate the total monetary cost C for all the passengers on a flight due to an
additional minute of delay:

                                            2
                                                              Vi
                                     C=          N ·  · i ·      ,                                    (6)
                                           i=1
                                                              60

where N denotes the total seat count,  denotes the occupancy rate of the flight, and i
denotes the share of passenger type i. According to the Civil Aviation Administration, 46%
of all airline passengers travel on business and 54% travel on leisure.21 That is, 1 = 0.46
and 2 = 0.54. Suppose that each flight has 200 seats on average and an occupancy rate of
80%, then the cost C for all passengers on a flight due to an additional minute of delay is
CNY 481.28.
    Given that our estimated reduction in the arrival delay for all treated flights before
September 2015 is 4.36 minutes (as shown in Column 1 of Table 8), a simple estimate of the
value of the time saving per flight from the reduced arrival delay in the post-HSR period
is equivalent to CNY 2,098.38 (=4.36*481.28). To obtain a lower bound estimate of the
monetary value of the improvement in OTP by treated flights due to the competition from
HSR entries, we use all flights along the HSR routes in the post-HSR period for calculation.
In our data, 796,191 treated flights fly from Beijing to the 33 HSR destinations between
June 30, 2011 and September 30, 2015. Thus on average, there are 187,370 (=796,191/4.25)
treated Beijing-outbound flights per year. We assume that Beijing-inbound flights achieve
similar improvements in OTP. Moreover, we assume a 5% annual discount rate. A lower
bound of the discounted present value of the time saving for air travelers taking round-trip
  19
      Source: http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/sjjd/201305/t20130517_74300.html.
  20
      Suppose people work 8 hours per day, 5 days per week, and 52 weeks per year. After excluding 10 days
of statutory public holiday, the total working hours are 8*5*52-8*10=2000.
   21
      Source: http://www.mot.gov.cn/tongjishuju/minhang/201806/P020180621341239857728.pdf.




                                                    19
flights on the affected routes due to the HSR entries is thus given by:

                        187, 370  2  2, 098
                                            = CNY 15.724 Billion.
                                0.05
    Notably, this is a lower-bound estimate of the benefits for air travelers on the treated
routes because it does not take into account the decrease in airfare caused by the entry of the
HSR, or the benefit gained by the travelers who switched from airline to HSR (see Yang and
Zhang (2012)); in addition, to the extent that passengers are risk averse to unpredictable
flight delays, the reduction in the variance of the flight delays also improves passenger welfare.


7     Conclusion
     High-speed railway is one of the major disruptive technologies in transportation in the last
twenty years, and the HSR entry has posed fierce competition for passenger air travel, espe-
cially short-to-medium-distance travel. In this paper, we use the entry of Beijing-Shanghai
HSR as an exogenous increase in competition to affected flights to the destination cities
along the HSR line, and investigate whether competition spurs quality improvement, and if
so, how.
     We first document direct evidence that HSR entry poses a competition shock to airlines
in affected routes by showing that the number of flights in the treated routes is reduced in
the post-entry period relative to the control routes. We then find that the competition from
the HSR entry significantly reduced the departure and arrival delay minutes of the treated
flights by an average of 2.54 minutes (about 14.51%) in arrival delay minutes; and at the
extensive margin, the HSR entry causes 2.5 percentage points reduction in arrival delays of
15 minutes or longer. We also find that the entry of HSR significantly reduces the variance
of flight arrival delay minutes. These results are quantitatively similar when we restrict our
control group to Beijing-outbound flights to the nine cities on the Beijing-Guangzhou HSR
that opened on December 26, 2012. In addition, decomposing the actual travel time, we find
that the decreases in the departure delay and taxi-in runway times are the major sources of
the improvement in OTP.
     We also evaluate and rule out an exhaustive list of alternative explanations for our find-
ings. The alternative explanations we examined include cancellation of flights on the treated
routes with poor OTP, rescheduling treatment flights to better time slots, delays of the
incoming flights, among others. We also conduct two falsification tests, one based on a ficti-
tious treatment group and another based on a fictitious treatment date, to rule out that our
findings are driven by spurious effects. The results from heterogeneity analysis further re-
veal that non-hub airlines, i.e. those with less market power, and flights on short-to-medium


                                               20
distance routes, are more responsive to HSR entry in their OTP improvement. Finally, we
provide a back-of-the-envelope estimate of the lower bound of the values from the time sav-
ings by air travelers due to the improvement of OTP, which amounts to more than 15.7 billion
CNY. Our paper thus contributes to the literature on the causal impact of competition on
quality, and on the economic benefits of HSR.


References
Adler, N., E. Pels, and C. Nash (2010). High-speed Rail and Air Transport Competition: Game Engineering
  as Tool for Cost-benefit Analysis. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 44 (7), 812­833.
Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griffith, and P. Howitt (2005). Competition and Innovation: An
  Inverted-U Relationship. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (2), 701­728.
Albalate, D., G. Bel, and X. Fageda (2015). Competition and Cooperation between High-speed Rail and Air
  Transportation Services in Europe. Journal of Transport Geography 42, 166­174.
Amiti, M. and A. K. Khandelwal (2013). Import Competition and Quality Upgrading. Review of Economics
  and Statistics 95 (2), 476­490.
Baum-Snow, N. (2007). Did Highways Cause Suburbanization? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2),
  775­805.
Baum-Snow, N., L. Brandt, J. V. Henderson, M. A. Turner, and Q. Zhang (2017). Roads, Railroads, and
  Decentralization of Chinese Cities. Review of Economics and Statistics 99 (3), 435­448.
Behrens, C. and E. Pels (2012). Intermodal Competition in the London­Paris Passenger Market: High-Speed
  Rail and Air Transport. Journal of Urban Economics 71 (3), 278­288.
Buccirossi, P., L. Ciari, T. Duso, G. Spagnolo, and C. Vitale (2013). Competition Policy and Productivity
  Growth: An Empirical Assessment. Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (4), 1324­1336.
Chen, C.-L. (2012). Reshaping Chinese Space-economy through High-speed Trains: Opportunities and
  Challenges. Journal of Transport Geography 22.
Cornaggia, J., Y. Mao, X. Tian, and B. Wolfe (2015). Does Banking Competition Affect Innovation? Journal
  of Financial Economics 115 (1), 189­209.
Donaldson, D. (2018). Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 108 (4-5), 899­934.
Duranton, G. and M. A. Turner (2011). The Fundamental Law of Road Congestion: Evidence from US
  Cities. American Economic Review 101 (6), 2616­52.
Duranton, G. and M. A. Turner (2012). Urban Growth and Transportation. Review of Economic Stud-
  ies 79 (4), 1407­1440.
Fu, X., A. Zhang, and Z. Lei (2012). Will China's Airline Industry Survive the Entry of High-speed Rail?
  Research in Transportation Economics 35 (1), 13­25.
Gal-Or, E. Quality and Quantity Competition.
Gayle, P. G. and J. O. Yimga (2018). How much do Consumers Really Value Air Travel on-time Performance,
  and to What Extent are Airlines Motivated to Improve their On-time Performance? Economics of
  Transportation 14, 31­41.
Goolsbee, A. and C. Syverson (2008). How do Incumbents Respond to the Threat of Entry? Evidence from
  the Major Airlines. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4), 1611­1633.




                                                   21
Greenfield, D. (2014). Competition and Service Quality: New Evidence from the Airline Industry. Economics
   of Transportation 3 (1), 80­89.
Hashmi, A. R. (2013). Competition and Innovation: The Inverted-U Relationship Revisited. Review of
   Economics and Statistics 95 (5), 1653­1668.
Holmes, T. J. and J. A. Schmitz Jr (2010). Competition and Productivity: a Review of Evidence. Annual
   Review of Economics 2 (1), 619­642.
Koenker, R. and K. F. Hallock (2001). Quantile Regression. Journal of Economic Perspectives 15 (4),
   143­156.
Levinson, D. M. (2012). Accessibility Impacts of High Speed Rail. Journal of Transport Geography 22,
   288­291.
Li, X., G.-c. LIU, M.-c. YAN, and W. ZHANG (2007). The Economic Loss of Airlines and Passengers Caused
   by Flight Delays [J]. Systems Engineering 12, 005.
Lin, Y. (2017). Travel Costs and Urban Specialization Patterns: Evidence from China's High Speed Railway
   System. Journal of Urban Economics 98, 98­123.
Matsa, D. A. (2011). Competition and Product Quality in the Supermarket Industry. The Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 126 (3), 1539­1591.
Mayer, C. and T. Sinai (2003). Network Effects, Congestion Externalities, and Air Traffic Delays: Or Why
   not all Delays are Evil. American Economic Review 93 (4), 1194­1215.
Mazzeo, M. J. (2003). Competition and Service Quality in the US Airline Industry. Review of Industrial
   Organization 22 (4), 275­296.
Nickell, S. J. (1996). Competition and Corporate Performance. Journal of Political Economy 104 (4), 724­
   746.
Prince, J. T. and D. H. Simon (2009). Multimarket Contact and Service Quality: Evidence from On-time
   Performance in the US Airline Industry. Academy of Management Journal 52 (2), 336­354.
Prince, J. T. and D. H. Simon (2015). Do Incumbents Improve Service Quality in Response to Entry?
   Evidence from Airlines' On-time Performance. Management Science 61 (2), 372­390.
Qin, Y. (2017). `No County Left Behind?'The Distributional Impact of High-speed Rail Upgrades in China.
   Journal of Economic Geography 17 (3), 489­520.
Rupp, N., D. Owens, L. Plumly, et al. (2006). Does Competition Influence Airline On-time Performance.
   Advances in Airline Economics 1, 251­272.
Sachs, G. (2010). China Transportation: Airlines-High Speed Rail Less of a Threat Than You May Think.
   Report issued on Oct 28, 2010.
Schmitz Jr, J. A. (2005). What Determines Productivity? Lessons from the Dramatic Recovery of the US
   and Canadian Iron ore Industries following their Early 1980s Crisis. Journal of Political Economy 113 (3),
   582­625.
Tierney, S. (2012). High-speed Rail, the Knowledge Economy and the Next Growth Wave. Journal of
   Transport Geography 22, 285­287.
Yang, H. and A. Zhang (2012). Effects of High-speed Rail and Air Transport Competition on Prices, Profits
   and Welfare. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 46 (10), 1322­1333.
Zheng, S. and M. E. Kahn (2013). China's Bullet Trains Facilitate Market Integration and Mitigate the Cost
   of Megacity Growth. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 201209247.




                                                     22
                                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics: Flight Level
                                                            Treatment                               Control
                                                 Before               After              Before               After
                                               Mean   S.D          Mean    S.D         Mean   S.D          Mean    S.D
                        ADM                17.32 41.91              17.51    35.99      20.42 40.35         22.64   42.99
                        ADD15               0.26  0.44               0.28     0.45       0.35  0.48         0.37     0.48
                        DDM                34.73 44.53               36.5    38.26      32.41 41.48         39.37   46.83
                        DDD15               0.68  0.47               0.74     0.44       0.66  0.47          0.74    0.44
                        ATT               129.65 49.09             131.21     43.3     158.17 66.74        166.58   68.51
                        ETT                32.71 44.44              32.53    38.16      33.09 43.48         36.78   44.79
23




                        Actual Duration    94.97 20.1               94.81    19.51     125.68 50.35        127.45   50.33
                        Schedule Duration 119.45 19.69             123.89    19.92     142.04 48.44        148.93   48.35
                        Taxi-in Time      15.14 9.73                13.61     9.48     14.37    9.8         14.46   10.21
                        Taxi-out Time     18.49 13.24               18.11    11.49      19.35 16.2          18.97   15.38
                        Air Time           62.79 23.9               64.35    23.58      93.19 50.65        94.92    51.02
                        Observations               98,987               107,266           292,818             366,896
     Notes : This table presents the summary statistics of the treatment and control sample in the baseline analysis. The sample includes
     all Beijing-outbound flights between January 1, 2009 and December 25, 2012. The treatment sample consists of flights departing from
     Beijing to cities along the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line, and the control sample consists of flights departing from Beijing to other non-HSR
     cities. The definitions and constructions of the variables are introduced in detail in Section 3.
                   Table 2: Effect of Competition on the Number of Flights
       Dep. Variables                        ln(Number of Flights)
                            Flight-Route-Month Airline-Route-Month            Route-Month
                                    (1)                 (2)                       (3)
       Treatment*After            -0.088***                -0.135***             -0.192**
                                   (0.015)                  (0.048)               (0.092)

       Observations                 47,391                   15,374                4,751
       R-squared                     0.512                    0.865                0.959
       Year-Month FE                  Yes                      Yes                  Yes
       Flight FE                      Yes                      No                   No
       Airline FE                     No                       Yes                  No
       Route FE                       No                       Yes                  Yes
Notes : This table reports the results of estimating Equation (1). The sample period is between
January 1, 2009 and December 25, 2012. Supply in Columns (1), (2), and (3) is the number of flights
aggregated at the flight-route-month, airline-route-month, and route-month cells, respectively. The
year-month fixed effects are included in all specifications. The flight fixed effects are included in
Column (1), airline and route fixed effects are included in Column (2), and route fixed effects are
included in Column (3). Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We
use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                 24
                        Table 3: Effect of Competition on the On-time performance Measures: Flight Level Results
                         Dep. Variables        ADM        ADD15           DDM        DDD15           ATT            ETT
                         Model                  (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)             (5)            (6)
                         Treatment*After     -2.539***   -0.025***      -5.282***   -0.034***      -4.726***     -3.919***
                                              (0.230)     (0.002)        (0.224)     (0.002)        (0. 236)      (1.240)

                         Observations         865,967     865,967        865,967     865,967        865,967       865,967
25




                         R-squared             0.266       0.196          0.254       0.209          0.636         0.208
                         Hour FE                Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
                         Date FE                Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
                         Flight FE              Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes            Yes           Yes
     Notes : This table reports the results of estimating Equation (2). We examine the six measures of OTP: Arrival Delay in minutes
     (ADM), Arrival Delay 15 minutes (ADD15), Departure Delay in minutes (DDM), Departure Delay 15 minutes (DDD15), actual travel
     time (ATT), and excessive travel time (ETT). The sample period is from January 1, 2009 to December 25, 2012. The hour, date, and
     flight fixed effects are included in all specifications. Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***,
     **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
Table 4: Effect of Competition on the Variance of On-time Performance: Flight-Weekly
Level Results
   Dep. Variables       Var. of ADM        Var. of DDM         Var. of ATT       Var. of ETT
                             (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)
   Treatment*After       -475.113***        -487.390***        -509.221***       -507.734***
                           (58.658)           (59.993)           (70.310)          (70.426)

   Observations            150,019            150,019            150,019            150,019
   R-squared                0.100              0.117              0.049              0.049
   Year-Week FE              Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
   Flight FE                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
Notes : This table reports the results of variance analysis. The dependent variable is the weekly
variance of OTP measures. The sample period is from January 1, 2009 to December 25, 2012. The
year-week and flight fixed effects are included in all specifications. Standard errors clustered by
destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                26
               Table 5: Effect of Competition on the On-Time Performance Measures: Airline-Route-Month Level Results
                       Dep. Variables        ADM        ADR15           DDM        DDR15          ATT            ETT
                                              (1)        (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)            (6)
                       Treatment*After     -3.419**    -0.028***      -5.445***   -0.043**      -5.300***      -4.628***
                                            (1.441)     (0.011)        (1.723)     (0.021)       (1.217)        (1.195)

                       Observations         12,499      12,499         12,499      12,499         12,499         12,499
27




                       R-squared            0.610        0.640          0.613       0.640         0.958           0.530
                       Year-Month FE         Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes
                       Airline FE            Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes
                       Route FE              Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes             Yes
     Notes : This table reports the results of estimating the WLS models based on Equation (4), weighting each observation by the number
     of flights in each cell. We examine the six measures of OTP at the airline-route-month level. The sample period is from January 1, 2009
     to December 25, 2012. The year-month, airline, and route fixed effects are included in all specifications. Standard errors clustered by
     destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     Table 6: Effect of Competition on the On-time Performance Measures: Beijing­Shanghai HSR (Treatment) vs. Beijing­
     Guangzhou HSR (Control)
                      Dep. Variables         ADM        ADD15            DDM        DDD15            ATT            ETT
                                              (1)        (2)              (3)        (4)              (5)            (6)
                      Treatment*After      -2.241***   -0.035***       -2.991***   -0.030***       -3.587***      -2.345***
                                            (0.284)     (0.003)         (0.277)     (0.011)         (0.285)        (0.283)

                      Observations          400,158     400,158         400,158     400,158         400,158        400,158
28




                      R-squared              0.296       0.212           0.274       0.213           0.577          0.238
                      Hour FE                 Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes
                      Date FE                 Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes
                      Flight FE               Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes             Yes            Yes
     Notes : This table reports the results of estimating the HSR competition effects in the subsample. The sample period is from January
     1, 2009 to December 25, 2012. The treatment group includes flights departing from Beijing to the 11 destinations linked to the Beijing­
     Shanghai HSR line. The control group includes flights departing from Beijing to the 9 destinations that would later be linked to the
     Beijing­Guangzhou HSR line after December 26, 2012. The hour, date, and flight fixed effects are included in all specifications. Standard
     errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
     respectively.
                            Table 7: Sources of Quality Improvement from Competition: Flight Level Results
                                                                         Components of Actual Duration
          Dep. Variables       Departure Delay     Actual Duration       Taxi-out Taxi-in     Air time           Scheduled Duration
          Model                       (1)                (2)                (3)       (4)       (5)                      (6)
          Treatment*After         -5.282***             0.391              0.117  -1.389*** 1.740***                   0.819
                                   (0.224)             (0.541)            (0.086)  (0.055)    (0.124)                 (0.941)

          Observations             865,967              865,967           865,387     865,387      865,387             865,967
29




           R-squared                0.254                0.929             0.097       0.141        0.813               0.976
          Hour FE                    Yes                  Yes               Yes         Yes          Yes                 Yes
          Date FE                    Yes                  Yes               Yes         Yes          Yes                 Yes
          Flight FE                  Yes                  Yes               Yes         Yes          Yes                 Yes
     Notes : This table reports the results of estimating the effects of the HSR introduction on the departure delay, actual duration, and
     scheduled duration. Actual Duration is divided into taxi-out time (Column 3), taxi-in time (Column 4) and air time (Column 5). The
     sample period is from January 1, 2009 to December 25, 2012. The hour, date, and flight fixed effects are included in the individual
     regressions. Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the
     1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
             Table 8: Effect of Competition on the On-Time Performance Measures: All HSR Entries up to September 2015
                      Dep. Variables         ADM         ADD15            DDM         DDD15           ATT             ETT
                                              (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)             (5)             (6)
                      Treatment*After      -4.357***    -0.024***       -3.553***   -0.039***       -2.455***      -2.154***
                                            (0.274)      (0.001)         (0.116)     (0.001)         (0.130)        (0.128)

                      Observations         2,001,362    2,001,362       2,001,362    2,001,362      2,001,362      2,001,362
30




                      R-squared              0.231        0.196           0.246        0.220          0.564          0.197
                      Hour FE                 Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
                      Date FE                 Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
                      Flight FE               Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
     Notes : This table reports the results of estimating the HSR competition effects in an extended sample. The sample period is from
     January 2009 to September 2015. The number of treated destinations increased from 11 to 33 in September 2015. The hour, date, and
     flight fixed effects are included in all specifications. Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***,
     **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
            Table 9: Heterogeneous Effects of the Competition on the On-Time Performance Measures: Flight Level Results
                                        Panel A. Hub Airlines Heterogeneity                     Panel B. Distance Heterogeneity
         Dep. Variable                ADM        DDM         ATT        ETT                 ADM        DDM         ATT        ETT
                                       (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)                 (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)
         Treatment*After            -6.793***    -3.780*** -3.079***       -1.433***       -2.696**      1.054        -0.889      -0.556
                                     (0.415)      (0.176)    (0.196)        (0.193)         (1.331)     (0.989)      (0.967)     (0.843)
         Treatment*After*Hub        3.698***       0.344*   0.947***         0.422*
                                     (0.473)      (0.200)    (0.224)        (0.227)
         Treatment*After*STM                                                              -1.252***    -3.781***    -2.825**    -2.737***
                                                                                           (0.068)      (0.759)      (1.425)     (0.891)
31




         Observations               2,001,362    2,001,362    2,001,362    2,001,362      2,001,362    2,001,362   2,001,362    2,001,362
         R-squared                    0.231        0.246        0.564        0.197          0.346        0.517       0.890        0.363
         Hour FE                       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
         Date FE                       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
         Flight FE                     Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
     Notes : This table examines the heterogeneity in the HSR competition effects on hub airlines and distance. Hub is a dummy equal to 1 if
     the flights are under Air China, China South Airlines, China East Airlines, Hainan Airlines, or Beijing Capital Airlines, and 0 otherwise.
     STM is a dummy equal to 1 if the distance between Beijing and the destination is below 1200 km and 0 otherwise. We examine the four
     measures of OTP: arrival delay in minutes (ADM), departure delay in minutes (DDM), actual travel time (ATT), and excessive travel
     time (ETT). The hour, date, and flight fixed effects are included in all specifications. The estimations are conducted at the individual
     level. Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
     and 10% levels, respectively.
            Table 10: Subsample Analysis: Only Flights in the Holiday Periods
 Dep. Variables        ADM       ADD15          DDM        DDD15           ATT            ETT
                        (1)       (2)            (3)        (4)             (5)            (6)
 Treatment*After     -1.628**    -0.017**     -2.505***    -0.024**      -3.558***      -2.001**
                      (0.798)     (0.008)      (0.781)      (0.011)       (0.838)        (0.826)

 Observations         54,719      54,719        54,719      54,719         54,719        54,719
 R-squared             0.266       0.204        0.239        0.220         0.700         0.202
 Hour FE                Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Date FE                Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Flight FE              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
Notes : This table reports the results of estimating Equation (2) on a subsample that includes
observations seven days before/after the Spring Festival, three days before/after the Mid-Autumn
Day, and three days before/after the National Day. The sample period is from January 1, 2009
to December 25, 2012. The hour, date, and flight fixed effects are included in all specifications.
Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to
denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                               32
                    Table 11: Subsample Analysis: Only Flights that Operated Both Before and After the HSR Entry
                      Dep. Variables         ADM         ADD15           DDM         DDD15            ATT            ETT
                                              (1)         (2)             (3)         (4)              (5)            (6)
                      Treatment*After      -2.579***    -0.026***      -5.374***    -0.035***      -4.717***       -3.975***
                                            (0.230)      (0.003)        (0.229)      (0.003)        (0.234)         (0.362)
33




                      Observations          716,304      716,304        716,304      716,304        716,304         716,304
                      R-squared              0.262        0.193          0.253        0.206          0.637           0.237
                      Hour FE                 Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
                      Date FE                 Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
                      Flight FE               Yes          Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes             Yes
     Notes : This table includes flights that existed both before and after the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line. The hour, date,
     and flight fixed effects are included in all specifications. Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use
     ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                               Table 12: Subsample Analysis: Only Morning Flights Between 6 am and 9 am
                      Dep. Variables         ADM         ADD15            DDM         DDD15           ATT             ETT
                                              (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)             (5)             (6)
                      Treatment*After      -2.057***    -0.019***       -2.717***   -0.023***       -2.992***      -1.993***
                                            (0.419)      (0.004)         (0.401)     (0.005)         (0.425)        (0.417)
34




                      Observations          216,840      216,840         216,840      216,840        216,840        216,840
                      R-squared              0.318        0.246           0.330        0.257          0.692          0.268
                      Hour FE                 Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
                      Date FE                 Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
                      Flight FE               Yes          Yes             Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes
     Notes : This table focuses on a subsample consisting only of flights departing in the early morning (6am to 9am). The hour, date and
     flight fixed effects are included in all specifications. Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***,
     **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
               Table 13: DID Tests on the Probability of Schedule Reshuffling
   Sample                       Flight Level                      Aggregate Level
   Dep. Variables        Better Time Slot Dummy           Monthly Better Time Slot Fraction
                                     (1)                                 (2)
   Treatment*After                  -0.021                                 -0.020
                                   (0.019)                                (0.021)

   Observations                    865,967                                 12,499
   R-squared                        0.781                                  0.595
   Date FE                           Yes                                     No
   Year-Month FE                     No                                     Yes
   Flight FE                         Yes                                     No
   Airline FE                        No                                     Yes
   Route FE                          No                                     Yes
Notes : This table examines whether the affected airlines are more likely to allocate their flights
to preferred time zones after the introduction of the HSR. The dependent variable in Column (1)
is a dummy equal to 1 if the flight was scheduled in the better time slots and 0 otherwise. The
dependent variable in Column (2) is the proportion of flights in the better time slots over the total
flights in the airline-route-month cells. The date and flight fixed effects are included in Column (1)
and the year-month, airline, and route fixed effects are included in Column (2). Standard errors
clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                 35
Table 14: Effect of Competition on the On-Time Performance Measures: International
Flights as the Control Flights
 Dep. Variables          ADM         ADD15             DDM        DDD15             ATT             ETT
                          (1)         (2)               (3)        (4)               (5)             (6)
 Treatment*After       -2.215***    -0.026***       -2.141***    -0.036***       -2.606***       -2.684***
                        (0.363)      (0.003)         (0.384)      (0.003)         (0.655)         (0.867)

 Observations           342,175      342,175           342,175    342,175         342,175         342,175
 R-squared               0.290        0.208             0.259      0.277           0.869           0.326
 Hour FE                  Yes          Yes               Yes        Yes             Yes             Yes
 Date FE                  Yes          Yes               Yes        Yes             Yes             Yes
 Flight FE                Yes          Yes               Yes        Yes             Yes             Yes
Notes : This table reports the results of estimating the effect of the HSR introduction on departure
delays with the control group consisting only of international flights. The hour, date, and flight
fixed effects are included in all specifications. Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported
in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.




                                                  36
                                             Table 15: Placebo Tests: Fictitious Treatment Group
                             Dep. Variables        ADM       ADR15         DDM      DDR15          ATT         ETT
                                                    (1)       (2)           (3)      (4)            (5)         (6)
                             Treatment*After       0.416      -0.006       -2.102    0.001        0.046        -0.593
                                                  (1.619)    (0.013)      (1.320)   (0.016)      (1.219)      (1.048)

                             Observations          10,203    10,203       10,203     10,203       10,203       10,203
                             R-squared              0.509     0.553       0.529       0.652       0.936         0.382
37




                             Year-Month FE           Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
                             Airline FE              Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
                             Route FE                Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
     Notes : This table reports the results of a placebo test by creating a fictitious treatment group consisting of nine destinations linked to
     the Beijing­Guangzhou HSR line after December 26, 2012. The destinations in the fictitious treatment group were not linked to the
     Beijing­Shanghai HSR line between January 1, 2009 and December 25, 2012. In this regression, the 11 real treated destinations linked
     to the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line are excluded. We examine the six measures of OTP at the airline-route-month level. The year-month,
     airline, and route fixed effects are included in the aggregate level analysis. Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in
     parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                             Table 16: Placebo Tests: Fictitious Treatment Date
                             Dep. Variables        ADM      ADR15         DDM      DDR15          ATT          ETT
                                                    (1)      (2)           (3)      (4)            (5)          (6)
                             Treatment*After       2.366     0.008        1.011      0.017        1.420       0.086
                                                  (1.985)   (0.009)      (1.752)    (0.017)      (1.587)     (1.145)

                             Observations          6,129     6,129        6,158      6,129        6,129       6,129
38




                             R-squared             0.498     0.606        0.540      0.655        0.921       0.384
                             Year-Month FE          Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
                             Airline FE             Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
                             Route FE               Yes       Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
     Notes : This table tests a fictitious treatment date, which is placed at a point (e.g., on June 30, 2010) one year before the introduction
     (e.g., on June 30, 2011) of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line. The year-month, airline, and route fixed effects are included in the aggregate
     level analysis. Standard errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the
     1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                                  Figure 1: Geographic Distribution of Sample Cities in September 2015
39




     Notes : This figure presents the geographic distribution of the sample destinations in September 2015. The red train signs denote
     the 11 treated destinations linked to the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line introduced on June 30, 2011. The green train signs denote the
     nine destinations linked to the Beijing­Guangzhou HSR line introduced on December 26, 2012. The black train signs denote the 13
     destinations linked to other Beijing­departure HSR lines, which were introduced after December 26, 2012. The blue airport signs denote
     the destinations with direct flights from Beijing but not linked to any Beijing-bound HSR lines during our sample period. All the
     destinations in this figure are linked by direct flights departing from Beijing.
                                                     Figure 2: Flowchart for Flight Delays
40




     Notes : The flowchart illustrates the components of the flight departure and arrival delays. Actual Travel Time (ATT) captures the
     time difference between the scheduled departure time and actual arrival time. The departure delay is calculated as the time spent before
     leaving the gate (the difference between the actual departure time minus the scheduled departure time ) and arrival delay (the difference
     between the actual arrival time minus the scheduled arrival time ). The actual duration consists of the taxi-out time (time spent on the
     departure runway), airtime, and taxi-in time (time spent on the arrival runway).
                               Figure 3: Distribution of Actual Travel Time for HSRs and Treated Flights
41




     Notes : This figure shows the distributions of actual travel time (the difference between the actual arrival time minus the scheduled
     departure time) for the flights linking Beijing and the 11 HSR destinations along the Beijing-Shanghai line (in black). The fastest
     scheduled travel time for the corresponding HSR is depicted in red.
                                         Figure 4: Dynamic Changes of the Four OTP Measures
42




     Notes : This figure plots the dynamic responses of the four OTP measures to the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line. The
     coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are obtained from estimating Equation (3).
                                                      Figure 5: Heterogeneity in Distance
43




     Notes : This figure plots the heterogeneity responses of four OTP measures to the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line across
     different distance categories. The travel distances range from 500 km to over 1,500 km with a 200 km interval. We plot the 95% confidence
     intervals.
                                                          Figure 6: Quantile Estimations
44




     Notes : This figure plots the estimates of treatment effect using the quantile regressions (i.e., at quantiles 10% (decile 1), 20% (decile 2),
     . . . , and 90% (decile 9)). Standard errors are obtained by bootstrapping using 500 repetitions each time. We plot the 95% confidence
     intervals.
                                          Table A1: HSR cities Linked to Beijing
     City           Province   Travel Time     Distance   Opening Date   HSR Line
     Tianjin        Tianjin    41minute        120km      2008-8-1       Beijing-Tianjin
     Langfang       Hebei      22minute        60km       2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Cangzhou       Hebei      52minute        210km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Dezhou         Shandong   1hour13minute   314km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Jinan          Shandong   1hour56minute   406km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Tai'an         Shandong   2hour16minute   465km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Jining         Shandong   2hour46minute   550km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Zaozhuang      Shandong   3hour3minute    627km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Xuzhou         Jiangsu    3hour17minute   692km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Suzhou         Anhui      3hour29minute   760km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Qingdao        Shandong   4hour38minute   819km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Bengbu         Anhui      3hour37minute   848km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Chuzhou        Anhui      4hour14minute   964km      2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
A1




     Hefei          Anhui      3hour55minute   1000km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Nanjing        Jiangsu    4hour35minute   1023km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Zhenjiang      Jiangsu    4hour55minute   1053km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Liu'an         Anhui      5hour24minute   1072km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Changzhou      Jiangsu    5hour8minute    1153km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Wuxi           Jiangsu    5hour25minute   1210km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Suzhou         Jiangsu    5hour33minute   1237km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Kunshan        Jiangsu    5hour30minute   1268km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Hangzhou       Zhejiang   5hour52minute   1279km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Shanghai       Shanghai   5hour6minute    1318km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Shaoxing       Zhejiang   5hour15minute   1322km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Ningbo         Zhejiang   7hour0minute    1434km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Quzhou         Zhejiang   7hour38minute   1548km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Wenzhou        Zhejiang   9hour41minute   1673km     2011-6-30      Beijing-Shanghai
     Shijiazhuang   Hebei      1hour19minute   281km      2012-12-26     Beijing-Guangzhou   (Beijing-Zhengzhou   Section)
     Handan         Hebei      2hour14minute   456km      2012-12-26     Beijing-Guangzhou   (Beijing-Zhengzhou   Section)
     Taiyuan        Shanxi     2hour43minute   513km      2012-12-26     Beijing-Guangzhou   (Beijing-Zhengzhou   Section)
     Anyang         Henan      2hour40minute   516km      2012-12-26     Beijing-Guangzhou   (Beijing-Zhengzhou   Section)
                                                              Table A1 Continues
       Zhengzhou        Henan           3hour25minute       693km      2012-12-26    Beijing-Guangzhou (Beijing-Zhengzhou Section)
       Luoyang          Henan           5hour17minute       832km      2012-12-26    Beijing-Guangzhou (Beijing-Zhengzhou Section)
       Xian             Sanxi           5hour51minute       1212km     2012-12-26    Beijing-Guangzhou (Beijing-Zhengzhou Section)
       Wuhan            Hubei           5hour40minute       1229km     2012-12-26    Beijing-Guangzhou (Beijing-Zhengzhou Section)
       Huanggang        Hubei           5hour47minute       1294km     2012-12-26    Beijing-Guangzhou (Beijing-Zhengzhou Section)
       Yichang          Hubei           6hour18minute       1525km     2012-12-26    Beijing-Guangzhou (Beijing-Zhengzhou Section)
       Changsha         Hunan           5hour42minute       1631km     2012-12-26    Beijing-Guangzhou (Beijing-Zhengzhou Section)
       Guangzhou        Guangdong       9hour21minute       2298km     2012-12-26    Beijing-Guangzhou (Beijing-Zhengzhou Section)
       Shenzhen         Guangdong       10hour36minute      2409km     2012-12-26    Beijing-Guangzhou (Beijing-Zhengzhou Section)
       Tangshan         Hebei           1hour29minute       241km      2013-12-31    Tianjin-Qinhuangdao
       Qinhuangdao      Hebei           2hour1minute        388km      2013-12-31    Tianjin-Qinhuangdao
       Shenyang         Liaoning        3hour58minute       786km      2013-12-31    Tianjin-Qinhuangdao
       Dalian           Liaoning        4hour52minute       963km      2013-12-31    Tianjin-Qinhuangdao
       Changchun        Jilin           6hour19minute       1103km     2013-12-31    Tianjin-Qinhuangdao
A2




       Jilin            Jilin           5hour57minute       1214km     2013-12-31    Tianjin-Qinhuangdao
       Harbin           Heilongjiang    7hour16minute       1331km     2013-12-31    Tianjin-Qinhuangdao
       Baoji            Sanxi           7hour16minute       1379km     2013-12-31    Xuzhou-Lanzhou (Xi'an-Baoji Section)
       Fuzhou           Fujian          9hour14minute       1808km     2013-7-1      Hangzhou-Shenzhen (Hangzhou-Ningbo Section)
       Quanzhou         Fujian          10hour55minute      1963km     2013-7-1      Hangzhou-Shenzhen (Hangzhou-Ningbo Section)
       Yantai           Shandong        7hour16minute       961km      2014-12-28    Qingdao-Rongcheng (Jimo-Rongcheng Section)
       Weihai           Shandong        7hour20minute       1063km     2014-12-28    Qingdao-Rongcheng (Jimo-Rongcheng Section)
       Yuncheng         Shanxi          6hour12minute       922km      2014-7-1      Datong-Xi'an (Taiyuan-Xi'an Section)
       Xiamen           Fujian          10hour55minute      2053km     2014-7-1      Hangzhou-Shenzhen (Hangzhou-Ningbo Section)
       Nanchang         Jiangxi         9hour4minute        1933km     2014-9-16     Shanghai-Kunming (Nanchang-Changsha Section)
       Nanning          Guangxi         13hour58minute      2478km     2014-9-25     Liuzhou-Nanning
       Chongqing        Chongqing       12hour11minute      2078km     2015-1-1      Chongqing-Wuhan
       Anqing           Anhui           7hour4minute        1257km     2015-12-6     Ningbo-Anqing
       Huangshan        Anhui           6hour29minute       1306km     2015-7-1      Hefei-Fuzhou
       Guiyang          Guizhou         10hour47minute      2297km     2015-7-1      Shanghai-Kunming (Xinhuang-Guiyang Section)
     Notes : This table summarizes the HSR destinations linked to Beijing along the different HSR lines before September 2015. It also reports
     the province to which an HSR city belongs, the travel time, the proximity to Beijing in kilometers, the HSR entry date, and the official
     name of the HSR line.
                                   Table A2: Summary Statistics - Aggregate Level (airline-route-month)
                                                          Treatment                                 Control
                                                   Before           After                   Before           After
                                                 Mean   S.D      Mean    S.D              Mean   S.D      Mean    S.D
                      ADM                    18.31 15.46              17.08   13.43       20.57 16.93         20.99    15.27
                      ADD15                   0.14  0.15               0.21    0.17        0.18  0.2           0.29     0.21
                      DDM                    34.31 16.46              36.16   14.07       31.83 17.51         38.03    18.49
                      DDD15                   0.36   0.3               0.62    0.24        0.35  0.31          0.65     0.23
                      Travel Time           129.05 26.62             128.84   24.92      154.34 51.39        160.63    52.48
A3




                      Excessive Travel Time 31.78 14.48               31.77   12.96       31.66 16.91         34.69    15.18
                      Actual Duration       102.36 22.1               99.12   21.06      128.62 48.35        126.64    48.41
                      Schedule Duration     114.22 22.32             119.91   21.61       137.1 47.73        144.62    48.39
                      Taxi-in Time           14.93 2.19              14.19     3.47      14.86 2.86           14.93      4.6
                      Taxi-out Time          18.38 4.73               18.24    4.72       19.71 6.61          19.18     6.25
                      Air Time               63.81 19.4               65.59   20.09       90.47 45.61         92.55    46.76
                      Observations                   1,164                1,132               4,965               5,238
     Notes : This table presents the airline-route-month level summary statistics of the treatment and control sample in the baseline analysis.
     The sample includes all Beijing-outbound flights between January 1, 2009 and December 25, 2012. The definitions and constructions of
     the variables are introduced in detail in Section 3.
     Table A3: Flight Level DID - Arrival Delays with Airline and Route Level shocks
                      Panel A. Including Airline-Year-Month Fixed Effects
 Dep. Variables       ADM       ADD15          DDM15     DDD15           ATT              ETT
                        (1)        (2)            (3)       (4)           (5)              (6)
 Treatment*After    -2.805*** -0.018***       -6.025*** -0.028***     -4.828***        -3.925***
                     (0.242)     (0.003)       (0.240)   (0.003)        (0.248)         (0.246)

 Observations        865,967     865,967      865,967     865,967       865,967         865,046
 R-squared            0.272       0.230        0.266       0.209         0.639           0.213
 Fixed Effects                  Hour FE, Date FE, Flight FE, Airline-Year-Month FE

                       Panel B. Including Route-Year-Month Fixed Effects
 Treatment*After    -3.414***   -0.024***     -5.384***   -0.025***      -5.220***     -4.201***
                     (0.243)     (0.003)       (0.241)     (0.003)        (0.248)       (0.248)

 Observations        865,967     865,967      865,967     865,967      865,967          865,051
 R-squared            0.275       0.235        0.266       0.204        0.645            0.216
 Fixed Effects                  Hour FE, Date FE, Flight FE, Route-Year-Month FE
Notes : This table reports the results of estimating Equation (2). The sample period is from
January 1, 2009 to December 25, 2012. The hour, date, and flight fixed effects are included in all
specifications. The airline dummy interacted with the year-month dummy is included in Panel A,
and the route dummy interacted with the year-month dummy is included in Panel B. Standard
errors clustered by destinations are reported in parentheses. We use ***, **, and * to denote
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                               A4
        Table A4: Comparison of the Treatment and Control Groups before the Introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR Line
                                    Treat                  Control1                 Control2              Treat-Control1       Treat-Control2
                             Mean           S.D         Mean       S.D           Mean       S.D           Diff. in Mean 1      Diff. in Mean 2
      Population             711.37     276.54         512.45      420.06        633.84      228.45          198.92***               77.53
      Income               44,954.40   10,423.92      33,647.11   7,562.63     38,749.80   10,298.26       11,307.29***            6,204.60
      GDP                  5,525.21    4,011.51       2,076.58    2,100.36     4,889.10    3,304.22         3,448.63**              636.11
      Number of Flights     5,994.15   8,474.74       1,906.10    2,898.06      5,838.41    4,656.27        4,088.05***             155.74
A5




      DDM                    32.90        8.30          35.25       11.63         33.94       8.40             -2.35**               -1.04
      ADM                    16.92       11.55          19.30       15.40         18.19      10.49            -2.38***              -1.27*
      ATT                    123.29      25.67         146.85      48.59         144.54      44.54           -23.56***             -21.25**
      ETT                    32.37        6.82          33.41       10.35        33.47        5.67              -1.04                -1.10
     Notes : This table reports the difference between the treatment and control destination cities in the key economic variables and four
     OTP measures. Treat refers to flights departing from Beijing to 11 destination cities linked to the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line. Control 1
     refers to flights departing from Beijing to 102 destination cities not linked to the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line. Control 2 refers to flights
     departing from Beijing to nine destination cities later linked to the Beijing­Guangzhou HSR line.
                                   Figure A1: Distribution of Flights throughout the Day
A6




     Notes : This figure plots the distribution of flights in the treatment (blue line) and control (red line) groups per hour.
                              Figure A2: Distribution of the Schedule Time Slots before/after the HSR Entry
A7




     Notes : This figure plots the average number of schedule flights at 30-minute intervals throughout the day before and after the introduction
     of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line between January 2009 and December 2012. The solid line represents the distribution of scheduled
     flights before the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line and the dotted line represents the distribution of scheduled flights after
     the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai HSR line.
                              Figure A3: Distribution of the Departure Delay in Minutes throughout the Day
A8




     Notes : This figure plots the traffic volume and average departure delay in each time slot before the introduction of the Beijing­Shanghai
     HSR line. The solid line represents the average departure delay per hour. The bar represents the number of flights by hour, with the
     solid bar denoting the "better" time slots.
