                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             CHOOSING TECHNOLOGY:
                     AN ENTREPRENEURIAL STRATEGY APPROACH

                                        Joshua S. Gans
                                        Michael Kearney
                                         Erin L. Scott
                                          Scott Stern

                                       Working Paper 27489
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27489


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27489.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joshua S. Gans, Michael Kearney, Erin L. Scott, and Scott Stern. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Choosing Technology: An Entrepreneurial Strategy Approach
Joshua S. Gans, Michael Kearney, Erin L. Scott, and Scott Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 27489
July 2020
JEL No. O31

                                          ABSTRACT

A central premise of research in the strategic management of innovation is that start-ups are able
to leverage emerging technological trajectories as a source of competitive advantage. But, if the
potential for a technology is given by the fundamental character of a given technological
trajectory, then why does entrepreneurial strategy matter? Or, put another way, if the evolution of
technology is largely shaped by the strategic choices entrepreneurs make, then why do
technological trajectories exhibit systematic patterns such as the Technology S-curve? Taking a
choice-based perspective, this paper illuminates the choices confronting a start-up choosing their
technology by resolving the paradox of the Technology S-curve through a reformulation of the
foundations of the Technology S-curve. Specifically, we reconceptualize the Technology S-curve
not as a technological given but as an envelope of potential outcomes reflecting differing strategic
choices by the entrepreneur in exploration versus exploitation. Taking this lens, we are able to
clarify the role of technological uncertainty on start-up strategy, the impact of constraints on
technological evolution, and how technology choice is shaped by the possibility of imitation. Our
findings suggest that staged exploration may stall innovation as a result of the replacement effect,
increasing the strategic importance of commitment.

Joshua S. Gans                                   Erin L. Scott
Rotman School of Management                      MIT Sloan School of Management
University of Toronto                            100 Main St
105 St. George Street                            E62-470
Toronto ON M5S 3E6                               Cambridge, MA 02142
CANADA                                           United States
and NBER                                         elscott@mit.edu
joshua.gans@gmail.com
                                                 Scott Stern
Michael Kearney                                  MIT Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            100 Main Street, E62-476
Sloan School of Management                       Cambridge, MA 02142
100 Main Street, E62-463                         and NBER
Cambridge, MA 02142                              sstern@mit.edu
mkearney@mit.edu
  I.    Introduction


        Technological trajectories are structured yet evolutionary processes by which emerging

technologies change and improve over time (Dosi 1982), with implications for the distribution of value

from innovation (Teece 1986), the co-evolution of industries and competition (Utterback 1994), and the

choice of commercialization strategy (Teece 1986; Gans and Stern 2003). The analytical insights that arise

from these studies are grounded in the thesis that, even in the face of significant uncertainty, the evolution

of technology follows a structured process, and that managers (and, especially entrepreneurs) may be able

to harness this process as a foundation for competitive advantage. This perspective is perhaps most

forcefully articulated through the now-pervasive concept of the Technology S-curve (Foster 1986). Foster

argued that, at the earliest stage of an emerging technological trajectory, investment in innovation yields

few concrete performance improvements; realized research productivity is dampened by learning,

experimentation, and failures. But, for those technologies that are ultimately impactful, an inflection point

is reached, at which firms focus on exploitation of their learning, R&D productivity increases dramatically,

and only tapers off as the technology reaches certain physical or architectural limits. This concept of S-

shaped technological change is central across a wide swath of research in the management of innovation,

including the pioneering work of Henderson and Clark (1990) on the role of architectural innovation, as

well as the influential work by Christensen (1997) and his theory of disruptive innovation.

        Though these foundational studies focused on the role of and implications for incumbent firms,

they also offered an important lens for entrepreneurs evaluating potential opportunities from an emerging

technology. Many an entrepreneur (knowingly or not) has built their entrepreneurial strategy on theories,

empirics, and stylized facts grounded in our understanding of the Technology S-curve. While the ultimate

impact of a technological trajectory depends on more than its ability to achieve a given level of

technological performance (Adner and Kapoor 2016), it is nonetheless true that the ability of entrepreneurs

to achieve meaningful technological advance with an emergent technology offers the potential for that firm

to achieve competitive advantage. Free from the organizational inertia that may bias existing firms and
delay their engagement with an emerging trajectory (Ganco and Agarwal 2009; Wu et al 2013; Kapoor and

Furr 2015), entrepreneurs must choose and quickly develop robust organizational capabilities to realize the

competitive advantage this freedom offers (Mitchell 1994; Carroll et al 1996; Klepper and Simons 2000;

Khessina and Carroll 2008). These early strategic choices, including technological investments, are critical

to not only realizing their competitive advantage, but also their long-term survival (Furr et al 2012).

          At the heart of the Technology S-curve lies the fact that successful innovation requires both

investments in exploration and exploitation, a central insight within innovation strategy (and organizational

learning more generally (March 1991)). Exploiting existing technology in the near term offers an immediate

advantage but may imperil long-term survival and growth, while exploring novel pathways opens up routes

to long-term success but may involve ceding near-term opportunities (Levinthal and March 1981; March

1991). This tension is front of mind for entrepreneurs. Near term opportunities to exploit an emerging

technology may facilitate key learnings (for instance, from customers) and the acquisition of resources

necessary to enable a longer period of exploration; yet, these exploitation activities may distract from (and

potentially constrain, where commitments are involved) the long-term objectives of the start-up. Indeed,

the empirical instantiation of the Technology S-curve as a phenomenon is perhaps the most commonly

invoked exemplar of the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation.

          But, these two arguments rest on a seeming paradox. Specifically, while on the one hand, the

Technology S-curve is taken as an empirical phenomenon that at its essence is technologically determined,

the argument justifying the shape of the S-curve depends on strategic choices as to the balance between

exploration and exploitation. But, if S-curves are an environmental fact, then why do these strategic choices

matter? Alternatively, if they are the result of strategic choice, why do they appear as a systematic empirical

phenomenon? Said otherwise, is the role of entrepreneurial strategy to inform entrepreneurs as they select

and then `ride' an emerging technology trajectory? Or, does a robust entrepreneurial strategy necessitate

understanding how the strategic choices of the entrepreneur will shape the emerging technology trajectory

itself?
        Consider the case of the electric vehicle industry in the late 2000s, and the contrasting strategies of

start-ups Better Place and Tesla. On the one hand, both Better Place and Tesla premised their innovation

strategy on the potential application of lithium ion batteries, which were widely perceived to be undergoing

significant technological advancement. Within the domain of lithium ion batteries, though, Better Place

founder Shai Agassi focused quickly on the potential exploitation of existing lithium ion battery technology.

While this still emerging technology had significant limitations including a high cost and low energy storage

(and so vehicle range would be limited and charging times were long), Agassi prioritized the development

of a "swappable" battery in which customers could simply replace the batteries in a few minutes at a

"replacement" station rather than necessarily having to wait while the battery itself was being charged. This

pragmatic near-term focus allowed Better Place to establish partnerships with traditional automakers,

finance regional infrastructure (e.g., swapping stations across the entirety of Israel), and introduce a

"mainstream" electric vehicle by 2012 (Squatriglia 2009).

        In contrast, Elon Musk recognized the same broad opportunity and selected the same emerging

technological trajectory (lithium ion batteries). However, in contrast to Better Place, Tesla pursued a

fundamentally different innovation management approach, prioritizing exploration over exploitation, with

two key features. First, Musk implemented a deliberative stepwise model of introduction. Accounting for

the existing shortcomings of the still nascent battery technology, Tesla introduced the Roadster, a luxury

vehicle, where price was not a key factor in the purchase decision. The experience developing the Roadster

enabled Tesla to explore continued development of the lithium ion battery technology, take advantage of

learning-by-doing in process development, and ultimately benefit from economies of scale (e.g., through

vertical integration into battery manufacturing at the Giga Factory) (Baker 2016). From 2010 through 2018,

lithium-ion battery costs declined 90 percent, enabling increases in energy, power density and vehicle range.

        Though both Better Place and Tesla pursued the "same" emerging technological opportunity (at

the same time, industry, and domain of application), their ability to leverage the emerging technological

innovation as a source of competitive advantage diverged. After an initial rollout in 2012 that met with a

very low level of demand (fewer than 1500 Better Place vehicles were sold), Better Place was unable to
shift away from its exploitation-oriented approach to take advantage of the emerging improvements being

developed by Tesla (Chafkin 2014). In contrast, Tesla's long-term strategy of pairing a more exploratory

approach with a focus on the luxury vehicle segment allowed it to develop and commercialize the

"mainstream" Model 3 sedan by 2018. Despite more than $1 billion USD in investment in Better Place, the

entire venture was liquidated for scrap value in 2013, while Tesla was able to "ride the S-curve" to emerge

as the leading electric car manufacturer for advanced economies such as the United States and Europe.

        The contrasting experiences of Tesla and Better Place puts into sharp relief both the central insight

but also the implicit paradox behind the Technology S-curve. On the one hand, the relative success of Tesla

seems to be a classic case where an innovation strategy premised on pioneering a new S-curve allows a

start-up venture to ultimately compete with more established players by taking advantage of improved

performance in a nascent technological trajectory over time. At the same time, despite investing in the same

technology (and market, etc.), the choice of Better Place to "exploit" the new S-curve more quickly seems

to have precluded its ability to take advantage of the more exploratory path pioneered by Tesla. What is the

relationship between the Technology S-curve traced out by Better Place (low exploration and high

exploitation) versus Tesla (with a longer and more intensive period in the exploration phase)? And, how

does the fact that the S-curve that each start-up followed reflected the strategic choices by each founding

team impact how we interpret and identify Technology S-curves themselves?

        The purpose of this paper is to better illuminate the choices confronting a start-up choosing their

technology by resolving the paradox of the Technology S-curve through the reformulation of the

foundations of the Technology S-curve. While most research in innovation and strategy treats the

Technology S-curve as a given (e.g., a technological trajectory is likely to be disruptive or not), we

reformulate technology strategy through a choice-based framework in which the S-curve realized by a given

start-up depends on the choices of its founders. We reconceptualize the technology S-curve, not as a

technological given, but as an envelope of potential outcomes derived by strategic choice, and we explicitly

account for the active choice technology entrepreneurs make. This perspective suggests that the limiting

factor shaping long-term innovation performance is not fundamental physical limits but strategy itself.
        This choice-based approach offers novel insight into the strategic implications of the tradeoff

between exploration and exploitation. Whereas the explore-exploit framework has traditionally reflected

strategic choices by firms choosing between alternative and distinct Technology S-curves (Foster 1986;

Anderson and Tushman 1990; Henderson and Clark 1990; Christensen 1997), our framework offers a

complementary strategic lens (most relevant for resource-constrained entrepreneurs) about how to engage

with a single but still emerging technological trajectory. Rather than focusing on how to divide effort and

attention across technologies (e.g., the choice by General Motors to prioritize internal combustion versus

battery-powered vehicles), our framework emphasizes the importance of active choice in shaping the

evolution of the emerging technology itself (e.g., the choice of when to take a more exploratory versus more

exploitation-oriented focus towards lithium-ion battery technology for automobiles).

        This additional choice-based perspective is important insofar as a significant literature assumes

(often implicitly) that a certain group of technologies (e.g., lithium ion batteries) have the potential for

disruption of the established market; however, a choice-based approach emphasizes that whether a

technology ends up being disruptive depends less on the inherent nature of the technology but on whether

the entrepreneur chooses a strategy in order to be disruptive to established players. Put another way,

observations of disruptive innovation (e.g., overtaking an established trajectory and doing so in a way that

overturns established market power) fundamentally conflates the potential for disruption with the strategic

choice to take advantage of its disruptive potential; rather than seeking to identify a "disruptive technology,"

entrepreneurs should consider how their strategic choices are coherent with a disruptive strategy. Indeed, a

choice-based approach illuminates the potential for entrepreneurs, particularly those embracing a disruptive

strategy, to become trapped by a novel form of the replacement effect whereby success with limited

exploration may reduce their incentives to explore the full potential of a novel technological trajectory (and,

in fact, disrupt the incumbent).

        We begin by considering the nature and history of the Technology S-curve, and the central role that

this tool plays (often implicitly) in research, teaching and practice within the broad fields of innovation

strategy and technology-driven entrepreneurship. This analysis highlights the "paradox" at the heart of the
Technology S-curve, motivating the choice-based approach for start-ups we develop in Section III. We then

present a simple model of start-up technology strategy in Section IV that, though highly stylized, clarifies

the role of technological uncertainty on start-up technology strategy, the impact of constraints (such as

limited resources) on technological evolution, and how technology choice is shaped by the possibility of

imitation. In Section V we consider how the choices of start-up founders to explore or exploit an emerging

technology may manifest in the industry-level Technology-curve. While the broad conceptual framing

applies to all firms that engage with a new technological trajectory, the strategic tradeoffs we describe are

perhaps most salient in the case of a start-up innovator, where both the choice of technological trajectory

and choice of exploration (relative to exploitation) may serve as core choices of their entrepreneurial

strategy (Gans Scott and Stern 2018; Gans Stern and Wu 2019).


 II.     The Technology S-Curve Paradox


         The Technology S-curve occupies a critical yet elusive position at the intersection between strategy

and innovation. At its core, the Technology S-curve offers an elegant and structured characterization of the

dynamic evolution of technology. Specifically, the Technology S-curve captures, within a single

framework, the role of learning and experimentation as a foundation for subsequent technological

improvement, the cumulative nature of technological innovation, and the constraints of design and natural

limits on potential technological performance (Foster 1986; Gans 2016). Moreover, the framework has both

empirical content (an S-curve can be measured (see, for example, Nagy et al. (2013))) as well as a range of

managerial implications (including how to manage along a given S-curve and the opportunities and

challenges associated with "switching" S-curves). And, importantly, the empirical existence of Technology

S-curves is the foundational building block in key theoretical arguments regarding the organizational and

competitive dynamics accompanying technological transitions (Henderson and Clark 1990; Christensen

1993).

         But, a fundamental paradox lies at the heart of the Technology S-curve: while the strategic

implications of S-curves depend on their empirical existence, the empirical existence of S-curves depends
on strategic choice. If S-curves reflect an inevitable empirical pattern, managers can use that knowledge to

plan for how to manage innovation at different points along an S-curve and be proactive in switching S-

curves in order to maintain technological leadership. At the same time, the rationale for the S-curve itself

depends on a strategic choice to focus at the earliest stages on exploration and then turning towards

exploitation in order to improve realized performance. But, if their very existence depends on strategic

choice, how can we take their existence as given in order to justify strategic choice itself?

        Not simply a minor point of potential inconsistency, this seeming contradiction is grounded in the

intellectual synthesis that the S-curve represents. On the one hand, building on a long line of research going

back (at least) to Schumpeter (1942), researchers in strategy and innovation grappled during the 1970s and

1980s with how to classify technological change in a way that reflected the dynamic and cumulative nature

of innovation while also accommodating the presence of significant uncertainty and path dependence

(Abernathy and Utterback 1978; Rosenberg 1976; Sahal 1981). Dosi (1982) offered a way through this

impasse through the development of the concept of technological trajectories, in which most technological

innovation follows a structured pattern of innovating within a particular trajectory, with the understanding

that this type of innovation is fundamentally different from the relatively rarer phenomena of innovation

that creates a new trajectory. By clarifying the distinction between continuous versus discontinuous

innovation, the technological trajectory framework offered guidance for management and policy in which

the optimal strategy surrounding a particular innovation depended on whether that innovation represented

the evolution of innovation within a trajectory or the establishment of an entirely new trajectory.

        While the concept of technological trajectories allowed for the dynamic examination of how

innovation evolves within a given technological domain, a parallel literature grappled with how to classify

alternative approaches towards the management of the innovation process itself (Burns and Stalker 1961;

Nelson 1962; Abernathy 1976). These studies emphasized the wide range of different organizational

approaches to innovation (e.g., highly centralized versus widely dispersed authority, high-powered versus

low-powered incentives), and the potential importance of aligning innovation strategy and management

with the innovation environment (e.g., the use of a fluid approach in an environment with higher
uncertainty). Beyond the identification of broad categories and contingencies, a central insight from these

studies is the identification of the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation in the innovation process

(Levinthal and March 1981; Roberts 1988; March 1991). Whereas exploration is a search process whose

aim is to learn about uncertain domains, exploitation is a selection process whose aim is to leverage

accumulated knowledge. This tension between exploration and exploitation offers a foundational

managerial insight: to the extent that organizational processes (e.g., incentives, routines) reward

exploitation (at least in the short term), organizations might underinvest in exploration (even for a given

level of appropriability) resulting in long-term loss in organizational learning and performance (Levinthal

and March 1993).

        The key insight of Foster (1986) was to bring together these two lines of research into a single

framework that simultaneously offered structured predictions about the evolution of technology while also

offering guidance into technology management. Specifically, at the earliest stages of a new technological

trajectory (a la Dosi), the primary focus will be on exploration in order to maximize learning, identify

potential dead ends, and gain a more structured understanding of the potential for improvement for a new

technology. An important consequence of this learning orientation is that measured technological

performance is unlikely to improve significantly during this early period (i.e., a focus on learning is the

microfoundation for the prediction that the early stages of a technological trajectory demonstrate a relatively

flat performance-effort profile). This accumulated knowledge pays off when the innovator shifts towards

exploitation of the knowledge they have gained; from an empirical perspective, this period is marked by an

inflection point in which there are sharper gains in measured performance for a given expenditure of R&D

effort. But, this focus on exploitation ultimately depletes the technological performance improvement that

can be realized from an initial level of technological knowledge. From an empirical perspective, this latter

stage is characterized by diminishing returns and a decline in R&D productivity (i.e., the relationship

between effort and performance once again flattens out).

        Before considering the strategic implications of this framework, it is useful to emphasize that

Foster's formulation of the S-curve was not simply conceptual but also empirical in nature. Foster
emphasized not simply the broad shape of the S-curve but the potential for concrete empirical analysis on

both a retrospective and prospective basis (and was work that was conducted at McKinsey and other

consulting firms at the time). In his work, Foster highlighted the empirical nature of the S-curve in a

disparate range of settings from the artificial heart to polymer chemicals to tire cords. For example, his

observation that the rate of improvement per unit of effort in the DRAM industry prompted Foster to

forecast a shift in the locus of competitive advantage away from DRAM manufacturers and towards

software manufacturers (a prediction which was ultimately borne out).

        Though its origins lay in the domain of technology management and measurement, the primary

application of the S-curve has been in the domain of innovation strategy. The central strategic insight

implied by the existence of the S-curve is that whereas established firms have comparative advantage in

innovation along a technological trajectory, start-ups may be able to gain competitive advantage by

pioneering a new Technology S-curve. An immediate consequence of differential investment and

commitment to alternative technological trajectories by incumbents versus entrants is the existence of a

potential mechanism by which technological innovation serves as a source of creative destruction by

overturning existing sources of market power.

        Motivated by this insight, a wave of research in the late 1980s and early 1990s sought to

characterize how and when innovation gave rise to creative destruction. Most notably, the influential

dissertations of Rebecca Henderson (1988) and Clay Christensen (1992a) (both at the Harvard Business

School) used detailed industry-level case studies (of the semiconductor photolithographic equipment

industry and the disk drive industry, respectively) as a foundation for conceptualizing the conditions under

which established firms were able to achieve technological transitions. Henderson and Clark (1990)

articulated the ways in which technologies that involved a shift in design (i.e., architecture) that might

impact multiple otherwise siloed areas of competency within an established firm pose fundamental

organizational challenges for those firms. Specifically, the challenge for incumbents arising from

architectural innovation results from the inability to recognize and communicate across the organization

about the architectural potential of the emerging technology, and instead focusing on how the innovation
reinforces component-level competencies. In turn, Christensen (1993) focused on market-oriented

challenges associated with emerging technological trajectories, in which the potential reluctance to adopt

innovation due to the potential for cannibalization (Arrow 1962) is reinforced when existing customers of

the established firm do not perceive the potential value of the emerging technological trajectory.

Specifically, disruptive innovation is characterized by an initial set of performance attributes not valued by

the incumbent existing customers (though, importantly valued by other customer groups) and rapid

performance improvement along the attributes existing customers valued, ultimately overtaking the

performance of the existing technological trajectory. In other words, even when an established firm may be

able to accommodate the innovation in an organizational sense, there may be resistance to the innovation

based on a low level of initial technological performance.

        In both of these influential bodies of work, the emergence of a specific type of novel technological

trajectory has the consequence of offering a specific set of challenges for established firms (and opportunity

for start-ups). Importantly, these frameworks concerning the interplay between innovation and competitive

dynamics take the nature of the technological trajectory under consideration as given in order to draw out

the organizational and competitive implications of that type of innovation. The early work of Henderson

and Christensen separately consider the potential uncertainty and path-dependent nature of innovation and

the "limits" of the Technology S-curve as a technological construct (Christensen 1992b,c; Henderson 1995).

However, the paradigmatic shift in thinking ushered in by their work is grounded in their ability to offer

concrete frameworks linking the emergence of specific types of technological trajectories to specific

predictions regarding competitive dynamics (Gans 2016).

        The concepts of "disruptive" and "architectural" innovation have been among the most influential

contributions to our academic and managerial understanding of innovation strategy (Gans 2016). Over the

past quarter century, a significant academic and managerial literature has developed that have by and large

taken the underlying premises of both theories as given and extended or critiqued them on a theoretical or

empirical basis. On the one hand, Henderson and Clark (1990) offered a foundational stepping stone upon

which to consider the economic, strategic, and institutional conditions under which established firms are
able to manage technological transition, including the potential mitigating impact of complementary assets

(Tripsas 1997), the role of managerial cognition (Tripsas and Gavetti 2000), and the potential for strategic

cooperation between incumbents and entrants (Gans and Stern 2000). On the other hand, Bower and

Christensen (1995) and Christensen (1997) offered a synthetic and accessible overview of the theory of

disruptive innovation which had an immediate and persistent impact on managerial practice and thought

(Christensen et al 2018; Gans 2016). A significant body of research drew out the economic, institutional

and strategic conditions under which this theory applies (Adner 2002; Henderson 2006; Adner and Kapoor

2016), with a separate body of work offering critiques of its logical consistency or empirical relevance

(King and Tucci 2002; Danneels 2004; Lepore 2014; King and Baatartogtokh 2015).

        At the heart of this ongoing and impactful research agenda are two interrelated concepts: (a) certain

types of technological breakthroughs result in new and distinct Technology S-curves and (b) these

Technology S-curves can have significant consequences for competitive and organizational dynamics. But,

these foundational premises depend importantly on the (often implicit) assumption that the evolution of S-

curves is autonomous from innovation strategy itself. For the emergence of an S-curve to have

consequences, S-curves themselves must evolve independently from the choices of those firms that the S-

curve is supposed to influence. Concretely, in our discussion of start-ups Better Place and Tesla, there was

an underlying prediction that a new battery for electric vehicles S-curve would have the potential to achieve

a specific performance target (in a given amount of time) to compete against traditional automobile

manufacturers. This premise is based on an (implicit) assumption that the evolution of battery performance

is a (perhaps difficult to forecast) function of innovative investment in batteries. However, the battery S-

curve was not simply a function of raw innovative investment but also a function of strategic choices made

by Better Place and Tesla; whereas Better Place took a more aggressive stance that allowed more rapid

early progress that ultimately stalled, Tesla undertook a longer-term exploratory approach that has allowed

them to take more complete advantage of the underlying potential of lithium ion battery technology.

        Put another way, there are two seemingly contradictory conceptions of the Technology S-curve.

On the one hand, the origins or the S-curve aimed at analysis at the level of technological trajectories takes
the performance profile of the S-curve as given (if uncertain at the outset), and draws out implications for

strategy and performance (and is indeed the foundation for the theory of disruptive innovation, which has

become ubiquitous among practitioners and entrepreneurs). At the same time, the Technology S-curve is a

consequence of innovation strategy at the firm level, most notably reflecting the way in which

organizational learning proceeds from an orientation towards exploration to a focus on exploitation.

        But, if the S-curve is a technological concept, in what sense does choice of innovation strategy

matter? And, if the result of managerial choice, what role does the S-curve play in innovation strategy and

competitive dynamics?



III.    A Choice Based Approach to the Technology S-curve


        To revolve this paradox and clarify the implications technology strategy for start-ups, we

reformulate the foundations of the Technology S-curve using a choice-based framework. Rather than taking

the Technology S-curve as a purely technological phenomena, the Technology S-curve realized by a given

start-up also reflects the strategic choices of the entrepreneur. Concretely, for a given emerging

technological trajectory, there exists an envelope of potential innovation outcomes; the precise trajectory

that is realized depends crucially not simply on technological potential but on the strategic choice that

entrepreneurs and managers make in prioritizing exploration versus exploitation at different stages of the

innovation process. This strategic choice is, perhaps, most salient for entrepreneurs where choices to

prioritize exploration (and long-term potential innovation outcomes) must be balanced against resource

constraints and an incentive to partially resolve uncertainty (through exploitation) to acquire more resources

(e.g., funding, team).

        The challenges facing an entrepreneur choosing to engage with an emerging technological

trajectory throws into sharp relief the subtle distinction between the broad organization learning tradeoff

between exploration and exploitation (Levinthal and March 1981; March 1991) and the microfoundations

of the Technology S-curve for a given technological trajectory. For any given potential trajectory,
entrepreneurs face a choice as to how to balance exploration and exploitation at each moment in time;

different choices will result in a different trajectory for that innovation. Manso (2011) articulates this logic

clearly in the context of a model in which a manager seeking to motivate innovation over multiple periods

chooses between an incentive scheme that provides near-term rewards for "base hits" (and penalizes failure)

versus an incentive scheme that has more muted incentives in the short term (and indeed "rewards" short-

term failure) but provides higher-powered incentives for a long-term "home run." While Manso focuses

primarily on this tradeoff as a challenge for innovation management, consider the compounded incentive

challenge faced by an entrepreneur. Though at least equally (and in some cases more) incentivized for a

long-term "home run" as the manager, accessing the resources required to achieve the long-term "home

run" often necessitates (or highly incentivizes) partially resolving the uncertainty of the long-term "home

run" through "base hits." Yet, this focus on repeated near-term "base hits" (and accompanying exploitation)

may limit the entrepreneur's ability to achieve the long-term "home run," resulting in a different trajectory

for the emerging technology. In particular, where the cost of "ambidexterity" (i.e., managing both the

exploitation and the exploration) is sufficiently high, an entrepreneur may choose to focus exclusively on

commercializing the `base hit' technology (and never realize the full potential of the Technology S-curve),

or bypass the near-term exploitation in order to realize the full potential of the emerging technology. Indeed,

these are the routes that were evident in the choices of Better Place and Tesla.

        Specifically, for a given emerging technological trajectory, there exists a strategic choice as to

whether to prioritize maximal learning through exploration versus the speed of the transition towards

exploitation. The existence of an inverse relationship between the speed at which there is a transition

towards exploitation and the overall ability to realize underlying technological potential induces a strategic

tradeoff between these alternative approaches. Whereas a short period of exploration allows the start-up to

gain a short-term performance benefit, a longer period of exploration allows the start-up to ultimately reach

a higher level of technological performance. This insight motivates a reconceptualization of the Technology

S-curve as an envelope of potential S-curves, only one of which is realized by the start-up (see Figure 1).

In its starkest form, a start-up that prioritizes near-term performance (the red curve) sacrifices their ability
to realize long-term potential, while a start-up that is willing to undertake a longer period of exploration

(the blue curve) bears the costs of lower performance at the earliest stages of the trajectory though may

realize greater long-term potential.

                                               [Insert Figure 1 Here]

        Figure 1 captures the essential tradeoff confronting any entrepreneur engaging with an emerging

technological trajectory ­ whether to prioritize activities and investments that lead to higher short-term

performance (but lower long-term potential) versus activities and investments that are less likely to yield

short-term advantage but may allow for advantage over a longer period of time (Manso 2011). This tradeoff

moreover manifests itself in terms of concrete choices facing start-up firms. Perhaps most directly, any

entrepreneur considering the potential commercialization path for an emerging technology must choose the

incentive system, organizational structure and timeline provided to their technical personnel (which might

include the entrepreneur themselves). A more exploitation-oriented approach involves the provision of

high-powered incentives for bringing any product "first to market," the integration of technical staff into

"product" teams, and the assignment of short-term meaningful deadlines to establish a commercialization

"pathway." Conversely, tolerating early-stage failures but providing long-term rewards for "breakthrough"

product achievements, a more insular approach towards technical development, and explicitly holding off

on exactly how to commercialize the emerging technology are each hallmarks of a more exploration-

oriented approach.

        Manso and Ederer (2013) provide detailed laboratory-based empirical evidence for the salience of

the tradeoff between exploitation versus exploration-oriented incentives on behavior. Specifically, the core

experiment allows a comparison of the degree of "search" behavior (in the form of considering alternative

locations, recipes and prices for a lemonade stand) by one group whose performance depends on their

average level of profitability across the experiment (i.e., a pay-for-performance contract) versus those who

are compensated on the profitability achieved by their lemonade stand during only the latter half of the

experiment (i.e., an exploration-oriented contract). Manso and Ederer document striking differences in

behavior and performance: whereas only 40% of the exploitation-oriented, pay-for-performance group
identifies the most profitable location, 80% of those provided exploration-oriented, long-term failure-

tolerant incentives are ultimately able to find the best location. Rather than reflecting differences in the

nature of the opportunity, this experiment highlights how differences in incentives lead to differences in

performance for a given opportunity.

        The sharp tradeoff between a short-term and long-term orientation depicted in Figure 1 raises the

natural question of how salient this tradeoff might be in practice. For example, it is possible that a start-up

that prioritized exploitation at a relatively early stage could simply revert back to a more exploratory mode

(perhaps resulting in an ascending wave pattern in which a start-up pursuing the red trajectory could then

transition back to the blue trajectory as they exhaust the value of their limited early-stage learning).

However, a shift towards exploitation nonetheless involves shifting incentives, personnel, and activities in

a way that likely induce at least some commitment away from more exploration-oriented activities. For

example, even after the limitations of Better Place's approach to the exploitation of lithium ion batteries

became apparent, that firm was unable to then make a transition to join Tesla in a more fundamental

innovation process in pursuit of practical electric vehicles. This tradeoff is made even more salient by the

fact that the strategic management of an emerging technological trajectory is but one of several

interdependent choices made by start-up innovators, with the combination resulting in both tradeoffs and

limited commitments (Gans Stern and Wu 2019; Gans Scott and Stern 2020).

        A second and perhaps more foundational objection lies in whether it is possible for an entrepreneur

to meaningfully forecast the potential for a given technological trajectory at the time when that trajectory

is just emerging and the start-up must choose between alternative commitments. The history of technology

is littered with examples of the inability and inaccurate forecasts by innovators of the potential for a

technology at the moment of its initial development (Rosenberg 1994). And, from a more contemporary

perspective, there are sharp debates among researchers and entrepreneurs about the potential for emerging

technologies such as artificial intelligence, autonomous vehicles, blockchain technology, or synthetic

biology. The choice-based approach redirects attention away from the abstract question of whether a
technology has reached its limits towards the question of how strategic choice affects the ability to reach a

given level of technological performance.

        Finally, it is important to clarify that the relationship between a more exploration-oriented versus

exploitation-oriented approach and competitive advantage is ambiguous. While the more exploratory

technology strategy of Tesla has ultimately allowed Tesla to establish itself as a global automotive

company, there are many instances where the more exploitation-oriented strategy allows a start-up to attract

resources and commercialize more quickly.

        Consider the classical "innovation" race during the 1970s to leverage the emerging tools of

biotechnology to produce human insulin. The two most advanced teams pursuing the most important early-

stage product of biotechnology were Genentech (founded by Herb Boyer of UC-SF and Bob Swanson, a

venture capitalist) and Biogen (whose founding team included Harvard biologist Wally Gilbert). Though

both teams were focused on exploiting the same emerging Technology S-curve (for the same application!),

the teams undertook two very different approaches (Hall 1988; Stern 1995). On the one hand, the Biogen

team pursued a more exploratory, scientifically interesting "complementary DNA" approach in which

human insulin would be produced by first extracting mRNA, transforming that material into human insulin

DNA, and then cloning that human DNA material. Though this approach faced significant obstacles (e.g.,

there was extensive regulation governing the use of human DNA materials), this approach ensured that the

team, once successful, would have acquired a systematic scientific understanding of the process by which

actual human DNA could be reliably extracted and replicated. In contrast, the Genentech team simplified

their pathway to commercialization by the "less interesting" approach of simply building the DNA

fragments using commercially available materials. As recounted by Keiichi Itakura, one of the key

researchers on the Genentech project, "When we started the insulin project, DNA synthesis was not the

risky part." (as quoted in Stern 1995, p. 172). By focusing more intensely on exploitation, Genentech was

indeed able to "win" the race to produce synthetic insulin, allowing it to establish a license with Eli Lilly

and raise capital through a (highly successful) IPO (Stern 1995).
IV.     A Simple Model of Start-up Technologies


        Building on this discussion, we now develop a simple (essentially decision-theoretic) model of

start-up technology strategy. Specifically, we focus on how a start-up confronting a potential emerging

Technology S-curve chooses the timing of when to switch from exploration towards exploitation, and the

implications of that endogenous strategic choice for the realized evolution of a particular firm-level

technological trajectory (with implications for the industry-level to follow in the next section). Though

highly stylized, we are able to clarify the role of technological uncertainty on start-up technology strategy,

the impact of constraints (such as limited resources) on technological evolution, and how technology choice

is shaped by the possibility of imitation.

        The model clarifies the traditional logic of how an entrepreneur pioneering an emerging

Technology S-curve can utilize entry on the basis of a more limited exploration S-curve (e.g., the red S-

curve) as an experiment on the path towards subsequent performance improvements (and return to the blue

S-curve). However, the model also identifies the potential for entrepreneurs themselves to be trapped by a

novel form of the "replacement effect" whereby their very success with limited exploration reduces their

incentives to explore the full potential of a novel technological trajectory.



A Single Exploration Choice

        Consider an entrepreneur who perceives a potential emerging technological trajectory, such as the

broad opportunity in lithium ion batteries perceived by Elon Musk and his collaborators in the mid-2000s.

The entrepreneur's evaluation of the potential of the emerging trajectory rests on their ability to realize at

least some minimum level of technological performance from the emerging technology itself. At the same

time, as the distinct strategic choices of the founders of Tesla and Genentech highlight, entrepreneurs need

not choose their entrepreneurial strategies in a manner that requires achieving the highest-level of

performance from the emerging trajectory. Entrepreneurs, reflecting on their desired realized level of

performance from the technology, are making a strategic choice as to the level of investment in exploration
in the emerging Technology S-curve. To focus on the interplay between the perception of opportunity

(Shane 2000) and entrepreneurial choice (Gans Stern and Wu 2019), we begin with the assumption that the

choice of the entrepreneur shapes the evolution of their firm-level Technology S-curve and model a start-

up's strategic choice over the investment in exploration (and performance) of an emerging Technology S-

curve. In essence, the entrepreneur is facing a strategic choice over the set of potential S-curves that may

be realized based on differing levels of investment in exploration.

        It is useful to begin with a simple characterization of the potential technological trajectory that the

entrepreneur can explore and ultimately develop. Specifically, consider a standard functional form for the

S-curve which depends on the overall technological potential for the S-curve (KMAX), the length of time that

is spent in exploration before releasing a product (t), the amount of exploration before an inflection point

is reached (T) and the steepness of the S-curve along that path (k):

                                                        '()
                                            () =
                                                    1 +  -.(/-0)

For simplicity, we consider the case where we take the limit as k ® ¥ , and so (1) becomes a step function

where the value of (t) = 0 for t < T and (t) = KMAX for t ³ T. Thus, for a given S-curve, the entrepreneur

will want to choose a length of time, T, to spend in exploration.

        Now consider, the entrepreneur's choice of S-curve itself. The elements of a choice set of S-curves

with individual elements labelled i, are described by pairs {2'() , 2 }. We assume that the discount factor

for the entrepreneur is   [0,1) and, thus, for a given 2'() , the entrepreneur would prefer a shorter 2

and, for a given 2 , the entrepreneur will prefer a higher 2'() . Thus, what is relevant is the upper envelope

of the set of S-curves. To make this transparent, we assume that  '() =  so we can think of the

entrepreneur as selecting an S-curve on the basis of the length of time spent in exploration. That time, T,

delays when the product can be exploited but also increases the potential performance associated with that

product. We will assume that performance drives the value of the start-up's product to its consumers with

higher performance being synonymous with greater value; that is, the expected profits of the venture, P,

are increasing in T.
        As a baseline, suppose that there is there is no uncertainty and the decision to invest in exploration

is a one-time choice (i.e., there is a single period of exploration followed by commercialization), then the

entrepreneur chooses to solve:



                                                     ()
                                              0            - ()
                                                   (1 + )0



  is determined by       A
                      (ABC)D
                                EF (  ) - log(1 +  ) (  )J = (  ); so a venture that is more patient will

choose a higher T. Moreover, if the start-up is resource constrained with total resources,  = ( L ) <

(  ), the chosen S-curve resolves to positive performance in a shorter amount of time but with a lower

potential.

        In reality, of course, there is the potential for uncertainty with regard to the success of exploration,

given by a probability p(T), as well as whether exploitation will result in imitation, that is, the public nature

of exploitation leads to a probability, q, that the start-up will face perfect competition ex-post. We assume

that p(T) is non-decreasing implying that more uncertainty is resolved if there is commitment to a longer

time in exploration. The probability of imitation, q, is assumed to be invariant with T as there is no clear

theoretical rationale as to why it would increase or decrease with the amount of exploration as the result is

a clearly implementable idea. Given this, we write the start-up's choice problem as:



                                              ()(1 - )()
                                         0               - ()
                                                (1 + )0


Note that the optimal T is now decreasing in q, the probability that the start-up will face perfect competition

ex-post, and that the start-up considers the reduction in uncertainty regarding exploration success as a

positive factor in terms of choosing a longer exploratory period.

        Note that q can capture various aspects of competition. It could be pure imitation that might arise

if the new technology is freely available but does not have, say, intellectual property protection. It could
also represent the probability that an incumbent responds quickly or not. This gives a window on potential

disruptive forces. For instance, the start-up might otherwise choose to enter a market targeting niche

customers rather than an incumbent's existing customers. If they do this, then q will be correspondingly

lower and so the start-up would choose a longer period of exploration. In this respect, we can see how the

start-up's technology choice will interact with its other strategic choices (Gans Scott and Stern 2020).



A Repeated Exploration Choice

        Thus far, we have modelled the start-up's technology choice as a single decision regarding T. In

reality, start-ups might reset or alter their trade-offs overtime. For instance, they may initially choose a

quick exploration cycle in order to resolve uncertainty sooner (and better acquire resources and key

learnings) and keep the option of further exploration and an elongated S-curve for the future. The most

straightforward mechanism limiting this type of "surfing the frontier" would be if there exists a tradeoff

between the commercialization of the technology at one performance level and unfettered exploration of

that same trajectory in order to achieve an even higher level of performance. Thus, it is interesting to analyze

whether there is any advantage to the start-up making up-front commitments to exploration rather than

preserving options to invest later on.

        To model this, we suppose that exploitation now has an explicit cost, C, for each time a new product

is introduced. Recall that, we suppose that exploration resolves uncertainty p(T). Thus, it is now possible

that a start-up might choose to explore for a shorter period of time in order to exploit and yield an earlier

signal on the technology's potential success. In particular, having exploited, the start-up either finds out,

with probability 1 ­ p(T), that no further exploration will be useful or with probability, p(T) that further

exploration will yield the benefit,  with certainty. This can allow it to save on exploration costs and it also

may be a mechanism of securing additional funding and resources. That said, the publicness of exploitation

implies that there is still a risk, at any point, that the product is imitated. Nonetheless, even with imitation

of a successful product, the start-up can still choose to embark on additional exploration.

        Given this, the start-up now chooses T to solve:
                                       ()E(1 - )V() + ()J - 
                                 0                           - ()
                                               (1 + )0


                        V(0)       (W-Z)VE0[ J-V(0)-L
where V() = max 0F (WXY)D +                    [        - ( F ) (if there is no imitation of the initial product) and
                                         (WXY)D

                (W-Z)VE0[ J-L
() = max 0F              [      - ( F ) (if there is imitation of the initial product). Each of these are the option
                   (WXY)D


value of continuing exploration after you have exploited (that is, bumping up to a better S-curve).

        The most significant finding here is that, where there is no imitation, the optimal T' is increasing

in T, the initial level of exploration. That is, the higher the S-curve potential reached in the initial round of

exploration, the higher is the target for an S-curve in subsequent rounds. Intuitively, if the initial S-curve

has positive value when exploited that signals that further investment in S-curves will also have positive

value. So, one effect, as expected, is to spur additional investment following the initial experiment.

However, importantly, the threshold to justify that additional investment must be correspondingly higher

because that investment will replace the initial successful investment. In other words, there is a replacement

effect that emerges in the second stage but in contrast to that discussed by Arrow (1962), this applies to

start-ups. Ironically, if there is imitation, this start-up replacement effect is not present and the optimal

length of exploration is shorter.

        This gives rise to an interesting insight. Being able to explore for a time and then exploit, changes

the potential behavior of the start-up. Specifically, if the start-up were to have a goal of a long total period

of exploration in order to end up on an S-curve with higher potential, to exercise the option associated with

staged exploration, the start-up would want to choose a more limited period of exploration initially in order

to commit themselves to continuing to that higher level should the technological uncertainty resolve

favorably. Whether the technological choice ends up being an S-curve with greater exploration and greater

potential or not depends upon the trade-off between a desire for an early resolution of uncertainty versus a

desire to economize on resource constraints by committing to a longer period of exploration. This
"commitment" approach to long-term S-curve exploration is indicative of the commitment value one sees

in Tesla.

        The interaction of the entrepreneur's technological choice with their choice of beachhead market

illustrates how lacking a pre-commitment to exploration, an entrepreneur may ultimately choose not to

pursue a S-curve with higher potential despite earlier intentions. For instance, following Christensen (1997),

we might think of start-ups who are conducting an experiment as choosing a more modest S-curve with

which to penetrate an under-served market niche (who place a value of lower technical performance). They

could enter that niche successfully (and not encourage imitation) but find themselves, precisely for that

reason, likely to go no further and enter mainstream markets because choosing an S-curve with high

performance at that point will cannibalize their own position in the niche market as well as potentially

provoke a response from established firms (see Gans 2016). In other words, a start-up pursuing an

experiment might find themselves stuck incentive-wise from pursuing a technology to a much higher level

and scale.

        This potential for being stuck at a lower performance level is likely if the start-up is resourced

constrained. A start-up that is resourced constrained, in terms of c that limits the initial exploratory choice

(T) both increases the risk that exploration will not be successful and causes it to anticipate choosing a

lower T' should it be successful and further funding is available. This suggests that a more complete analysis

of resource constraints, funding commitments and the role of competition and imitation are a fruitful area

for future analysis of what drives start-up growth.



 V.     Industry-Level Technology S-Curve


        We have focused our analysis so far on the case of a single start-up firm that is able to exercise

significant level of choice over both whether a particular trajectory is developed at all, and, if so, the balance

between exploration and exploitation that yields a particular S-curve for that technology. Of course, most

emerging technological opportunities ­ such as electric vehicles ­ attract multiple potential entrants
including existing firms. Indeed, while its micro-foundations are at the firm level, the Technology S-curve

is often taken to reflect an industrywide (or sectoral) phenomena (Abernathy and Utterback 1978; Anderson

and Tushman 1990; Utterback 1994), and, though often invoked as a strategic tool for individual firms,

both the existence and nature of the Technology S-curve are largely grounded in industry-level case studies

(Foster 1986; Christensen 1997).

        The linkage between the tradeoffs impacting a single firm and the patterns that emerge at an

industry level results from an (often implicit) set of assumptions about how a group of firms responds to

the emergence of a technological opportunity. Specifically, as illustrated in the rich coevolutionary models

of innovation and competition such as Utterback and Abernathy (1975) and Klepper (1996), the key

dynamic is the shared challenges among firms at different stages of the technology lifecycle result in

distinctive patterns of innovation at the industry level. Specifically, in the early stages after a technological

discontinuity, a wide range of firms enter and engage in experimentation and learning ­ this period

corresponds to the initial flat portion of the S-curve. However, when technical and institutional factors allow

for the establishment of a dominant design, there is a significant uptick in the realized performance of the

technology (expanding demand), a shakeout of firms, and a shift towards more incremental process

innovation, in a way that mirrors the pattern of increasing and then declining returns to R&D effort.

        The choice-based perspective developed earlier provides insight into both the underlying

assumptions of such a model, as well as insight into the nature of the strategic choices facing start-up

innovators when multiple firms are pursuing an emerging technological opportunity. Notably, connecting

the tradeoff between exploration and exploitation at the firm and industry level requires implicitly at least

three assumptions in evolutionary models: First, that there is a shared perception of the opportunity

presented from the emerging technological trajectory. Second, that there is shared access to the emerging

trajectory itself, with few restrictions on entry due to intellectual property or secrecy. Third, that there is

shared learning as firms engage with the emerging trajectory; that the experiments and failures from

individual firm's exploration activities are (at least partially) transmitted to other firms within the industry

and contribute to accumulated learning at the industry level. Though industry ferment is characterized by
broad experimentation and competing paths (Clark 1985), it relies on a degree of common perception,

access, and learning across entrants (both entrepreneurs and existing firms) engaging with the emerging

trajectory.

        Perhaps more saliently, a choice-based perspective offers novel insight into the core strategic

choices facing firms engaging with an emerging technological trajectory. Rather than a "passive" process

by which firms engage first in exploration and then shift towards exploitation with the emergence of a

dominant design, a choice-based approach suggests that firms face a core strategic tradeoff between

attempting to shift from exploration to exploitation at the earliest stage possible (in order to gain competitive

advantage through the establishment of the dominant design) versus continuing to invest in exploration in

order to enhance the likelihood that a shift towards exploitation will in fact be successful. In other words,

building on the model in Section IV, each firm in the emerging trajectory faces a tradeoff between

exploration and exploitation, but there is significant uncertainty for each firm about which mix will yield a

level of learning and subsequent technological performance that will be sufficient to catalyze

standardization around a dominant design. Specifically, a firm that shifts from exploration to exploitation

prematurely has a higher chance for failure; a firm that maintains an orientation towards exploration risks

missing the shift in industry dynamics. Ultimately, this choice-based perspective suggest that firms are not

simply choosing among technological S-curves with which to engage, but also choosing how to shape the

S-curve of the technologies they engage.

        This broader lesson on dynamics offers insights about the emergence of Tesla over the past 15

years as the leading firms in electric vehicles. Tesla was neither the first start-up to enter the electric vehicle

industry, nor was it the only firm that sought to take advantage of the potential for lowered cost and

increased power from lithium ion batteries. However, in contrast to both efforts by existing incumbent firms

in the combustion engine automobile, and other electric vehicle start-ups, Tesla both committed itself to a

meaningful level of exploration that allowed it to actually realize a higher level of technological

performance and so land a beachhead market, and also committed itself to experimental commercialization

that avoided more exploratory efforts (such as relying on new electrolytes or load-bearing battery cells) that
have yielded significant learning but where the firm never shifted towards meaningful exploitation and

commercialization.


VI.     Implications for Strategy and Policy


        A choice-based approach to the Technology S-curve offers insights for researchers, practitioners

and policy. On the one hand, an immediate consequence of a choice-based approach is that the incentives

to pursue exploration versus exploitation around a given technology depend not only on the nature of

technology itself, but on the strategic and institutional environment in which that technology is situated. A

trajectory being pursued by a long-term oriented entrepreneur (and similarly patient investors and funders)

committed to cumulative knowledge development is likely to have few short-term successes but may serve

as a foundation for long-term innovation potential. Beyond the laboratory-based evidence of Ederer and

Manso (2013), Tian and Wang (2014) and Nanda and Rhodes-Kropf (2013) demonstrate that the failure

tolerance and risk appetite of venture capitalists allows for more exploration which ultimately yields greater

commercialization of innovative technologies. Alternatively, short-termism in innovation can not only limit

the immediate application of a technology but may reduce the long-term potential of that trajectory through

a lock-in to a more exploitation-oriented approach.

        One of the novel implications of our analysis is that, even when there exists an option to shift back

and forth between exploration and exploitation, an early focus on exploitation may induce a "replacement"

effect that diminishes incentives to shift back towards a more exploratory mode. Concretely, though the

disincentives for innovation arising from the replacement effect have traditionally been linked to incumbent

players, the potential existence of an early-stage exploitation-oriented market of an emerging technology

may limit the long-term evolution of that path (at least by that start-up firm). Put another way, our model

highlights the importance of strategic commitment in being able to realize a more exploratory approach.

This potential for lock-in has implications not only for entrepreneurs but also for investors and other

stakeholders. Specifically, unless funders are able to commit to a potential staging of funding that commits
the start-up to a higher level of exploration, lack of resources is likely to induce start-ups to undertake a

more exploitation-oriented approach.

        This dynamic is particularly salient in assessing the interaction between a start-up's initial choice

of customer, or beachhead market, their technology choice, and their overall entrepreneurial strategy. For

instance, an entrepreneur following a disruption strategy (Christensen 1997) by initially pursuing a poorly

served niche market (who place a value of lower technical performance) on a strategic path to enter the

mainstream market may find that successful entry into the niche market (without threat of imitation) may

mute their incentive to continue to the mainstream market (due to cannibalization and potential incumbent

competitive response). More generally, the ex-ante strategic freedom entrepreneurs possess that enables

them to take advantage of emerging Technology S-curves (while existing firms delay) may be short-lived.

Early-stage strategic choices induce organizational inertia (Kapoor and Furr 2015), foreclose particular

options (Gans Stern and Wu 2019) and impose subsequent biases (Kaplan and Tripsas 2008).

        Though we have focused our analysis on the broad tradeoff between exploration versus

exploitation, a similar dynamic emerges if one considers related dimensions of technological change.

Specifically, though start-ups may face significant latitude in choosing between a more modular versus

more systemic "version" of a technology, choosing the initial degree of modularity within a design

constrains design freedom going forward (Egan 2013). For example, the choice by Steve Wozniak and

Steve Jobs to develop a more integrated design in the Apple II relative to more modular approaches such

as the IBM PC induced a design contrast that has persisted for more than forty years. Similarly,

entrepreneurs pursuing an emerging technological trajectory often have significant choice over the degree

of generality of that technology (i.e., whether development focuses on specific applications or involve a

more general-purpose approach). For example, after a regulatory shock raised the cost of integrating into

more specialized markets, firms in the laser industry pursued more "generalist" approaches to that

technological trajectory (Conti et al 2019).

        More generally, while the bulk of theoretical and empirical research in innovation strategy takes

these two dimensions of technology as givens (Bresnahan and Trajtenberg 1995; Schilling 2000), a choice-
based approach suggests that each of these aspects of a technology are endogenously influenced. Consider

again the contrasting development approaches of Better Place and Tesla. While both companies were

premised on taking advantage of the potential for improvement in lithium ion batteries, each company took

a very different approach in how to take advantage of that possibility. On the one hand, Better Place focused

relatively rapidly on implementing their "swappable battery" concept, resulting in two key design choices.

First, to implement a "plug-and-play" automobile battery, Better Place found that it had to fundamentally

redesign the automobile itself (most specifically, it had to reconceptualize the traditional drive train upon

which the bulk of automobile system design is built). Second, to accelerate time to market (i.e., their focus

on rapid exploitation), Better Place chose to undertake its development in a manner that was specifically

optimized for automotive applications rather than the broader battery market. Though facing the same

opportunity, technology and market, the approach by Tesla during the second half of the 2000s differed

sharply on both of these dimensions. The early years of Tesla were marked on the one hand by a design

focus that allowed Tesla to take advantage of existing automobile system design (i.e., preserving the

traditional drivetrain) while also focusing their technology development in a way that allowed them to lead

battery development not simply for automobiles but for a wider range of applications (Ramey 2017).

        Finally, our analysis offers significant implication for innovation policy. First, while our analysis

has focused primarily on the technology strategy choices of start-up firms, the broad tradeoff we analyze

also is salient for individual scientific researchers. As documented in Azoulay, et al (2011), the provision

of more exploratory research incentives for life science researchers (resulting from being granted a Howard

Hughes Medical Investigator grant) results in a similar quantity of scientific output (i.e., raw numbers of

papers) but is associated with the pursuit of more exploratory research approaches (e.g., a higher fraction

of papers which either fail (e.g., are poorly cited) or become home runs). Our analysis is moreover

consistent with a broader body of evidence (drawn from detailed analyses of disparate publicly funded start-

up innovation programs (including DARPA, ARPA-E, NIH, and SBIR) that a central dimension of

innovation policy is not simply the provision of research funding but the management and incentives

governing the research that is funded (Azoulay et al 2019). More generally, our analysis suggests that, given
that, almost by definition, we do not observe the full range of potential ways that any particular technology

could be developed, and so it is worthwhile to explicitly consider how entrepreneurs and other

decisionmakers make choices about which paths to explore and which are left behind.
References
Abernathy W (1976) Production process structure and technological change. Decision Science. 7(4):607-
619.
Abernathy W, Utterback J (1978) Patterns of industrial innovation. Technology Review. 80(7):41-47.
Adner R (2002) When are technologies disruptive? A demand-based view of the emergence of
competition. Strategic Management Journal. 23(8):667­88.
Adner R, Kapoor R (2016) Innovation ecosystems and the pace of substitution: Re-examining technology
S-curves. Strategic Management Journal. 37(4): 625-648.
Anderson P, Tushman M (1990) Technological discontinuities and dominant designs: A cyclical model of
technological change. Administrative Science Quarterly. 35(1990):604-633.
Arrow K (1962) Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention. Nelson R, ed. The Rate
and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors (National Bureau of Economic Research),
609-626.
Azoulay P, Fuchs E, Goldstein A, Kearney M (2019) Funding breakthrough research: promises and
challenges of the "ARPA Model." Lerner J and Stern S, eds. Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume
19.
Azoulay P, Graff Zivin J, and Manso G (2011) Incentives and creativity: evidence from the academic life
sciences. RAND Journal of Economics. 42(3):527-554.
Baker D (2016) Elon Musk: Tesla was founded on 2 false ideas, and survived anyway. SFGate (May 31
2016).
Bower JL, Christensen C (1995) Disruptive Technologies: Catching the Wave. Harvard Business Review.
73(1):43­53.
Bresnahan T, Trajtenberg M (1995) General purpose technologies `engines of growth'? Journal of
Econometrics. 65(1):83-108.
Burns T, Stalker, GM (1961) The Management of Innovation (Oxford University Press).
Carroll GR, Bigelow LS, Seidel ML, Tsai LB (1996) The fates of de novo and de alio producers in the
American automobile industry 1885-1981. Strategic Management Journal. 17:117-137.
Chafkin M (2014) A broken place: The spectacular failure of the startup that was going to change the
word. The Atlantic (April 2014).
Christensen C (1992a) Doctoral Dissertation, Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA.
Christensen C (1992b) Exploring the limits of the technology S-curve, Part 1: Component Technologies.
Production and Operations Management. 1(4):334­357.
Christensen C (1992c) Exploring the limits of the technology S-curve, Part 2: Architectural Technologies.
Production and Operations Management. 1(4):358­366.
Christensen C (1993) The rigid disk drive industry: A history of commercial and technological turbulence.
The Business History Review. 67(4):531-588
Christensen C (1997) The Innovator's Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail
(Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA).
Christensen C, McDonald R, Altman EJ, Palmer J (2018) Disruptive innovation: An intellectual history and
directions for future research. Journal of Management Studies. 55(7):1043-1078.
Clark KB (1985) The interaction of design hierarchies and market concepts in technological evolution.
Research Policy. 14(5): 235-251.
Conti R, Gambardella A, Novelli E (2019) Specializing in general purpose technologies as a firm long-
term strategy. Industrial and Corporate Change. 28(2):351-364.
Danneels E (2004) Disruptive technology reconsidered: A critique and research agenda. Journal of
Product Innovation Management. 21(4):246­58.
Dosi G (1982) Technological paradigms and technological trajectories: a suggested interpretation of the
determinants and directions of technical change. Research Policy. 11(3):147-162.
Ederer F, Manso G (2013). Is pay for performance detrimental to innovation? Management Science.
59(7):1496-1513.
Egan E (2013) How start-up firms innovate: technology strategy, commercialization strategy, and their
relationship. Working Paper. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2364096.
Foster RN (1986) Innovation: The Attacker's Advantage (Summit Books, New York, NY).
Furr N, Cavarretta F, Garg S (2012) Who changes course? The role of domain knowledge and novel
framing in making technology changes. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal. 6(3): 236-256.
Ganco M, Agarwal R (2009) Performance differentials between diversifying entrants and entrepreneurial
start-ups: A complexity approach. Academy of Management Review. 34(2): 228-252.
Gans JS (2016) The Disruption Dilemma (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).
Gans JS, Scott EL, Stern S (2018) Strategy for start-ups. Harvard Business Review. 96(3):46-51.
Gans JS, Scott EL, Stern S (2020) Entrepreneurial Strategy. Draft Book Manuscript.
Gans JS, Stern S (2000) Incumbency and R&D incentives: Licensing the gale of creative destruction.
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy. 9(4):485-511.
Gans JS, Stern S (2003) The product market and the market for `ideas': commercialization strategies for
technology entrepreneurs. Research Policy. 32(2):333-350.
Gans JS, Stern S, Wu J (2019) Foundations of entrepreneurial strategy. Strategic Management Journal.
40(5):736-756.
Hall SS (1988) Invisible Frontiers: The Race to Synthesize a Human Gene (Sidgwick & Jackson, London).
Henderson R (1988) The Failure of Established Firms in the Face of Technological Change: A Study of
Photolithographic Alignment Equipment. Doctoral Dissertation. Harvard Business School, Cambridge,
MA.
Henderson R (1995) Of life cycles real and imaginary: The unexpectedly long old age of optical
lithography. Research Policy. 24(4): 631-643.
Henderson R (2006) The innovator's dilemma as a problem of organizational competence. Journal of
Product Innovation Management. 23(1):5-11.
Henderson R, Clark K (1990) Architectural innovation: the reconfiguration of existing product technologies
and the failure of established firms. Administrative Science Quarterly. 35(1):9­30.
Kaplan S, Tripsas M (2008) Thinking about technology: Applying a cognitive lens to technical change.
Research Policy. 37(5):790-805.
Kapoor, R, Furr NR (2015) Complementarities and competition: Unpacking the drivers of entrants'
technology choices in the solar photovoltaic industry. Strategic Management Journal. 36(3), 416-436.
Khessina OM, Carroll GR (2008) Product demography of de novo and de alio firms in the optical disk drive
industry, 1983-1999. Organization Science. 19(1): 25-38.
King AA, Baatartogtokh B (2015) How useful is the theory of disruptive innovation? MIT Sloan
Management Review. 57(1):77­90.
King AA, Tucci CL (2002). Incumbent entry into new market niches: The role of experience and managerial
choice in the creation of dynamic capabilities. Management Science. 48(2):171­86.
Klepper S (1996) Entry, exit, growth and innovation over the product life cycle. American Economic
Review. 86(3):562-83.
Klepper S, Simons KL (2000) Dominance by birthright: Entry of prior radio producers and competitive
ramifications in the US Television receiver industry. Strategic Management Journal. 21: 997-1016.
Lepore J (2014) The disruption machine: What the gospel of innovation gets wrong. The New Yorker (June
23 2014).
Levinthal D, March, J (1981) A model of adaptive organizational search. J. Economic Behavior &
Organizations. 2(4):307­333.
Levinthal D, March, J (1993) The myopia of learning. Strategic Management Journal. 14(2):95-112.
Manso G (2011) Motivating innovation. Journal of Finance. 66(5):1823-1860.
March J (1991) Exploration and exploitation in organization learning. Organization Science, 2(1):71­87.
Mitchell W (1994) The dynamics of evolving markets: The effects of business sales and age on dissolutions
and divestitures. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39(4):575-602.
Nagy B, Farmer JD, Bui WM, Trancik JE (2013) Statistical basis for predicting technological progress.
PLoS ONE. 8(2): e52669.
Nanda R, Rhodes-Kropf M (2013) Investment cycles and startup innovation. Journal of Financial
Economics. 110(2)403-418.
Nelson R (1962) The link between science and invention: the case of the transistor. Nelson R, ed. The Rate
and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors (National Bureau of Economic Research),
549-584.
Ramey J (2017) The first tesla roadster: A look back at the early adopter's electric car. Autoweek (November
27 2107).
Roberts E (1988) What we've learned: Managing invention and innovation. Research-Technology
Management. 31(1):1988.
Rosenberg N (1976) Perspectives on Technology (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK).
Rosenberg N (1994) Exploring the Black Box: Technology, Economics, and History (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK).
Sahal D (1981) Alternative conceptions of technology. Research Policy. 10(1981):2-24.
Schilling MA (2000). Toward a general modular systems theory and its application to interfirm product
modularity. Academy of Management Review. 25(2):312­334.
Schumpeter J (1942) Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (Harper & Row, New York, NY).
Shane S (2000) Prior knowledge and the discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportunities. Organization Science.
11(4):448-469.
Stern S (1995) Incentives and Focus in University and Industrial Research: The Case of Synthetic Insulin.
Rosenberg N, Gelijns AC, Dawkins H, eds. Sources of Medical Technology Universities and Industry
(National Academies Press, Washington DC), 157-187.
Squatriglia C (2009) Renault's EV features a swappable battery. Wired (June 22 2019).
Teece DJ (1986) Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration, collaboration,
licensing and public policy. Research Policy. 15(6):285-305.
Tian X, Wang TY (2014) Tolerance for failure and corporate innovation. Review of Financial Studies.
27(1):211-255.
Tripsas M (1997) Unraveling the process of creative destruction: Complementary assets and incumbent
survival in the typesetter industry. Strategic Management Journal. 18(1):119-142.
Tripsas M, Gavetti G (2000) Capabilities, cognition, and inertia: Evidence from digital imaging. Strategic
Management Journal. 21(10/11):1147-1161.
Utterback J, Abernathy W (1975) A dynamic model of process and product innovation. OMEGA, The Int.
Jl of Mgmt Sci. 3(6): 639-656.
Utterback J (1994) Mastering the Dynamics of Innovation: How Companies can Seize Opportunities in the
Face of Technological Change (Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA).
Wu B, Wan Z, Levinthal DA (2014) Complementary assets as pipes and prisms: Innovation incentives and
trajectory choices. Strategic Management Journal. 35(9), 1257-1278.
Figures




Figure 1: For an emerging technology with which a start-up chooses to engage, the entrepreneur is facing
  a strategic choice over the set of potential firm-level S-curves that may be realized based on differing
levels of investment in exploration (versus exploitation). A start-up that prioritizes near-term performance
  (the red dotted curve, left) sacrifices their ability to realize long-term potential, while a start-up that is
 willing to undertake a longer period of exploration (the blue dashed curve, right) bears the costs of lower
    performance at the earliest stages of the trajectory though may realize greater long-term potential.
