                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE EFFECT OF MANAGERS ON SYSTEMATIC RISK

                                       Antoinette Schoar
                                        Kelvin Yeung
                                           Luo Zuo

                                      Working Paper 27487
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27487


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We appreciate the helpful comments of Sanjeev Bhojraj, Robert Bloomfield, Ivor Cribben,
Toomas Laarits, Pavel Savor, and Eric Yeung, as well as seminar participants at Cornell
University, the 2019 Conference on Financial Economics and Accounting, and the American
Finance Association 2020 Annual Meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Antoinette Schoar, Kelvin Yeung, and Luo Zuo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Managers on Systematic Risk
Antoinette Schoar, Kelvin Yeung, and Luo Zuo
NBER Working Paper No. 27487
July 2020
JEL No. G12,G30

                                         ABSTRACT

Tracking the movement of top managers across firms, we document the importance of manager-
specific fixed effects in explaining heterogeneity in firm exposures to systematic risk. These
differences in systematic risk are partially explained by managers' corporate strategies, such as
their preferences for internal growth and financial conservatism. Managers' early-career
experiences of starting their first job in a recession also contribute to differential loadings on
systematic risk. These effects are more pronounced for smaller firms. Overall, our results suggest
that managerial styles have important implications for asset prices.


Antoinette Schoar                               Luo Zuo
MIT Sloan School of Management                  Johnson Graduate School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-638                        Cornell University
Cambridge, MA 02142                             114 East Avenue
and NBER                                        349 Sage Hall
aschoar@mit.edu                                 Ithaca, NY 14853
                                                luozuo@cornell.edu
Kelvin Yeung
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
114 East Avenue
301 Sage Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
kky23@cornell.edu
1    Introduction

         A key principle in asset pricing theory is that investors are compensated for bearing

systematic risk, but not idiosyncratic risk (Cochrane 2005). Drawing on this insight, empirical

asset pricing models decompose stock return variability into systematic and idiosyncratic

components (e.g., Fama and French 2015, 2018). The systematic risk of a stock is determined by

its beta, which measures the sensitivity of the stock's return to common risk factors such as the

market factor. In an effort to uncover the underlying sources of systematic risk, a large literature

investigates the determinants of beta.1 The general conclusion from these studies is that a large

amount of variation in systematic risk cannot be explained by firm-, industry-, or market-level

variables.2 In this paper, we ask whether manager-specific differences account for part of this

unexplained variation.

         A growing body of research suggests that CEOs and other top executives exhibit large

person-specific differences in their management styles. Bertrand and Schoar (2003) document that

such person-specific styles explain a significant amount of variation in firms' capital structures,

investment decisions, and organizational structures. The notion that CEOs differ in their styles is

reinforced by Bennedsen, Pérez-González, and Wolfenzon (2020) who exploit hospitalizations to

examine variation in firms' exposures to their CEOs. Similarly, a vibrant literature suggests that

managers' personal traits play a role in shaping their management approach (e.g., Malmendier and

Tate 2005; Kaplan, Klebanov, and Sorensen 2012; Graham, Harvey, and Puri 2013; Benmelech




1
  See, for example, Beaver, Kettler, and Scholes (1970), Hamada (1972), Breen and Lerner (1973), Rosenberg and
McKibben (1973), Fisher (1974), Lev and Kunitzky (1974), Melicher (1974), Robichek and Cohn (1974), Ben-Zion
and Shalit (1975), and Karolyi (1992).
2
  Ben-Zion and Shalit (1975) conclude that "a search for the `missing variable' seems to be a worthwhile undertaking
for future research, not only because an important determinant of risk might thus be identified, but also because in the
process we may gain a better understanding of the different aspects of risk."

                                                           1
and Frydman 2015).3 Prior research, however, often assumes that managerial style mostly affects

firms' exposures to idiosyncratic risk rather than systematic risk. For example, Bushman, Dai, and

Wang (2010) "posit that idiosyncratic volatility reflects information arrival related to the impact

of CEO talent on firm performance, while systematic volatility captures aspects of return volatility

unrelated to CEO talent and beyond the CEO's control." Our results suggest that managerial style

explains a substantial fraction of the variation in both idiosyncratic risk and systematic risk.4

         Starting from a single-factor market model, we decompose stock return variability into

systematic and idiosyncratic components. Total risk (TVOL) is the standard deviation of a firm's

daily stock returns within its fiscal year. Our measure of systematic risk (  ) is the slope

coefficient on the excess return of the market portfolio and our measure of idiosyncratic risk

(IVOL) is the standard deviation of the residuals. Although we focus on the single-index model,

our results generalize to other empirical asset pricing models such as the Fama-French Six-Factor

Model.5

         Following Bertrand and Schoar (2003), we track the movement of managers across firms

over time to disentangle manager fixed effects from firm fixed effects. We cannot separate

manager fixed effects from firm fixed effects if, for example, a manager never switches firms and

advances only through internal promotions. In our base model, we regress each measure of risk on

firm fixed effects and year fixed effects. Then, we add manager fixed effects to our base model


3
  In addition, recent research documents that individuals exhibit large differences in their expectations about future
macroeconomic conditions, which influences their desire to invest in the stock market and purchase durable goods
(e.g., Kuhnen and Miu 2017; Das, Kuhnen, and Nagel 2020).
4
  A strand of research suggests that managers' incentives influence their risk-taking behavior. However, this literature
does not focus on manager-specific differences such as talent and personal experiences. Instead, this literature views
managers as interchangeable and assumes that different managers will make similar decisions when provided with the
same incentives.
5
  We focus on market beta due to its strong theoretical roots (Sharpe 1964; Lintner 1965) and its widespread use in
practice. Berk and van Binsbergen (2016) find that the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) is the dominant model
used by mutual fund investors to make their capital allocation decisions. In addition, Graham and Harvey (2001) report
that more than 70% of CFOs use the CAPM to calculate their cost of equity.

                                                           2
and examine whether the manager fixed effects have incremental explanatory power.6 Intuitively,

we test whether systematic risk is correlated across at least two firms when the same manager is

present, controlling for time-invariant firm characteristics (firm fixed effects) and year-specific

cross-sectional effects (year fixed effects).

        Our results indicate that managerial style is an important determinant of systematic risk.

We observe a 7.16% increase in adjusted R2 when we add manager fixed effects to the model with

 as the dependent variable, which translates to a 16.67% increase relative to the base model.

For comparison, we observe a 4.43% increase in adjusted R2 when we use  as the dependent

variable and we observe a 4.56% increase in adjusted R2 when we use  as the dependent

variable. Adjusted R2 increases by 7.19% and 7.36% relative to the base model for  and

, respectively. Furthermore, the frequency of significant manager fixed effects is far greater

than would be expected under the null hypothesis that managerial style is not a determinant of

systematic risk: 49.26% of the manager fixed effects are significant at the 10% level, 43.18% of

the manager fixed effects are significant at the 5% level, and 35.01% of the manager fixed effects

are significant at the 1% level. In terms of economic magnitude, hiring a manager at the 25th

percentile leads to a 0.201 decrease in  and hiring a manager at the 75th percentile leads to a

0.161 increase in  .

        In addition, we confirm the above results with a more parametric specification by tracking

the evolution of  in event-time surrounding executive transitions. When a firm hires a

manager with a beta-increasing style, we observe an immediate and persistent increase in  .




6
 This approach does not rule out that managers may develop their style over time or that the market may learn about
a manager's style over her tenure (e.g., Pan, Wang, and Weisbach 2015), but manager fixed effects do not capture
such a time-varying dimension of style.

                                                        3
In contrast, when a firm hires a manager with a beta-decreasing style, we observe an immediate

and persistent decrease in  .

       To understand the channels through which top managers affect systematic risk, we analyze

whether specific firm-level decisions that managers undertake translate into differential loadings

on systematic risk. We first examine whether manager fixed effects on the real side of the firm,

such as capital structure decisions and other firm policies, explain manager fixed effects on beta,

 . Bertrand and Schoar (2003) show that manager fixed effects are important for a number of

corporate policy variables. We conduct factor analysis which shows that these manager fixed

effects vary along three dimensions: internal growth, financial conservatism, and external growth.

Manager fixed effects on  are positively related to managers' preferences for internal growth

and negatively related to managers' preferences for financial conservatism, but do not vary

systematically with measures of external growth.

       To analyze the importance of managerial strategies in explaining manager fixed effects on

 , we also rerun our regressions, but directly control for time-varying firm characteristics. This

specification directly absorbs changes on the real side of the firm that top managers might be

undertaking. When we control for time-varying firm characteristics, adjusted R2 increases by

6.86% (compared to 7.16% in the benchmark specification). Our results indicate that time-varying

firm characteristics partially explain manager fixed effects on  , However, manager fixed

effects have significant explanatory power after controlling for time-varying firm characteristics.

The above results suggest that managers affect their firm's loading on systematic risk via the

corporate strategies they adopt, but a large amount of the variation in manager fixed effects on

 remains unexplained by these observable dimensions.




                                                4
        Similarly, by using unlevered betas (i.e. asset betas) we separate out the effect of the firm's

capital structure and isolate the component of systematic risk due to the firm's assets. Adjusted R2

increases by 6.06%, which translates to a 13.98% increase relative to the base model. Our results

indicate that manager fixed effects are an important determinant of unlevered beta, which confirms

that managers influence the risk of their firm's underlying assets and not only the capital structure

of their firm.

        In a next step, we analyze whether observable manager characteristics explain manager

fixed effects with respect to systematic risk. We find that manager fixed effects on  are related

to managers' early-career experiences. On average, the signed effect on  is 0.240 smaller for

managers who originally entered the labor market during recessions. These results are in line with

the findings in Schoar and Zuo (2017) that managers who enter the labor market during recessions

adopt more conservative corporate strategies, such as lower SG&A or reduced leverage. We do

not find evidence that other characteristics like age or gender are related to manager fixed effects

on  .

        To shed light on the settings in which managerial style matters more for systematic risk,

we analyze whether certain firm and market conditions moderate the effect of managers on beta.

We find that manager fixed effects on  are more pronounced in smaller firms compared to

larger firms, which is consistent with the notion that managers have more discretion over firm

outcomes in smaller firms.

        In a final step, we examine whether managers are matched to firms based on their style.

For example, boards might prefer to hire beta-increasing managers when they expect a bull market

and vice versa for beta-decreasing managers in a bear market. We do not find evidence of such

hiring patterns.



                                                  5
          We conduct a battery of sensitivity tests to ascertain the robustness of our results. First,

estimates of systematic risk may be biased when a stock is infrequently traded (Dimson 1979).

This concern is unlikely to confound our results since our sample tracks firms in the S&P 1500.

Nevertheless, we ensure that our results hold when we estimate beta following Dimson (1979).

Second, we estimate each measure of risk using weekly returns in lieu of daily returns to ensure

that microstructure frictions such as bid-ask bounce do not confound our results. Lastly, three

notable events occurred during our sample period: the dotcom bubble, the Enron scandal, and the

global financial crisis. Our identification strategy examines whether systematic risk is correlated

across at least two firms when the same manager is present. If the events thereof induce executive

transitions and affect firms' risk exposures, then these events could drive our results. This is not

the case. Our results are qualitatively similar if we exclude managers who join or leave a firm

during the dotcom bubble (2000), the Enron scandal (2001), or the 2007-2008 global financial

crisis.

          The rest of our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature.

Section 3 describes our sample. Section 4 describes our measures of risk and presents descriptive

statistics. Section 5 presents the main results. Section 6 summarizes and offers some concluding

remarks.

2    Related Literature

          One of the key insights of asset pricing theory is that investors are rewarded for bearing

systematic risk, but not idiosyncratic risk. To shed light on the sources of systematic risk, a large

literature studies the fundamental determinants of beta. Early empirical work identified several




                                                   6
firm-, industry-, and market-level determinants.7 More recently, a strand of the literature models

beta as a function of firm characteristics, including size, book-to-market, and financial leverage.

For example, Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003) model a dynamic general equilibrium production

economy that links beta with firm size and book-to-market. Size captures the importance of growth

options relative to assets-in-place. Small firms derive most of their value from growth options,

while large firms derive most of their value from assets-in-place. Since growth options are riskier

than assets-in-place, small firms have higher beta. On the other hand, book-to-market is a measure

of the risk associated with a firm's assets-in-place, leading to a positive relation between beta and

book-to-market. Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004) elaborate on the mechanism underlying

this relation. High book-to-market firms have higher operating leverage (i.e., more fixed costs),

which increases their sensitivity to aggregate demand shocks. Livdan, Sapriza, and Zhang (2009)

study the relation between beta and financial leverage. Levered firms are riskier because financial

constraints hinder their ability to adjust capital investments in response to aggregate demand

shocks. We contribute to this literature by identifying managerial style as a novel determinant of

beta. Our paper differs from prior research in that we examine manager-specific differences rather

than firm, industry, or market characteristics.8

         A growing body of research suggests that CEOs and other top executives exhibit large

person-specific differences in their management styles. Bertrand and Schoar (2003) document that

such person-specific styles explain a large fraction of the variation in firms' investment, financial,

and organizational policies. In a similar vein, other studies have documented the importance of


7
  See, for example, Beaver, Kettler, and Scholes (1970), Hamada (1972), Breen and Lerner (1973), Rosenberg and
McKibben (1973), Fisher (1974), Lev and Kunitzky (1974), Melicher (1974), Robichek and Cohn (1974), Ben-Zion
and Shalit (1975), and Karolyi (1992).
8
  A strand of research suggests that managers' incentives influence their risk-taking behavior (e.g., Coles, Daniel, and
Naveen 2006; Armstrong and Vashishtha 2012; Hayes, Lemmon, and Qiu 2012; Shue and Townsend 2017). However,
this literature does not focus on manager-specific differences. Instead, this literature assumes that different managers
will make similar decisions when provided with the same incentives.

                                                           7
managerial style for tax avoidance (Dyreng, Hanlon, and Maydew 2010), voluntary disclosure

(Bamber, Jiang, and Wang 2010), and financial reporting (Ge, Matsumoto, and Zhang 2011).

Recently, Bennedsen, Pérez-González, and Wolfenzon (2020) show that CEOs have significant

effects on investment and profitability using hospitalizations as an exogenous source of variation

in firms' exposures to their CEOs. A related strand of literature suggests that managers' styles are

shaped by their personal traits including overconfidence (Malmendier and Tate 2005, 2008;

Hirshleifer, Low, and Teoh 2012), skills and expertise (Kaplan, Klebanov, and Sorensen 2012;

Custódio and Metzger 2013, 2014), military service (Benmelech and Frydman 2015), marriage

(Roussanov and Savor 2014), parenting a daughter (Cronqvist and Yu 2017), and formative

experiences during childhood (Malmendier, Tate, and Yan 2011; Bernile, Bhagwat, and Rau 2016)

and the beginning of a manager's career (Dittmar and Duchin 2015; Schoar and Zuo 2016, 2017).9

While a growing body of research documents the effects of individual managers in accounting and

corporate finance, the asset pricing implications of managerial style have remained unexplored.

We fill this gap by documenting the importance of managerial style for firms' systematic risk

exposures.

3    Sample

        Our sample begins with all executives covered by Execucomp between 1992 and 2016.

Within the Execucomp universe, we identify managers who work in two or more firms

("movers").10 In doing so, we require that movers work at least three years in each firm, giving



9
 A large body of work in the strategic management literature argues that managers' unique experiences, values, and
personalities influence how they respond to complex situations, see Hambrick and Mason (1984) or Hambrick (2007).
First, a manager's field of vision is limited and they might therefore operate with specific heuristics. Second, the
information selected for processing is interpreted through a filter woven by the manager's cognitive frame.
10
   Beginning in 1994, Execucomp has tracked the top five highest paid executives in the S&P 1500. Execucomp
includes both incumbent firms as well as firms that were once part of the S&P 1500, but were later removed from the
index. Before 1994, Execucomp's coverage was limited to the S&P 500. Our sample selection procedure excludes
managers who move from an Execucomp firm to a non-Execucomp firm and vice versa. However, we do not believe

                                                         8
these managers an opportunity to "imprint their mark." If a firm employs a mover at any point

during our sample period, we retain all of that firm's observations. Lastly, our sample excludes

financial firms (SIC = 6) and utilities (SIC = 49).11 The resulting sample includes 25,266 firm-year

observations corresponding to 1,675 firms and 1,683 movers.

         Table 1 summarizes the nature of executive transitions in our sample. We use three

variables in Execucomp to code the position of a specific manager in a given firm: (1) titleann, (2)

ceoann, and (3) cfoann. Following the prior literature (e.g., Jiang, Petroni, and Wang 2010), we

use ceoann to identify CEOs.12 For the sample period after and including 2006, we use cfoann to

identify CFOs. For the sample period before 2006, we code a manager as CFO if titleann includes

any of the following phrases: CFO, Chief Financial Officer, Treasurer, Controller, or Finance.13

         A small subset of managers work at more than two firms: 131 (7.78%) managers work at

three firms, 14 (0.83%) managers work at four firms, and 3 (0.18%) managers work at five firms.

When a manager works at three or more firms (i.e., moves more than once), Table 1 reports the

last move only. Therefore, the "to" positions in Table 1 can be interpreted as the last position held

by each manager. Our sample contains 582 executives whose last position is CEO, 414 executives

whose last position is CFO, and 687 executives whose last position is neither CEO nor CFO (i.e.,

Other). "Other" refers to miscellaneous job titles, such as Chief Operating Officer, Corporate

Secretary, General Counsel, and various subdivision Presidents or Vice-Presidents (e.g., human




that this sample selection issue limits the generalizability of our results since the S&P 1500 covers approximately 90%
of the U.S. market capitalization.
11
   Bertrand and Schoar (2003) exclude financial firms and utilities when examining manager fixed effects for various
corporate policy variables. For consistency, we exclude these firms. However, our results are qualitatively similar if
we include these firms.
12
   When a firm-year is not assigned a CEO (i.e., ceoann is missing), we assign a CEO using the variables becameceo
and leftofc, if possible.
13
   The variables ceoann and titleann are available for the entire sample period; cfoann is not available before 2006.

                                                          9
resources, research and development, and marketing). In our main analysis, we use these three

categories to group manager fixed effects.

           Our sample contains 214 executives who leave a CEO position, 440 executives who leave

a CFO position, and 1,029 executives who leave a non-CEO, non-CFO position. Among the set of

executives who start as CEO, 132 become CEO at another firm and 82 move to a non-CEO, non-

CFO position at another firm. Among the set of executives who start as CFO, 41 become CEO at

another firm, 340 become CFO at another firm, and 59 move to a non-CEO, non-CFO position at

another firm. Lastly, among the set of executives who start in a non-CEO, non-CFO position, 409

become CEO at another firm, 74 become CFO at another firm, and 546 move to a non-CEO, non-

CFO position at another firm.

           We merge the firm-year panel described above with annual accounting variables from

Compustat, merger and acquisition data from SDC Platinum, institutional holdings data from

CDA/Spectrum, and volatilities calculated using daily stock returns from the Center for Research

in Security Prices (CRSP) and daily factor returns from Kenneth French's data library.14

4       Variable Definitions and Descriptive Statistics

4.1      Risk

           The Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) proposed by Sharpe (1964) and Lintner (1965)

formalizes the relation between risk and expected returns. Specifically, the Sharpe-Lintner CAPM

shows that if investors have homogenous expectations and hold mean-variance efficient portfolios

(Markowitz 1959), then the market portfolio will itself be a mean-variance efficient portfolio. The

efficiency of the market portfolio leads to the following equilibrium pricing relation:

                                        [ ] =  +  ([ ] -  )                                     (1)



14
     http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html

                                                          10
                                                      ( ,  )
                                               =
                                                      ( )

where  is the return of asset i;  is the return of the risk-free asset; and  is the return of the

market portfolio. The beta coefficient,  , measures the sensitivity of the return of asset i to that

of the market portfolio and has been widely adopted as a measure of systematic risk in security

and portfolio analysis.

         The Sharpe-Lintner CAPM is a one-period model. Thus, early studies often assumed that

beta was time-invariant. However, empirical evidence challenges the veracity of this assumption

(e.g., Bollerslev, Engle, and Wooldridge 1988; Harvey 1989; Jagannathan and Wang 1996). These

studies advocate a dynamic or conditional CAPM in which beta is time-varying and depends on

investors' information set at any given point in time. As noted by Liu, Stambaugh, and Yuan

(2018), "[t]here are numerous approaches for estimating [time-varying] betas on individual stocks,

and the literature does not really offer a consensus." However, several recent studies estimate beta

using a one-year window with daily returns (e.g., Lewellen and Nagel 2006; Cederburg and

O'Doherty 2016; Herskovic, Kelly, Lustig, and Van Nieuwerburgh 2016; Hong and Sraer 2016).

Following these studies, we estimate the following time-series regression for each firm-year.15

                                -  =  +  ( -  ) +                                                               (2)

 is firm i's stock return on day t in year ;  is the risk-free rate on day t in year ; and 

is the return of the market portfolio on day t in year . Our measure of systematic risk,  , is

the slope coefficient on the excess return of the market portfolio. While systematic risk is the focus

of our study, we also examine total risk and idiosyncratic risk. Total risk (TVOL) is the standard




15
  Equation (2) allows a firm's risk exposures to change annually, but assumes that a firm's risk exposures are stable
within its fiscal year.

                                                         11
deviation of a firm's daily stock returns within its fiscal year and idiosyncratic risk ( ) is the

standard deviation of the residuals  . Following Bali, Engle, and Murray (2016), we require at

least 200 daily observations in year  to estimate our measures of risk.

4.2    Descriptive Statistics

        Table 2 reports descriptive statistics for our measures of risk as well as the corporate policy

variables and measures of firm performance studied in Bertrand and Schoar (2003). All variables

are defined in Appendix 1. We winsorize all continuous variables at the 1st and 99th percentiles

to reduce the influence of outliers. The mean (median)  in our sample is 1.082 (1.021).

Although our sample focuses on the S&P 1500, we still observe considerable variation in firms'

systematic risk exposures. The standard deviation of  is 0.521 and the interquartile range of

 is 0.644.

5     Main Results

5.1    Executive Fixed Effects on Risk

        To test whether managerial style is an important determinant of systematic risk, we adopt

Bertrand and Schoar's (2003) identification strategy. First, we regress each measure of risk on firm

fixed effects ( ) and year fixed effects ( ). Firm fixed effects control for time-invariant firm

characteristics. Year fixed effects control for cross-sectional changes in risk such as those

documented by Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001). Then, we add manager fixed effects to

our base model and examine whether the manager fixed effects have incremental explanatory

power. Using the "to" positions in Table 1, we create three groups of manager fixed effects: 

are fixed effects for managers who are CEO in the last position we observe them in,  are fixed

effects for managers who are CFO in the last position we observe them in, and  are fixed

effects for managers who are neither CEO nor CFO in the last position we observe them in. The


                                                  12
manager fixed effects are indicator variables that equal one if manager j works at firm i during

fiscal year . For each measure of risk, we estimate three models:

                                   =  +  +                                                                        (3)

                                   =  +  +  +                                                                     (4)

                                   =  +  +  +  +  +                                                               (5)

         Note that none of these models include time-varying firm characteristics (e.g., leverage).

Suppose that differences between managers lead to differences in their firms' capital structure,

which affects systematic risk. If we controlled for leverage, we would ignore this effect. The goal

of our first test is to quantify the total effect of managers on systematic risk, so we exclude time-

varying firm controls.16 When we look at the mechanisms through which managers affect

systematic risk, we include time-varying firm controls and examine the extent to which these

controls explain manager fixed effects on systematic risk.

         Table 3 reports the results from estimating equations (3), (4), and (5) using the sample of

firm-years with non-missing data. For each measure of risk, the first row reports the adjusted R2

of our base model that includes only firm fixed effects and year fixed effects. The second row

reports adjusted R2 when we include CEO fixed effects and the third row reports adjusted R2 when

we include fixed effects for all three groups of managers. The second and third rows also report

F-statistics, which test the joint significance of the manager fixed effects.17



16
   As Angrist and Pischke (2008) note, "[s]ome variables are bad controls and should not be included in a regression
model... Bad controls are variables that are themselves outcome variables."
17
   We use robust standard errors when we test the joint significance of the manager fixed effects. With clustered
standard errors, the degree of freedom of our model is the minimum of the number of regressors and the number of
clusters minus 1 (Cameron and Miller 2015). Since the number of clusters exceeds the number of regressors, the
degree of freedom is the number of regressors. It is not possible to test the joint significance of the manager fixed
effects using clustered standard errors because the number of linear restrictions exceeds the degree of freedom. It is,
however, possible to consistently estimate the individual manager fixed effects using clustered standard errors, which
we report in Figure 1.

                                                          13
         The adjusted R2 of our base model is 42.94% for  . Adding CEO fixed effects to our

base model increases adjusted R2 to 45.60% and adding manager fixed effects for all three groups

of managers increases adjusted R2 to 50.10%. Overall, adjusted R2 increases by 7.16%, which

translates to a 16.67% (7.16/42.94) increase relative to the base model. For comparison, we

observe a 4.43% increase in adjusted R2 when we use  as the dependent variable and we

observe a 4.56% increase in adjusted R2 when we use  as the dependent variable. Adjusted

R2 increases by 7.19% (4.43/61.62) and 7.36% (4.56/61.99) relative to the base model for 

and , respectively. In all specifications, the F-test strongly rejects the null hypothesis that

the manager fixed effects are jointly equal to zero (p < 0.0001).18

       The incremental adjusted R2s reported in Table 3 are comparable in magnitude to those in

prior studies. Bertrand and Schoar (2003) report large increases in adjusted R2 for SG&A (37%),

number of diversifying acquisitions (11%), and interest coverage (10%). However, Bertrand and

Schoar (2003) report small increases in adjusted R2 for other variables such as investment to cash

flow sensitivity (1%), leverage (2%), and cash holdings (3%). More recently, Dyreng, Hanlon, and

Maydew (2010) examine manager fixed effects for tax avoidance. Their adjusted R2 increases by

6.4% when manager fixed effects and year fixed effects are added to their base model, which

includes only firm fixed effects. Ge, Matsumoto, and Zhang (2011) examine manager fixed effects

for several financial reporting variables: discretionary accruals, off-balance sheet accounting,




18
   A limitation of our paper and the managerial style literature in general is that we cannot disentangle whether (1)
managers impose their styles on the firms that they lead or (2) boards hire managers who match their firm's strategic
needs. Finkelstein, Hambrick, and Cannella's (2009) fit-drift/shift-refit model expands on the second interpretation.
They argue that the economic environment can gradually drift or radically shift, creating a mismatch between the
incumbent CEO's style and the firm's strategic needs. CEO succession provides an opportunity for the board to realign
the firm's leadership with its prevailing economic environment. While it is interesting to differentiate between these
interpretations, doing so is not critical to our paper. Our results suggest that managerial style is relevant to asset pricing,
regardless of whether managers impose their styles against the will of the board or whether boards actively seek
managers with particular styles.

                                                             14
pension accounting, meeting and beating analysts' expectations, earnings smoothing, and the

likelihood of misstatements. Their average incremental adjusted R2 is 2%.

5.2    Robustness Tests

5.2.1 Infrequent Trading

        When a stock is infrequently traded, estimates of systematic risk using equation (2) may

be biased (Dimson 1979). This concern is unlikely to confound our results since Execucomp tracks

firms in the S&P 1500 and we use a relatively recent sample period (1992 to 2016). Nevertheless,

we ensure the robustness of our results using Dimson's (1979) procedure: that is, we include

current and lagged market returns in equation (2), estimating , as the sum of the slopes

on all lags. Following Lewellen and Nagel (2006), we include four lags of market returns, but we

do not impose the constraint that lags two to four have the same slope. More specifically, we

estimate the following time-series regression for each firm-year.

                                                      4
                                0                 
 (6)        -  =  +               (       -  ) +   (,-, - ,-, ) +                             (6)
                                                     =1


 is firm i's stock return on day t in year ;  is the risk-free rate on day t in year ; and 

is the return of the market portfolio on day t in year . , is the slope coefficient on the

                             0
excess return to the market (  ) plus all of the slope coefficients on the lagged excess returns to

            1   2   3   4
the market (  +   +   +   ).  is the standard deviation of the residuals  .

        Table 4 reports the results from estimating equations (3), (4), and (5) for , and

 . When we include fixed effects for all three groups of managers, we observe a 4.69%

increase in adjusted R2 for , and a 4.44% increase in adjusted R2 for  .

Relative to the base model, adjusted R2 increases by 14.44% (4.69/32.47) for , and

7.20% (4.44/61.65) for  .

                                                15
5.2.2 Fama-French Six-Factor Model

       Drawing on Merton's (1973) Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model (ICAPM) and

Ross' (1976) Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT), several multifactor models have been proposed

(e.g., Fama and French 1993, 2015, 2018). In this section, we examine whether our results

generalize to the Fama-French Six-Factor Model ­ one of the most recently adopted models in the

asset pricing literature. We begin by estimating asset-specific factor loadings using the following

time-series regression for each firm-year:

                 -  =  + 
                           + 
                               + 
                                                                                                (7)
                                 
                       +  +   +  
                       +

 is firm i's stock return on day t in year ;  is the risk-free rate on day t in year ; 

is the excess return of the market portfolio;  is the return to a diversified portfolio that is

long in small (low market capitalization) firms and short in big (high market capitalization) firms;

 is the return to a diversified portfolio that is long in high book-to-market (value) firms and

short in low book-to-market (growth) firms;  is the return to a diversified portfolio that is

long in firms that have robust (high) operating profitability and short in firms that have weak (low)

operating profitability;  is the return to a diversified portfolio that is long in firms that have

conservative (low) investment and short in firms that have aggressive (high) investment; and

 is the return to a diversified portfolio that is long in firms that performed well during the

previous 12 months and short in firms that performed poorly during the previous 12 months. The
                                       
slope coefficients ( ,  ,  ,  ,  , and  ) are asset-specific sensitivities to

the six factors of Fama and French (2018). We use 6 to denote the standard deviation of

the residuals  .




                                                 16
          Table 5 reports the results from estimating equations (3), (4), and (5) for the Fama-French

(2018) factor loadings and 6 . Adjusted R2 increases by 3.03%, 2.58%, 2.09%, 2.05%,

5.10%, and 3.11% for ,6 , ,6 , ,6 , ,6 , ,6 , and ,6 ,

respectively. This translates to a 14.57% (3.03/20.80), 6.15% (2.58/41.96), 9.02% (2.09/23.17),

8.76% (2.05/23.41), 41.13% (5.10/12.44), and 53.07% (3.11/5.876) increase in adjusted R2 relative

to each factor loading's base model. For comparison, we observe a 4.44% increase in adjusted R2

when we use 6 as the dependent variable, which translates to a 7.22% (4.44/61.49) increase

relative to the base model. While manager fixed effects improve the explanatory power for all of

the Fama-French (2018) factor loadings, our results are most pronounced for the CMA investment

factor.

          Note that there is a fundamental difference between characteristics and factor loadings

(Daniel and Titman 1997; Fama and French 2020). There is a mechanical relation between

characteristics and factor loadings at the portfolio level, but such a relation need not exist at the

firm level. Consider market capitalization and . The loading on  must be higher for small

firms than for big firms, on average. However, a large firm can have a large loading on  and

a small firm can have a small loading on . For example, a small firm that sells most of its

products to Apple may move more closely with the prices of large firms than with the prices of

other small firms. Our analysis explores whether a small firm moves more closely with the prices

of large firms when a small firm employs a manager who has a "large-firm" management style.

5.2.3 Other Robustness Tests

          To ensure that microstructure frictions such as bid-ask bounce do not confound our results,

we repeat our analysis for each measure of risk using weekly returns in lieu of daily returns. We




                                                  17
require at least 26 weekly observations in year  to estimate our measures of risk. Our results are

qualitatively similar when we use these measures of risk.

           Three notable events occurred during our sample period: the dotcom bubble, the Enron

scandal, and the global financial crisis. Our identification strategy examines whether systematic

risk is correlated across at least two firms when the same manager is present. If the events thereof

induce executive transitions and affect firms' risk exposures, then these events could drive our

results and our results may not generalize. This is not the case. Our results are qualitatively similar

if we exclude managers who join or leave a firm in 2000 (dotcom bubble), 2001 (Enron scandal),

or 2007-2008 (global financial crisis).

           Lastly, the alternative hypothesis of the F-tests performed in Table 3, Table 4, and Table 5

is that at least one of the manager fixed effects is not zero. Thus, a valid concern is that rejecting

the null hypothesis does not necessarily mean that an economically significant number of manager

fixed effects are different from zero.19 To address this concern, Figure 1 reports the actual and

expected number of significant manager fixed effects (t-statistics). Because systematic risk is the

focus of our study, we report the number of significant manager fixed effects only for  ,

, , ,6 , ,6 , ,6 , ,6 , ,6 , and ,6 . The number of

significant manager fixed effects is qualitatively similar for the other measures of risk.

           Under the null hypothesis that managerial style is not a determinant of systematic risk, we

would expect 16 (i.e., 1628×0.01) manager fixed effects to be significant at the 1% level, 81 (i.e.,

1628×0.05) manager fixed effects to be significant at the 5% level, and 163 (i.e., 1628×0.10)

manager fixed effects to be significant at the 10% level. When we use  as the dependent

variable, 570 manager fixed effects are significant at the 1% level, 703 manager fixed effects are



19
     Fee, Hadlock, and Pierce (2013) highlight this limitation of the F-test.

                                                             18
significant at the 5% level, and 802 manager fixed effects are significant at the 10% level. When

we use , as the dependent variable, 549 manager fixed effects are significant at the 1%

level, 689 manager fixed effects are significant at the 5% level, and 788 manager fixed effects are

significant at the 10% level. When we use ,6 as the dependent variable, 586 manager fixed

effects are significant at the 1% level, 734 manager fixed effects are significant at the 5% level,

and 820 manager fixed effects are significant at the 10% level. When we use ,6 as the

dependent variable, 558 manager fixed effects are significant at the 1% level, 711 manager fixed

effects are significant at the 5% level, and 812 manager fixed effects are significant at the 10%

level. When we use ,6 as the dependent variable, 579 manager fixed effects are significant

at the 1% level, 730 manager fixed effects are significant at the 5% level, and 823 manager fixed

effects are significant at the 10% level. When we use ,6 as the dependent variable, 554

manager fixed effects are significant at the 1% level, 702 manager fixed effects are significant at

the 5% level, and 792 manager fixed effects are significant at the 10% level. When we use ,6

as the dependent variable, 562 manager fixed effects are significant at the 1% level, 712 manager

fixed effects are significant at the 5% level, and 802 manager fixed effects are significant at the

10% level. Lastly, when we use ,6 as the dependent variable, 582 manager fixed effects are

significant at the 1% level, 702 manager fixed effects are significant at the 5% level, and 803

manager fixed effects are significant at the 10% level. Overall, the number of significant manager

fixed effects is far grater than would be expected by chance. Moreover, our results suggest that

manager fixed effects on systematic risk are pervasive and are not confined to a small subset of

managers.




                                                19
5.3      Distribution of Executive Fixed Effects

           Next, we examine the economic magnitude of the manager fixed effects. In Table 6, we

report the distribution of manager fixed effects for each regression in Table 3. When we compute

these statistics, we weigh each manager fixed effect by the inverse of its standard error to account

for estimation error. Our results suggest that manager fixed effects are economically large. Hiring

an executive at the 25th percentile of the distribution is expected to reduce  by 0.201, while

hiring an executive at the 75th percentile of the distribution is expected to increase  by

0.161.20

5.4      Event-Time Analysis of Systematic Risk

           In Figure 2, we plot the evolution of  in event-time surrounding executive transitions.

We begin by classifying managers into four groups: beta-increasing (significant at the 5% level),

beta-increasing (not significant at the 5% level), beta-decreasing (significant at the 5% level), and

beta-decreasing (not significant at the 5% level). These categories are based on the sign and the

significance of the fixed effects estimated in Table 3. If a firm employs one of these managers, we

collect  for the period [­2, +2], where 0 denotes the hiring year. Then, we subtract the average

value of  measured over the interval [-2, -1] from the raw value of  for each firm-year.

Figure 2 plots these values for the full interval [­2, +2]. Thus, the value of beta over the interval

[0, 2] represents the change in beta from the firm's average beta before the executive joined the

firm. The evidence in Figure 2 suggests that beta-increasing (beta-decreasing) managers lead to an

immediate and persistent increase (decrease) in  .




20
     When a new CEO is hired, the average unsigned change in  is 0.374 (untabulated).

                                                      20
5.5    Mechanisms

         The previous sections of our paper indicate that manager fixed effects are an important

determinant of systematic risk. In this section, we explore the channels through which managers

influence systematic risk.

5.5.1 Executive Fixed Effects on Corporate Policy

         In our first test, we examine whether manager fixed effects on corporate policy variables

explain manager fixed effects on systematic risk. To shed light on this mechanism, we examine

the relation between manager fixed effects on systematic risk and the manager fixed effects studied

in Bertrand and Schoar (2003). Bertrand and Schoar (2003) document significant manager fixed

effects for twelve corporate policy variables. These variables are related to investment policy

(capital expenditures, investment to Q sensitivity, investment to cash flow sensitivity, and number

of acquisitions), financial policy (leverage, interest coverage, cash holdings, and dividend payout),

and organizational strategy (number of diversifying acquisitions, R&D expenditures, advertising

expenditures, and SG&A expenditures).21

         Due to multicollinearity, we do not simply regress manager fixed effects on beta on the

twelve manager fixed effects studied in Bertrand and Schoar (2003). Instead, we proceed in two

steps. In the first step, we examine whether latent factors (i.e., unobservable management styles)

explain the covariance structure among the manager fixed effects studied in Bertrand and Schoar

(2003). In the second step, we examine whether the factors thereof explain manager fixed effects

on beta.



21
   All variables are defined in Appendix 1. To reduce skewness, we use the natural logarithm of one plus the raw value
for number of acquisitions, number of diversifying acquisitions, and interest coverage. Table 6 reports the distribution
of manager fixed effects for each corporate policy variable. When we compute these statistics, we weigh each manager
fixed effect by the inverse of its standard error to account for estimation error. For brevity, we do not report the
estimation of these manager fixed effects. Please refer to Bertrand and Schoar (2003) for details on each specific
regression.

                                                          21
       To prepare our data for factor analysis, we follow the convention of standardizing our

variables to have zero mean and unit variance. Using a Scree test (Cattell 1966), we determine that

there are three factors. Panel A of Table 7 reports the factor loadings of the three factors; Panel B

of Table 7 reports the eigenvalues and the proportion of variation explained by the three factors;

and Panel C of Table 7 examines the relation between the three factors and manager fixed effects

on beta.

       The three factors identified in Table 7 have natural interpretations. The first factor loads

positively on number of acquisitions and number of diversifying acquisitions. We interpret this

factor as a preference for external growth. The second factor loads positively (negatively) on

interest coverage (leverage). We interpret this factor as a preference for financial conservatism.

The third factor loads positively on investment (i.e., capital expenditures), cash holdings and R&D.

We interpret this factor as a preference for internal growth.

       In Panel C of Table 7, we examine the relation between the three factors and manager fixed

effects on beta. Factor 1 (external growth) is not significantly related to manager fixed effects on

 . This finding is intuitive. Managers who have a proclivity to acquire other firms can acquire

either high-beta or low-beta targets. Therefore, a preference for external growth can be beta-

increasing, beta-decreasing, or beta-neutral. Our results suggest that a preference for external

growth is beta-neutral, on average.

       There is some evidence that Factor 2 (financial conservatism) is related to manager fixed

effects on  . The coefficient on Factor 2 is statistically significant at the 10% level and

economically large. The interquartile range for Factor 2 is 0.895 (untabulated), so we would expect

the effect of a manager on  to be 0.062 smaller (i.e., 0.895×0.069) for a manager at the 75th




                                                 22
percentile of Factor 2 relative to a manager at the 25th percentile of Factor 2, holding the other

covariates constant.

        On the other hand, Factor 3 (internal growth) is positively related to manager fixed effects

on  . The coefficient on Factor 3 is statistically significant at the 1% level and economically

large. The interquartile range for Factor 3 is 0.569 (untabulated), so we would expect the effect of

a manager on  to be 0.147 larger (i.e., 0.569×0.259) for a manager at the 75th percentile of

Factor 3 relative to a manager at the 25th percentile of Factor 3, holding the other covariates

constant.

        Manager fixed effects on ROA are not significantly related to manager fixed effects on

 . However, manager fixed effects on ROA are negatively related to manager fixed effects on

idiosyncratic risk. The coefficient on . . () is negative and significant at the 1% level for

. Managers who have larger performance fixed effects are associated with lower idiosyncratic

risk, suggesting that these managers have superior ability, not greater risk tolerance.22

        Overall, Table 7 provides evidence that manager fixed effects on corporate policy variables

partially explain manager fixed effects on systematic risk. Specifically, manager fixed effects on

systematic risk are negatively related to managers' preferences for financial conservatism and

positively related to managers' preferences for internal growth.

5.5.2 Firm-Level Determinants of Beta

        In our second test, we estimate manager fixed effects after controlling for known firm-level

determinants of beta. As discussed in Section 2, beta is related to firm size, book-to-market, and

leverage. We adopt the standard definitions used in the prior literature (Cosemans et al. 2015).

Size is the market value of equity. Book-to-market is book value of equity divided by market value


22
  The Pearson product-moment correlation (Spearman rank-order correlation) between manager fixed effects on 
and manager fixed effects on  is 0.438 (0.450).

                                                    23
of equity, where book value of equity equals common equity plus deferred taxes and investment

tax credits minus the book value of preferred stock. Lastly, leverage is book value of assets divided

by the market value of equity. We use the logarithmic transformation of these variables.

       Without controlling for time-varying firm characteristics (Table 3), adjusted R2 increases

by 7.16% when we add manager fixed effects to the model with  as the dependent variable.

After controlling for time-varying firm characteristics (Table 8), adjusted R2 increases by 6.86%

(51.51-44.65). This test indicates that manager fixed effects are incremental to known firm-level

determinants of beta.

5.5.3 Unlevered Beta

       In our third test, we estimate manager fixed effects on unlevered beta (i.e., asset beta).

Unlevered beta removes the effect of the firm's capital structure and isolates the component of

systematic risk due to the firm's assets, such as the different types of businesses in which the firm

operates and the firm's operating leverage.

       Following prior research (e.g., Choy, Lin, and Officer 2014), we estimate unlevered beta

using Hamada's (1972) equation:

                                    
                                                      
                                     =                                                          (8)
                                                           
                                              1 + (1 -  ) (  )


 denotes unlevered beta (or asset beta),  denotes levered beta (or equity beta),  denotes

the corporate tax rate, D denotes the market value of debt, and E denotes the market value of

equity. We use equation (2) to estimate levered beta. Following the standard convention, we use

book value of debt as a proxy for market value of debt, and we measure book value of debt and

market value of equity at the beginning of the year during which levered beta is estimated. Lastly,




                                                 24
we use the GAAP effective tax rate defined as total income tax expense divided by pre-tax book

income before special items.23

        The results of this test are reported in Table 9. The adjusted R2 of our base model is 43.35%.

Adding CEO fixed effects to our base model increases adjusted R2 to 45.35% and adding fixed

effects for all three groups of managers (CEO, CFO, and Other) increases adjusted R2 to 49.41%.

Adjusted R2 increases by 6.06%, which translates to a 13.98% (6.06/43.35) increase relative to the

base model. Overall, our results indicate that manager fixed effects are an important determinant

of unlevered beta, suggesting that managers influence the risk of their firm's underlying assets.

Another implication of this test is that removing the effect of leverage attenuates the explanatory

power of manager fixed effects for beta (7.16% for levered beta versus 6.06% for unlevered beta),

suggesting that managers also influence systematic risk through leverage.

5.6    Executive Characteristics

        In Table 10, we examine whether manager fixed effects on systematic risk are related to

observable manager characteristics. Specifically, we examine the economic conditions at the

beginning of a manager's career, birth year, and gender. Following Schoar and Zuo (2017), we

define Recession as an indicator variable that equals 1 if there is a recession in the calendar year

when a manager turns 24 years old. We use the manager's birth year plus 24 as the beginning of

the manager's career to avoid endogenous selection of when an individual chooses to enter the

labor market. Recession years are based on the business cycle dating database of the National

Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Recession years include the trough of the business cycle

and all years leading to the trough (excluding the peak of the business cycle).




23
  Our results are robust to using simulated marginal tax rates (Graham 1996a, Graham 1996b) and the cash effective
tax rate defined as cash tax paid divided by pre-tax book income before special items.

                                                       25
       Panel A of Table 10 presents descriptive statistics for the sample of managers for whom

we were able to estimate manager fixed effects. The descriptive statistics are virtually identical for

the Execucomp universe (untabulated). Not surprisingly, the majority of the executives in our

sample are male (93.7%). 23.7% of the executives in our sample entered the labor market during

a recession. The mean birth year in our sample is 1953.

       In Panel B of Table 10, we find that manager fixed effects on  are related to managers'

early-career experiences. The coefficient on Recession is statistically significant at the 5% level

and economically large. On average, we would expect the signed effect of a manager on  to

be 0.240 smaller if the manager entered the labor market during a recession, holding the other

covariates constant. Age and gender, however, are not related to manager fixed effects on  .

These results are surprising given that older cohorts are more risk-averse than younger cohorts and

women are more risk-averse than men (e.g., Byrnes, Miller, and Schafer 1999). However, as

Hambrick and Mason (1984) note, it may take "a certain kind of person to rise to the top ranks of

a firm." Therefore, individuals who rise to the top ranks of a firm may share many similarities

(e.g., risk-aversion), despite differences in age or gender. It should be noted, however, that the

tests in Table 10 have low power. The dependent variables are regression coefficients, which are

noisy by definition. Moreover, demographic characteristics are "incomplete and imprecise proxies

of executives' cognitive frames" (Hambrick 2007).

5.7   Executive Discretion

       Next, we examine whether certain environments amplify the effects of managerial style on

systematic risk. This test is inspired by Finkelstein, Hambrick, and Cannella's (2009) influential

book Strategic Leadership. They conclude that "considerable work is needed in understanding the




                                                 26
determinants of [executive] discretion," and call for "examination of how organizational and

individual characteristics affect the top executive's latitude of action."

         In Table 11, we examine whether unsigned manager fixed effects on systematic risk vary

with institutional holdings, firm size, return on assets, leverage, Tobin's Q, and the value-weighted

return to the market portfolio. All variables are defined in Appendix 1. We acknowledge that the

results in this table do not establish causality and are purely exploratory. However, to alleviate

some concerns about reverse causality we measure all explanatory variables in the year before

each executive transition. For example, for an executive transition in year , we measure

institutional holdings in year ­1.

         Only firm size is significantly related to unsigned manager fixed effects on  . The

coefficient on Size is statistically significant at the 1% level and economically large. The

interquartile range for Size in our sample is 2.239 (untabulated). Therefore, we would expect the

unsigned effect of a manager on  to be 0.116 smaller (i.e., 2.239×0.052) if the manager leads

a firm at the 75th percentile of the Size distribution relative to a firm at the 25th percentile of the

Size distribution, holding the other covariates constant. Given that Execucomp tracks managers in

the S&P 1500 and our sample selection procedure further requires that a manager work at two or

more Execucomp firms, the results documented hitherto likely represent a lower bound on the

effects of managerial style on systematic risk.24




24
   In untabulated analysis, we also find that unsigned manager fixed effects on beta are larger in firms with high beta
volatility. In particular, we perform two comparisons. First, we compare managers that worked at a high beta volatility
firm with managers that never worked at a high beta volatility firm. Second, we compare managers that always worked
at a high beta volatility firm with managers that did not always work at a high beta volatility firm. In both comparisons,
unsigned manager fixed effects on beta are larger for the former group.

                                                           27
5.8    Hiring Preferences

        In Table 12, we ask whether certain firm and market characteristics lead to a preference for

managers who have beta-increasing styles, and whether other firm and market characteristics lead

to a preference for managers who have beta-decreasing styles. For example, if the market

performed well in the previous year, do boards prefer beta-increasing managers? To this end, we

examine whether signed manager fixed effects on systematic risk vary with institutional holdings,

firm size, return on assets, leverage, Tobin's Q, and the value-weighted return to the market

portfolio. While some of the coefficients in Table 12 are statistically significant, we do not find

robust evidence that managers are matched to firms based on their style.

6     Conclusion

        The objective of our paper is to show that manager-specific styles are important for

understanding asset prices. While there is a growing body of research on the effects of individual

managers in accounting and corporate finance, the asset pricing implications of managerial style

have remained unexplored.

         Tracking managers across different firms over time, we find that manager fixed effects

explain a significant amount of variation in firms' exposures to systematic risk (i.e., firms'

sensitivities to the market factor, and other risk factors like size, value, profitability, investment,

and momentum). The impact of managerial styles on firm betas is a pervasive phenomenon and is

not confined to a small subset of managers. We show that manager fixed effects on corporate

policy variables are one channel that partially explains manager fixed effects on systematic risk.

Specifically, manager fixed effects on systematic risk are positively related to managers'

preferences for internal growth and negatively related to managers' preferences for financial

conservatism. Importantly, manager fixed effects are incremental to known determinants of



                                                  28
systematic risk. We can also tie manager fixed effects on systematic risk to observable manager

traits such as their personal experiences. We find that managers who enter the labor market during

recessions exhibit a strong proclivity to reduce their firm's systematic risk. Finally, we show that

these effects are more pronounced for smaller firms.

          Our findings raise several avenues for future research. For example, it would be interesting

to know whether managerial style is itself a distinct risk factor. In addition, it may be fruitful to

identify observable manager characteristics that have forecasting power for beta. More research

along this line can further our understanding of the implications of corporate managers for asset

prices.




                                                   29
References
Angrist, J. D., Pischke, J. S., 2008. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion.
       Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Armstrong, C. S., Vashishtha, R., 2012. Executive stock options, differential risk-taking
      incentives, and firm value. Journal of Financial Economics 104 (1), 70­88.
Bali, T. G., Engle, R. F., Murray, S., 2016. Empirical Asset Pricing: The Cross Section of Stock
        Returns. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
Beaver, W., Kettler, P., Scholes, M., 1970. The association between market determined and
       accounting determined risk measures. The Accounting Review 45 (4), 654­682.
Ben-Zion, U., Shalit, S. S., 1975. Size, leverage, and dividend record as determinants of equity
      risk. Journal of Finance 30 (4), 1015­1026.
Benmelech, E., Frydman, C., 2015. Military CEOs. Journal of Financial Economics 117(1), 43­
      59.
Bennedsen, M., Nielsen, K., Pérez-González, F., Wolfenzon, D., 2007. Inside the family firm: The
      role of families in succession decisions and performance. Quarterly Journal of Economics
      122 (2), 647­691.
Bennedsen, M., Pérez-González, F., Wolfenzon, D., 2020. Do CEOs matter? Evidence from
      hospitalization events. Journal of Finance (forthcoming).
Berk, J. B., van Binsbergen, J. H., 2016. Assessing asset pricing models using reveal preferences.
        Journal of Financial Economics 119 (1), 1­23.
Bernile, G., Bhagwat, V., Rau, P. R., 2016. What doesn't kill you will only make you more risk-
       loving: Early-life disasters and CEO behavior. Journal of Finance 72 (1), 167­206.
Bertrand, M., Schoar, A., 2003. Managing with style: The effect of managers on firm policies.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4), 1169­1208.
Bollerslev, T., Engle, R. F., Wooldridge, J. M., 1988. A capital asset pricing model with time-
       varying covariances. Journal of Political Economy 96 (1), 116­131.
Breen, W. J., Lerner, E. M., 1973. Corporate financial strategies and market measures of risk and
       return. Journal of Finance 28 (2), 339­351.
Bushman, R., Dai, Z., Wang, X., 2010. Risk and CEO turnover. Journal of Financial Economics
     96 (3), 381­398.
Byrnes, J. P., Miller, D. C., Schafer, W. D., 1999. Gender differences in risk taking: A meta-
       analysis. Psychological Bulletin 125 (3), 367­383.
Cameron, A. C., Miller, D. L., 2015. A practitioner's guide to cluster-robust inferences. Journal
      of Human Resources 50 (2), 317­372.


                                               30
Campbell, J. Y., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B. G., Xu, Y., 2001. Have individual stocks become more
     volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. Journal of Finance 56 (1), 1­43.
Campbell, J. Y., Lo, A. W., MacKinlay, A. C., 1997. The Econometrics of Financial Markets.
     Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Carlson, M., Fisher, A., Giammarino, R., 2004. Corporate investment and asset price dynamics:
       Implications for the cross-section of returns. Journal of Finance 59 (6), 2577­2603.
Cattell, R. B., 1966. The scree test for the number of factors. Multivariate Behavioral Research 1
        (2), 245­276.
Cederburg, S., O'Doherty, M. S., 2016. Does it pay to bet against beta? On the conditional
      performance of the beta anomaly. Journal of Finance 71 (2), 737­774.
Cochrane, J. H., 2005. Asset Pricing. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Coles, J. L., Daniel, N. D., Naveen, L., 2006. Managerial incentives and risk-taking. Journal of
       Financial Economics 79 (2), 431­468.
Cosemans, M., Frehen, R., Schotman, P. C., Bauer, R., 2015. Estimating security betas using prior
      information based on firm fundamentals. Review of Financial Studies 29 (4), 1072­1112.
Cronqvist, H., Yu, F., 2017. Shaped by their daughters: Executives, female socialization, and
      corporate social responsibility. Journal of Financial Economics 126 (3), 543-562.
Custódio, C., Metzger, D., 2013, How do CEOs matter? The effect of industry expertise on
       acquisition returns. Review of Financial Studies 26 (8), 2008­2047.
Custódio, C., Metzger, D., 2014, Financial expert CEOs: CEO's work experience and firm's
       financial policies. Journal of Financial Economics 114 (1), 125­154.
Daniel, K., Titman, S., 1997. Evidence on the characteristics of cross sectional variation in stock
       returns. Journal of Finance 52 (1), 1­33.
Das, S., Kuhnen, C. M., Nagel, S., 2020. Socioeconomic status and macroeconomic expectations.
        Review of Financial Studies 33 (1), 395-432.
Dimson, E., 1979. Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading. Journal of
      Financial Economics 7 (2), 197­226.
Dittmar, A., Duchin, R., 2016. Looking in the rearview mirror: The effect of managers'
       professional experience on corporate financial policy. Review of Financial Studies 29 (3),
       565-602.
Dyreng, S. D., Hanlon, M., Maydew, E. L., 2010. The effects of executives on corporate tax
      avoidance. The Accounting Review 85 (4), 1163­1189.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1993. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal
       of Financial Economics 33 (1), 3­56.


                                                31
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 1996. The CAPM is wanted, dead or alive. Journal of Finance 51 (5),
      1947­1958.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2015. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of Financial
      Economics 116 (1), 1­22.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2018. Choosing factors. Journal of Financial Economics 128 (2), 234­
       252.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2020. Comparing cross-section and time-series factor models. Review
      of Financial Studies 33 (5), 1891­1926.
Fee, C. E., Hadlock, C. J., Pierce, J. R., 2013. Managers with and without style: Evidence using
       exogenous variation. Review of Financial Studies 26 (3), 567­601.
Finkelstein, S., Hambrick, D. C., Cannella, A. A., 2009. Strategic leadership: Theory and research
       on executives, top management teams, and boards. Oxford University Press, New York,
       NY.
Fisher, L., 1974. The economic determinants of systematic risk: Discussion. Journal of Finance
        29 (2), 488­492.
Gomes, J., Kogan, L., Zhang, L., 2003. Equilibrium cross section of returns. Journal of Political
      Economy 111 (4), 693­732.
Graham, J. R., 1996a. Debt and the marginal tax rate. Journal of Financial Economics 41 (1), 41­
      73.
Graham, J. R., 1996b. Proxies for the corporate marginal tax rate. Journal of Financial Economics
      42 (2), 187­221.
Graham, J. R., Harvey, C. R., 2001. The theory and practice of corporate finance: Evidence from
      the field. Journal of Financial Economics 60 (2-3), 187­243.
Graham, J. R., Harvey, C. R., Puri, M., 2013. Managerial attitudes and corporate actions. Journal
      of Financial Economics 109 (1), 103-121.
Graham, J. R., Li, S., Qiu, J., 2012. Managerial attributes and executive compensation. Review of
      Financial Studies 25 (1), 144­186.
Hamada, R. S., 1972. The effect of the firm's capital structure on the systematic risk of common
     stocks. Journal of Finance 27 (2), 435­452.
Hambrick, D. C., 2007. Upper echelons theory: An update. Academy of Management Review 32
      (2), 334­343.
Hambrick, D. C., Mason, P. A., 1984. Upper echelons: The organization as a reflection of its top
      managers. Academy of Management Review 9 (2), 193­206.
Harvey, C. R., 1989. Time-varying conditional covariances in tests of asset pricing models.
      Journal of Financial Economics 24 (2), 289­317.

                                               32
Hayes, R. M., Lemmon, M., Qiu, M., 2012. Stock options and managerial incentives for risk
       taking: Evidence from FAS 123R. Journal of Financial Economics 105 (1), 174­190.
Herskovic, B., Kelly, B., Lustig, H., Van Nieuwerburgh S., 2016. The common factor in
      idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications. Journal of Financial
      Economics 119 (2), 249­283.
Hirshleifer, D., Low, A., Teoh, S. H., 2012. Are overconfident CEOs better innovators? Journal
       of Finance 67 (4), 1457­1498.
Hong, H., Sraer, D. A., 2016. Speculative betas. Journal of Finance 71 (5), 2095­2144.
Jagannathan, R., Wang, Z., 1996. The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expected returns.
       Journal of Finance 51 (1), 3­53.
Jiang, J. X., Petroni, K. R., Wang, I. Y., 2010. CFOs and CEOs: Who have the most influence on
        earnings management? Journal of Financial Economics 96 (3), 513­526.
Kaplan, S. N., Klebanov, M. M., Sorensen, M., 2012. Which CEO characteristics and abilities
      matter? Journal of Finance 67 (3), 973-1007.
Kaplan, S. N., Sorensen, M., 2019. Are CEOs different? NBER Working Paper No. w23832.
Karolyi, G. A., 1992. Predicting risk: Some new generalizations. Management Science 38 (1), 57­
       74.
Kuhnen, C. M., Miu, A. C., 2017. Socioeconomic status and learning from financial information.
      Journal of Financial Economics 124 (2), 349-372.
Lev, B., Kunitzky, S., 1974. On the association between smoothing measures and the risk of
       common stocks. The Accounting Review 49 (2), 259­270.
Lewellen, J., Nagel, S., 2006. The conditional CAPM does not explain asset-pricing anomalies.
       Journal of Financial Economics 82 (2), 289­314.
Lintner, J. 1965. The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stock
       portfolios and capital budgets. Review of Economics and Statistics 47 (1), 13­37.
Liu, J., Stambaugh, R. F., Yuan, Y., 2016. Absolving beta of volatility's effects. Journal of
        Financial Economics 128, 1­15.
Livdan, D., Sapriza, H., Zhang, L., 2009. Financially constrained stock returns. Journal of Finance
       64 (4), 1827­1862.
Malmendier, U., Tate, G., 2005. CEO overconfidence and corporate investment. Journal of
     Finance 6 (6), 2661­2700.
Malmendier, U., Tate, G., 2008. Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence and the market's
     reaction. Journal of Financial Economics 89 (1), 20­43.



                                                33
Malmendier, U., Tate, G., Yan, J., 2011. Overconfidence and early-life experiences: The effect of
     managerial traits on corporate financial policies. Journal of Finance 65 (5), 1687­1733.
Markowitz, H., 1959. Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments. Wiley, New
     York, NY.
Melicher, R. W., 1974. Financial factors which influence beta variations within a homogenous
      industry environment. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 9 (2), 231­241.
Merton, R. C., 1973. An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica 41 (5), 867­887.
Pan, Y., Wang, T. Y., Weisbach, M. S., 2015. Learning about CEO ability and stock return
      volatility. Review of Financial Studies 28 (6), 1623­1666.
Robichek, A. A., Cohn, R. A., 1974. The economic determinants of systematic risk. Journal of
      Finance 29 (2), 439­447.
Rosenberg, B., McKibben, W., 1973. The prediction of systematic and specific risk in common
      stocks. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 8 (2), 317­333.
Ross, S. A., 1976. The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic Theory 13
       (3), 341­360.
Roussanov, N., Savor, P., 2014. Marriage and managers' attitudes to risk. Management Science
      60 (10), 2496­2508.
Schoar, A., Zuo, L., 2016. Does the market value CEO styles? American Economic Review 106
       (5), 262­266.
Schoar, A., Zuo, L., 2017. Shaped by booms and busts: How the economy impacts CEO career
       and management styles. Review of Financial Studies 30 (5), 1425­1456.
Sharpe, W. F., 1964. Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk.
       Journal of Finance 19 (3), 425­442.
Shue, K., Townsend, R. R., 2017. How do quasi-random option grants affect CEO risk-taking?
       Journal of Finance 72 (6), 2551­2588.
Wooldridge, J. M., 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. MIT Press,
      Cambridge, MA.




                                                34
                                  APPENDIX 1
                            VARIABLE DEFINITIONS
Variable Name   Source          Description
                CRSP            Standard deviation of firm i's daily stock returns during fiscal year .
                CRSP, Fama-     For every firm i's fiscal year , we estimate the following OLS regression
                French factor   using daily stock returns (t indexes days in year ):
                data                             -  =  +  ( -  ) + 
                                 is the slope coefficient on the excess return to the market ( ). 
                                is the standard deviation of the residuals  .
,               CRSP, Fama-     For every firm i's fiscal year , we estimate the following OLS regression
                French factor   using daily stock returns (t indexes days in year ):
                data                                                         4
                                                      0                 
                                  -  =  +               (       -  ) +   (- - - ) + 
                                                                           =1
                                                                                                           0
                                , is the slope coefficient on the excess return to the market (              )
                                plus all of the slope coefficients on the lagged excess returns to the market
                                  1      2      3    4
                                (    +     +      +    ).  is the standard deviation of the
                                residuals  .
,6              CRSP, Fama-     For every firm i's fiscal year , we estimate the following OLS regression
,6              French factor   using daily stock returns (t indexes days in year ):
                data                   -  =  +                
                                                                   +         
                                                                                  +       
                                                                                             
,6
                                                                                                
,6                                                        +         +                 +             
,6                                                        +
                                                                                                      
,6                              The slope coefficients (         ,       ,       ,       ,     , and      ) are
                                asset-specific sensitivities to the six risk factors of Fama and French (2018).
6
                                6 is the standard deviation of the residuals  .



                                        35
                                                       APPENDIX 1
                                                  VARIABLE DEFINITIONS
Variable Name                         Source         Description
Investment                            Compustat      Capital expenditures (CAPX) divided by net property, plant, and equipment
                                                     at the beginning of the fiscal year (PPENT).
Tobin's Q                             Compustat      Market value of assets divided by book value of assets (AT). Market value of
                                                     assets equals book value of assets (AT) plus the market value of common
                                                     equity (|PCC_F|×CSHO) less the sum of the book value of common equity
                                                     and deferred taxes (CEQ+TXDB).
Cash flow                             Compustat      The sum of earnings before extraordinary items and depreciation (IB+DP)
                                                     divided by net property, plant, and equipment at the beginning of the fiscal
                                                     year (PPENT).
Number of acquisitions                SDC Platinum   The total number of acquisitions in the fiscal year.
Leverage                              Compustat      The sum of long-term debt and debt in current liabilities (DLTT+DLC)
                                                     divided by the sum of long-term debt, debt in current liabilities, and the book
                                                     value of common equity (DLTT+DLC+CEQ).
Interest coverage                     Compustat      Earnings before depreciation, interest, and tax (OIBDP) divided by interest
                                                     expense (XINT). We set interest coverage to zero for firms with negative
                                                     OIBDP and positive XINT.
Cash holdings                         Compustat      Cash and short-term investments (CHE) divided by lagged total assets (AT).
Dividends/earnings                    Compustat      The sum of common dividends and preferred dividends (DVC+DVP) divided
                                                     by earnings before depreciation, interest, and tax (OIBDP). We set this ratio
                                                     to missing when it is negative.
Number of diversifying acquisitions   SDC Platinum   The total number of acquisitions in the fiscal year where the target's two-
                                                     digit SIC differs from the acquirer's two-digit SIC.
R&D                                   Compustat      R&D expenditures (XRD) divided by lagged total assets (AT). Missing R&D
                                                     is set to zero.


                                                             36
                                                  APPENDIX 1
                                           VARIABLE DEFINITIONS
Variable Name                  Source          Description
Advertising                    Compustat       Advertising expenditures (XAD) divided by lagged total assets (AT). Missing
                                               advertising is set to zero.
SG&A                           Compustat       Selling, general, and administrative expenditures (XSGA) divided by sales
                                               (SALE). Missing SG&A is set to zero.
Return on assets               Compustat       Earnings before depreciation, interest, and tax (OIBDP) divided by lagged
                                               total assets (AT).
Operating return on assets     Compustat       Operating cash flow (OANCF) divided by lagged total assets (AT).
Institutional holdings         CDA/Spectrum Institutional holdings divided by the number of shares outstanding.
Size                           Compustat       The natural logarithm of total assets (AT).
Value-weighted market return   CRSP            Value-weighted return to the market (VWRETD) cumulated over the past 12
                                               months.
Male                           Execucomp       An indicator variable that equals one if a manager is male.
Birth year                     Execucomp       A manager's birth year.
Recession                      Execucomp       An indicator variable that equals one if a manager's birth year plus 24 is a
                                               recession year (Schoar and Zuo 2017). Recession years are based on the
                                               business cycle dating database of the National Bureau of Economic Research
                                               (NBER). Recession years include the trough of the business cycle and all
                                               years leading to the trough (excluding the peak of the business cycle).




                                                       37
                                                                          FIGURE 1
               FREQUENCY OF SIGNIFICANT EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS

                                                                         Panel A: 
               Number of Significant Executives   900                                                   802
                                                  800                                       703
                                                  700
                                                                  570
                                                  600
                                                  500
                                                  400
                                                  300
                                                  200                                             163
                                                                                  81
                                                  100   16
                                                   0
                                                             1%                        5%           10%
                                                                            Significance Level

                                                                         Expected      Actual




                                                                        Panel B: ,
                                                  900
                                                                                                        788
               Number of Significant Executives




                                                  800
                                                                                            689
                                                  700
                                                  600             549
                                                  500
                                                  400
                                                  300
                                                  200                                             163
                                                                                  81
                                                  100   16
                                                   0
                                                             1%                        5%           10%
                                                                            Significance Level

                                                                         Expected      Actual


Notes:
Figure 1 reports the actual number of significant manager fixed effects and the expected number
of significant manager fixed effects. The significance of manager fixed effects is determined using
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm-level.



                                                                             38
                                                                   FIGURE 1 (CONTINUED)
                FREQUENCY OF SIGNIFICANT EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS

                                                                        Panel C: ,6
               Number of Significant Executives   900                                                   820
                                                  800                                       734
                                                  700
                                                                  586
                                                  600
                                                  500
                                                  400
                                                  300
                                                  200                                             163
                                                                                  81
                                                  100   16
                                                    0
                                                             1%                        5%           10%
                                                                            Significance Level

                                                                         Expected      Actual




                                                                        Panel D: ,6
                                                  900                                                   812
               Number of Significant Executives




                                                  800                                       711
                                                  700
                                                  600             558
                                                  500
                                                  400
                                                  300
                                                  200                                             163
                                                                                  81
                                                  100   16
                                                    0
                                                             1%                        5%           10%
                                                                            Significance Level

                                                                         Expected      Actual


Notes:
Figure 1 reports the actual number of significant manager fixed effects and the expected number
of significant manager fixed effects. The significance of manager fixed effects is determined using
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm-level.



                                                                             39
                                                                   FIGURE 1 (CONTINUED)
                FREQUENCY OF SIGNIFICANT EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS

                                                                        Panel E: ,6
               Number of Significant Executives   900                                                   823
                                                  800                                       730
                                                  700
                                                                  579
                                                  600
                                                  500
                                                  400
                                                  300
                                                  200                                             163
                                                                                  81
                                                  100   16
                                                    0
                                                             1%                        5%           10%
                                                                            Significance Level

                                                                         Expected      Actual




                                                                        Panel F: ,6
                                                  900
                                                                                                        792
               Number of Significant Executives




                                                  800                                       702
                                                  700
                                                  600             554
                                                  500
                                                  400
                                                  300
                                                  200                                             163
                                                                                  81
                                                  100   16
                                                    0
                                                             1%                        5%           10%
                                                                            Significance Level

                                                                         Expected      Actual


Notes:
Figure 1 reports the actual number of significant manager fixed effects and the expected number
of significant manager fixed effects. The significance of manager fixed effects is determined using
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm-level.



                                                                             40
                                                                   FIGURE 1 (CONTINUED)
                FREQUENCY OF SIGNIFICANT EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS

                                                                        Panel G: ,6
               Number of Significant Executives   900                                                   802
                                                  800                                       712
                                                  700
                                                  600             562
                                                  500
                                                  400
                                                  300
                                                  200                                             163
                                                                                  81
                                                  100   16
                                                    0
                                                             1%                        5%           10%
                                                                            Significance Level

                                                                         Expected      Actual




                                                                        Panel H: ,6
                                                  900                                                   803
               Number of Significant Executives




                                                  800                                       702
                                                  700
                                                                  582
                                                  600
                                                  500
                                                  400
                                                  300
                                                  200                                             163
                                                                                  81
                                                  100   16
                                                    0
                                                             1%                        5%           10%
                                                                            Significance Level

                                                                         Expected      Actual


Notes:
Figure 1 reports the actual number of significant manager fixed effects and the expected number
of significant manager fixed effects. The significance of manager fixed effects is determined using
heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm-level.



                                                                             41
                                              FIGURE 2
              CHANGE IN BETA SURROUNDING EXECUTIVE TRANSITIONS




Notes:
Figure 2 plots the evolution of  for four groups: (1) firms that hire beta-increasing managers
(significant at the 5% level), (2) firms that hire beta-increasing managers (not significant at the 5%
level), (3) firms that hire beta-decreasing managers (significant at the 5% level), and (4) firms that
hire beta-decreasing managers (not significant at the 5% level). Year 0 denotes the hiring year. To
construct this figure, we subtract the average value of beta measured over the interval [-2, -1] from
the raw value of beta for each firm-year. Thus, the value of beta over the interval [0, 3] represents
the change in beta from the firm's average beta before the executive joined the firm.




                                                 42
                                            TABLE 1
                    EXECUTIVE TRANSITIONS BETWEEN POSITIONS
             To:          CEO                 CFO                Other               Total
 From:
  CEO                      132                  0                 82                 214
  CFO                       41                340                 59                 440
  Other                    409                 74                 546               1,029
  Total                     582               414                 687                 1,683
Notes:
This table summarizes executive transitions in our sample. Each manager in our sample works at
least three years at two or more firms. When a manager works at three or more firms (i.e., moves
more than once), we analyze the last move only. Each cell reports the number of transitions from
the row position to the column position. "Other" refers to miscellaneous job titles, such as Chief
Operating Officer, Corporate Secretary, General Counsel, and various subdivision Presidents or
Vice-Presidents (e.g., human resources, research and development, and marketing).




                                               43
                                           TABLE 2
                                 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
                                N         Mean        SD         p25         p50        p75
                              23,762      0.027      0.014       0.018      0.024      0.033
                              23,762      1.082      0.521       0.722      1.021      1.366
                              23,762      0.024      0.013       0.015      0.021      0.030
 Investment                   24,109      0.307      0.322       0.137      0.215      0.355
 N of acquisitions            25,266      0.362      0.544       0.000      0.000      0.693
 Leverage                     24,415      0.353      0.313       0.103      0.326      0.500
 Interest coverage            22,401      2.514      1.412       1.694      2.332      3.108
 Cash holdings                24,327      0.180      0.269       0.028      0.089      0.233
 Dividends/earnings           23,982      0.082      0.151       0.000      0.019      0.123
 N of diversifying acquis.    25,266      0.170      0.382       0.000      0.000      0.000
 R&D                          24,346      0.039      0.072       0.000      0.004      0.047
 Advertising                  24,346      0.015      0.036       0.000      0.000      0.012
 SG&A                         24,482      0.239      0.181       0.106      0.209      0.333
 Return on assets             24,275      0.164      0.122       0.098      0.153      0.221
 Operating return on assets   24,297      0.115      0.105       0.061      0.109      0.166
Notes:
This table presents summary statistics for the sample of firms that employ a mover at some point
during our sample period. All variables are defined in Appendix 1.




                                              44
                                                               TABLE 3
                                              EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS ON RISK
                                                      F-tests on fixed effects for
                                     CEOs                     CFOs                   Other executives             N        Adjusted R2
                                                                                                                23,762        .6199
                              4.69 (<.0001, 563)                                                                23,762        .6374
                              3.86 (<.0001, 563)        4.53 (<.0001, 410)           8.72 (<.0001, 655)         23,762        .6655
                                                                                                                23,762        .4294
                              5.00 (<.0001, 563)                                                                23,762        .4560
                              4.50 (<.0001, 563)        6.14 (<.0001, 410)           4.60 (<.0001, 655)         23,762        .5010
                                                                                                                23,762        .6162
                              4.21 (<.0001, 563)                                                                23,762        .6330
                             3.70 (<.0001, 563)       4.09 (<.0001, 410)         9.86 (<.0001, 655)             23,762        .6605
Notes:
Using the sample of firm-years with non-missing data, we estimate the following regression:
                                                 =  +  +  +  +  + 
 are year fixed effects,  are firm fixed effects, and  are manager fixed effects. The first row for each variable excludes manager
fixed effects. The second row includes CEO fixed effects and the third row includes fixed effects for all three groups of managers (CEO,
CFO, Other). The middle columns report the results from F-tests for the joint significance of the manager fixed effects. For each F-test,
we report the F-statistic, p-value, and number of constraints.




                                                                   45
                                                               TABLE 4
                                                      INFREQUENT TRADING
                                                      F-tests on fixed effects for
                                     CEOs                     CFOs                   Other executives             N        Adjusted R2
 ,                                                                                                              23,762        .3247
 ,                            2.91 (<.0001, 563)                                                                23,762        .3406
 ,                            3.09 (<.0001, 563)        3.40 (<.0001, 410)           4.98 (<.0001, 655)         23,762        .3716
                                                                                                                23,762        .6165
                              4.19 (<.0001, 563)                                                                23,762        .6333
                             3.72 (<.0001, 563)       3.79 (<.0001, 410)         9.98 (<.0001, 655)             23,762        .6609
Notes:
Using the sample of firm-years with non-missing data, we estimate the following regression:
                                                 =  +  +  +  +  + 
 are year fixed effects,  are firm fixed effects, and  are manager fixed effects. The first row for each variable excludes manager
fixed effects. The second row includes CEO fixed effects and the third row includes fixed effects for all three groups of managers (CEO,
CFO, Other). The middle columns report the results from F-tests for the joint significance of the manager fixed effects. For each F-test,
we report the F-statistic, p-value, and number of constraints.




                                                                   46
                                    TABLE 5
                    FAMA-FRENCH SIX-FACTOR MODEL
                          F-tests on fixed effects for
           CEOs                   CFOs                   Other executives       N      Adjusted R2
,6                                                                            23,768     .2080
,6   2.76 (<.0001, 563)                                                       23,768     .2178
,6   2.52 (<.0001, 563)    3.27 (<.0001, 410)            4.39 (<.0001, 655)   23,768     .2383
,6                                                                            23,768     .4196
,6   3.07 (<.0001, 563)                                                       23,768     .4281
,6   2.68 (<.0001, 563)    2.64 (<.0001, 410)            5.86 (<.0001, 655)   23,768     .4454
,6                                                                            23,768     .2317
,6   2.83 (<.0001, 563)                                                       23,768     .2395
,6   2.56 (<.0001, 563)    3.25 (<.0001, 410)            9.30 (<.0001, 655)   23,768     .2526
,6                                                                            23,768     .2341
,6   2.35 (<.0001, 563)                                                       23,768     .2399
,6   2.07 (<.0001, 563)    2.16 (<.0001, 410)            9.28 (<.0001, 655)   23,768     .2546
,6                                                                            23,768     .1244
,6   2.44 (<.0001, 563)                                                       23,768     .1388
,6   3.01 (<.0001, 563)    2.35 (<.0001, 410)            9.59 (<.0001, 655)   23,768     .1754
,6                                                                            23,768     .0586
,6   2.17 (<.0001, 563)                                                       23,768     .0665
,6   2.38 (<.0001, 563)    3.29 (<.0001, 410)            5.56 (<.0001, 655)   23,768     .0897



                                        47
                                                      TABLE 5 (CONTINUED)
                                              FAMA-FRENCH SIX-FACTOR MODEL
                                                     F-tests on fixed effects for
                                    CEOs                     CFOs                   Other executives             N         Adjusted R2
 6                                                                                                            23,768          .6149
 6                            4.73 (<.0001, 563)                                                              23,768          .6320
 6                           3.77 (<.0001, 563)      4.54 (<.0001, 410)         9.76 (<.0001, 655)            23,768          .6593
Notes:
Using the sample of firm-years with non-missing data, we estimate the following regression:
                                                 =  +  +  +  +  + 
 are year fixed effects,  are firm fixed effects, and  are manager fixed effects. The first row for each variable excludes manager
fixed effects. The second row includes CEO fixed effects and the third row includes fixed effects for all three groups of managers (CEO,
CFO, Other). The middle columns report the results from F-tests for the joint significance of the manager fixed effects. For each F-test,
we report the F-statistic, p-value, and number of constraints.




                                                                   48
                                             TABLE 6
                        DISTRIBUTION OF EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS
                                   N        Mean          SD          p25         p50         p75
                                 1,628      -0.001       0.006      -0.004       0.000       0.003
                                 1,628      -0.011       0.303      -0.201      -0.008       0.161
                                 1,628      -0.001       0.006      -0.004      -0.001       0.002
 Investment                      1,600       0.004       0.134      -0.046       0.009       0.057
 Inv to Q sensitivity            1,621      -0.011       0.381      -0.093      -0.007       0.066
 Inv to CF sensitivity           1,621      -0.017       0.820      -0.098      -0.016       0.060
 N of acquisitions               1,640      -0.008       0.329      -0.139      -0.014       0.140
 Leverage                        1,638       0.002       0.140      -0.060       0.002       0.076
 Interest coverage               1,615      -0.047       0.591      -0.282      -0.031       0.204
 Cash holdings                   1,639      -0.001       0.103      -0.044       0.000       0.043
 Dividends/earnings              1,636      -0.002       0.133      -0.023       0.002       0.020
 N of diversifying acquis.       1,639       0.003       0.201      -0.069      -0.007       0.062
 R&D                             1,639       0.001       0.019      -0.006       0.001       0.008
 Advertising                     1,639       0.000       0.008      -0.001       0.000       0.002
 SG&A                            1,639      -0.002       0.045      -0.017      -0.001       0.013
 Return on assets                1,640       0.003       0.065      -0.027       0.002       0.034
 Operating return on assets      1,640        0.003       0.058      -0.025       0.001      0.028
Notes:
This table presents the distribution of the manager fixed effects estimated in Table 3, as well as
the distribution of the manager fixed effects studied in Bertrand and Schoar (2003). For brevity,
we do not report the estimation of the latter. For details on each corporate policy regression, please
refer to Bertrand and Schoar (2003). We weigh each manager fixed effect by the inverse of its
standard error to account for estimation error.




                                                 49
                                              TABLE 7
         MECHANISM: EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS ON CORPORATE POLICY
                                     Panel A: Factor Loadings
                                              Factor 1             Factor 2             Factor 3
 Investment                                     0.047               -0.052               0.326
 Inv to Q sensitivity                          -0.010               0.054                -0.048
 Inv to CF sensitivity                         -0.010               0.025                0.021
 N of acquisitions                              1.000               -0.002               0.000
 Leverage                                      -0.063               -0.452               -0.117
 Interest coverage                              0.015               1.000                0.000
 Cash holdings                                  0.022               0.082                0.755
 Dividends/earnings                            -0.048               0.020                0.058
 N of diversifying acquis.                      0.756               -0.012               0.021
 R&D                                            0.030               0.032                0.591
 Advertising                                    0.060               -0.004               0.133
 SG&A                                           0.014               0.002                0.008

                                              TABLE 7
         MECHANISM: EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS ON CORPORATE POLICY
                           Panel B: Eigenvalues and Variance Explained
                                            Eigenvalue          Pct. Explained      Cumulative Pct.
 Factor 1 (external growth)                    1.585                0.132                0.132
 Factor 2 (financial conservatism)             1.219                0.102                0.234
 Factor 3 (internal growth)                     1.063                0.089                0.322
Notes:
We perform factor analysis on the manager fixed effects studied in Bertrand and Schoar (2003).
Our results are obtained using Stata's factor command with the ml and altdivisor options (Kaplan
and Sorensen 2019). All factors are non-rotated; however, our results are not sensitive to factor
rotation. Using a Scree test (Cattell 1966), we determine that there are three factors. Panel A reports
the factor loadings of the three factors. Factor loadings greater than 0.15 in absolute value are
highlighted. Panel B reports the eigenvalues and the proportion of variation explained by the three
factors.




                                                  50
                                           TABLE 7
         MECHANISM: EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS ON CORPORATE POLICY
            Panel C: Relation Between Factors and Executive Fixed Effects on Risk
                                                                                    
 Factor 1 (external growth)                 -0.026              -0.021              -0.053
                                            (0.036)             (0.041)            (0.034)
 Factor 2 (financial conservatism)        -0.133***            -0.069*            -0.125***
                                            (0.040)             (0.039)            (0.038)
 Factor 3 (internal growth)                 0.129**           0.259***              0.102
                                            (0.066)             (0.066)            (0.063)
 . . ()                                   -0.176***             -0.012            -0.168***
                                            (0.039)             (0.054)            (0.042)
 N                                           1,548              1,548               1,548
  2
 R                                            0.074              0.041              0.070
Notes:
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
We standardize the fixed effects estimated in Table 3 to have zero mean and unit variance. Then,
we estimate the following weighted least squares regression:
      . . () =  + 1 1 + 2 2 + 3 3 + 4 . . () + 
where j indexes managers. We weigh each observation by the inverse of the standard error of the
independent variable. Each column in Panel C of Table 7 reports the coefficients from a different
multiple regression.




                                               51
                                                               TABLE 8
                                     MECHANISM: FIRM-LEVEL DETERMINANTS OF BETA
                                                       F-tests on fixed effects for
                                     CEOs                      CFOs                    Other executives            N        Adjusted R2
                                                                                                                22,382         .6685
                               4.75 (<.0001, 556)                                                               22,382         .6811
                               4.19 (<.0001, 556)       6.08 (<.0001, 410)            10.65 (<.0001, 648)       22,382         .7056
                                                                                                                22,382         .4465
                               4.99 (<.0001, 556)                                                               22,382         .4726
                               4.45 (<.0001, 556)       5.92 (<.0001, 410)            4.71 (<.0001, 648)        22,382         .5151
                                                                                                                22,382         .6855
                               4.26 (<.0001, 556)                                                               22,382         .6960
                             4.05 (<.0001, 556)       6.35 (<.0001, 410)         10.75 (<.0001, 648)            22,382         .7175
Notes:
Using the sample of firm-years with non-missing data, we estimate the following regression:
                                               =  +  +  +  +  +  + 
 are year fixed effects,  are firm fixed effects,  are manager fixed effects, and  is a vector of time-varying firm characteristics
(size, book-to-market, and leverage). The first row for each variable excludes manager fixed effects. The second row includes CEO
fixed effects and the third row includes fixed effects for all three groups of managers (CEO, CFO, Other). The middle columns report
the results from F-tests for the joint significance of the manager fixed effects. For each F-test, we report the F-statistic, p-value, and
number of constraints.




                                                                    52
                                                               TABLE 9
                             MECHANISM: EXECUTIVE FIXED EFFECTS ON UNLEVERED BETA
                                                      F-tests on fixed effects for
                                     CEOs                     CFOs                   Other executives             N        Adjusted R2
 
                                                                                                               22,405         .4335
 
                              5.32 (<.0001, 561)                                                               22,405         .4535
  
                             5.59 (<.0001, 561)       4.28 (<.0001, 409)         6.88 (<.0001, 649)            22,405         .4941
Notes:
Using the sample of firm-years with non-missing data, we estimate the following regression:
                                                 =  +  +  +  +  + 
 are year fixed effects,  are firm fixed effects, and  are manager fixed effects. The first row for each variable excludes manager
fixed effects. The second row includes CEO fixed effects and the third row includes fixed effects for all three groups of managers (CEO,
CFO, Other). The middle columns report the results from F-tests for the joint significance of the manager fixed effects. For each F-test,
we report the F-statistic, p-value, and number of constraints.




                                                                   53
                                       TABLE 10
                           EXECUTIVE CHARACTERISTICS
                              Panel A: Descriptive Statistics
                              N        Mean         SD          p25     p50        p75
 Male                       1,536      0.937       0.243        1.000   1.000     1.000
 Recession                  1,536      0.237       0.425        0.000   0.000     0.000
 Birth Year                    1,536       1953        8.268      1948   1954     1959
Notes:
This table presents summary statistics for the sample of managers for whom we were able to
estimate manager fixed effects. All variables are defined in Appendix 1.




                                            54
                                             TABLE 10
                              EXECUTIVE CHARACTERISTICS
     Panel B: Relation Between Executive Characteristics and Executive Fixed Effects on Risk
                                                Signed Manager Fixed Effects
                                                                                   
 Male                               -0.160                  0.008                  -0.135
                                    (0.190)                (0.144)                (0.192)
 Recession                          -0.120                -0.240**                 -0.037
                                    (0.100)                (0.100)                (0.099)
 Birth Year                         -0.005                  0.007                  -0.003
                                    (0.013)                (0.014)                (0.013)
 Industry Fixed Effects               Yes                    Yes                    Yes
 Decade Fixed Effects                 Yes                    Yes                    Yes
 N                                   1,536                  1,536                  1,536
  2
 R                                    0.081                 0.099                 0.069
Notes:
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
We standardize the fixed effects estimated in Table 3 to have zero mean and unit variance. Then,
we estimate the following weighted least squares regression
                . . () =  +  +  +   + 
where j indexes managers. We weigh each observation by the inverse of the standard error of the
independent variable. Decade fixed effects are based on the decade in which the manager was
born. Industry fixed effects are based on the industry (two-digit SIC) of the last firm we observe
each manager in. Each column in Table 10 reports the coefficients from a different multiple
regression.




                                                55
                                             TABLE 11
                                   EXECUTIVE DISCRETION
                                                       Unsigned Manager Fixed Effects
                                                                                        
 Institutional holdings                       -0.215               -0.123               -0.177
                                              (0.148)              (0.132)             (0.142)
 Size                                        -0.058***           -0.052***            -0.062***
                                              (0.018)              (0.019)             (0.017)
 Return on assets                              0.049               -0.082               0.137
                                              (0.439)              (0.406)             (0.393)
 Leverage                                      0.010                0.004               0.026
                                              (0.032)              (0.019)             (0.037)
 Tobin's Q                                    -0.019               -0.001               -0.024
                                              (0.019)              (0.025)             (0.019)
 Value-weighted market return                 -0.101                0.179               -0.051
                                              (0.202)              (0.165)             (0.203)
 N                                             1,159                1,159               1,159
 R2                                           0.033              0.023              0.033
Notes:
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
We standardize the fixed effects estimated in Table 3 to have zero mean and unit variance. Then,
we estimate the following weighted least squares regression:
                     |. . () | =  + -1 + -1 + 
i, j, and  index firms, managers, and years, respectively. We weigh each observation by the inverse
of the standard error of the independent variable. Each column in Table 11 reports the coefficients
from a different multiple regression. The dependent variable is the absolute value of the manager
fixed effect on the column variable. FIRM is a vector of firm-level variables: institutional holdings,
firm size, return on assets, leverage, and Tobin's Q. VWRET is the return on the CRSP value-
weighted market portfolio. We measure FIRM in the last firm we observe each manager in, and
we measure all independent variables (FIRM and VWRET) in the year before each executive
transition.




                                                 56
                                           TABLE 12
                                    HIRING PREFERENCES
                                                       Signed Manager Fixed Effects
                                                                                       
 Institutional holdings                       0.284               0.076                0.230
                                             (0.199)             (0.203)              (0.189)
 Size                                        0.041*               0.040                0.029
                                             (0.025)             (0.029)              (0.024)
 Return on assets                           -1.173**             -0.925*              -1.000**
                                             (0.490)             (0.525)              (0.483)
 Leverage                                     0.038               0.027                0.038
                                             (0.050)             (0.052)              (0.043)
 Tobin's Q                                  0.060**              0.065*                0.037
                                             (0.026)             (0.038)              (0.027)
 Value-weighted market return                 0.248               0.110                0.243
                                             (0.285)             (0.255)              (0.281)
 N                                            1,159               1,159                1,159
 R2                                           0.044              0.022              0.032
Notes:
*, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
We standardize the fixed effects estimated in Table 3 to have zero mean and unit variance. Then,
we estimate the following weighted least squares regression:
                      . . () =  + -1 + -1 + 
i, j, and  index firms, managers, and years, respectively. We weigh each observation by the inverse
of the standard error of the independent variable. Each column in Table 12 reports the coefficients
from a different multiple regression. The dependent variable is the signed manager fixed effect on
the column variable. FIRM is a vector of firm-level variables: institutional holdings, firm size,
return on assets, leverage, and Tobin's Q. VWRET is the return on the CRSP value-weighted
market portfolio. We measure FIRM in the last firm we observe each manager in, and we measure
all independent variables (FIRM and VWRET) in the year before each executive transition.




                                                57
