                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF EUROPE'S CARBON TAXES

                                       Gilbert E. Metcalf
                                        James H. Stock

                                      Working Paper 27488
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27488


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We have received valuable comments from Meredith Fowlie and Geoffroy Dolphin. We wish to
thank Celine Ramstein and Ozgur Bozçaga for help with the World Bank carbon tax data, and
Xiaoxin Zhang for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gilbert E. Metcalf and James H. Stock. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Macroeconomic Impact of Europe's Carbon Taxes
Gilbert E. Metcalf and James H. Stock
NBER Working Paper No. 27488
July 2020
JEL No. E62,H23,Q43,Q54

                                         ABSTRACT

Policy makers often express concern about the impact of carbon taxes on employment and GDP.
Focusing on European countries that have implemented carbon taxes over the past 30 years, we
estimate the macroeconomic impacts of these taxes on GDP and employment growth rates for
various specifications and samples. Our point estimates suggest a zero to modest positive impact
on GDP and total employment growth rates. More importantly, we find no robust evidence of a
negative effect of the tax on employment or GDP growth. We examine evidence on whether the
positive effects might stem from countries that used the carbon tax revenues to reduce other
taxes; while the evidence is consistent with this view, it is inconclusive. We also consider the
impact of the taxes on emission reductions and find a cumulative reduction on the order of 4 to 6
percent for a $40/ton CO2 tax covering 30% of emissions. We argue that reductions would likely
be greater for a broad-based U.S. carbon tax since European carbon taxes do not include in the
tax base those sectors with the lowest marginal costs of carbon pollution abatement.


Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu

James H. Stock
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M26
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
James_Stock@harvard.edu
         


        Economists widely agree that putting a price on carbon emissions is the most cost

effective way to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  The two most straightforward ways to 

apply a price are a carbon tax and a cap and trade system.  A carbon tax can be levied on fossil 

fuels and other sources of greenhouse gas emissions based on their emissions; a cap and trade 

system limits emissions to some overall amount (the cap) and allows polluters to trade the 

rights to those scarce emission rights.  In the current Congress there are numerous bills to 

establish national carbon tax systems and a few cap and trade bills.  The filed bills reflect a 

growing consensus that action is needed at the national level to curb our carbon pollution and 

that a carbon tax is the most straightforward way to do that.  The bills also reflect a broad 

consensus among economists, as typified by the more than 3,500 economists who signed the 

Climate Leadership Council's statement in calling for a carbon tax as "the most costeffective 

lever to reduce carbon emissions at the scale and speed that is necessary."1 

        A major stumbling block to pricing carbon pollution is concern about the economic 

impact of the policy.  The Trump Administration's retreat from a climate policy is emblematic.  

In initiating a process to withdraw the United States from the global Paris Agreement, for 

example, the President claimed that the cost to the economy would be "close to $3 trillion in 

lost GDP and 6.5 million industrial jobs..." (Trump, 2017).    

        How should we assess the economic costs of a carbon tax?  Until recently, most analyses 

were based on modeling from large scale computable general equilibrium models.  But we now 

have enough experience with carbon tax systems around the world to carry out statistical 


         
1
   The  statement  was  published  in  The  Wall  Street  Journal  on  Jan.  17,  2019  and  is  available  at 
https://clcouncil.org/economistsstatement/.  Both of the authors of this paper are signatories of that statement.  

                                                                                                                1 
         
        


analyses of existing systems.  The first carbon tax was implemented in 1990 so there is now up 

to three decades of data to draw on.   

       In this paper we carry out an analysis of the 31 countries in Europe that are part of the 

EU wide emissions trading system (EUETS).  While all of these countries price a portion of their 

emissions through this cap and trade system, fifteen of these countries also impose a carbon 

tax, mostly on emissions not covered by the EUETS.  By limiting our analysis to countries that 

are part of the EUETS, we can identify the incremental impact of carbon taxes on emissions, 

output, and employment by leveraging the variation in carbon tax systems within this group of 

countries.  This paper builds on a previous analysis in Metcalf and Stock (2020).  We build on 

that analysis in a number of ways including, importantly, measuring the impact of the carbon 

taxes on emissions as well as economic growth.   

       We find the following.  For a wide range of specifications, we find no evidence of 

adverse effects on GDP growth or total employment.  We also test and generally cannot reject 

the hypothesis that the carbon tax has no long run effect on growth rates. This finding is 

consistent with macroeconomic theory that suggests growth rates are driven by fundamentals, 

such as technological progress, which are unaffected by changes in relative prices.  It is also 

consistent with most general equilibrium modeling of climate policy.  Finally, we find 

cumulative emission reductions on the order of 4 to 6 percent for a tax of $40 per ton of CO2 

covering 30% of emissions.  We argue that this is likely to be a lower bound on reductions for a 

broadbased carbon tax in the U.S. since European carbon taxes do not include in the tax base 

those sectors with the lowest marginal costs of carbon pollution abatement.  European carbon 




                                                                                                    2 
        
          


taxes generally exclude the electricity sector and carbon intensive industries since those 

emissions are covered under the EU Emission Trading System. 

         The next section provides background and a literature review that places our paper in 

context.  Section III surveys European carbon taxes.  Section IV details our data and the 

econometric approach we take assess the impact of European carbon taxes.  Section V presents 

results from the analysis.  The next section presents some robustness results.  We provide some 

concluding remarks in section VII. 


II. Previous Literature 

         Most analyses of the economic impact of carbon taxes rely on largescale computable 

general equilibrium models.  One representative model is the E3 model described in Goulder 

and Hafstead (2017).  They estimate that a $40 per ton carbon tax for the United States starting 

in 2020 and rising at 5 percent real annually would reduce GDP by just over one percent in 2035 

relative to a notax counterfactual.  While different models give different results, most find very 

modest reductions (if at all) in GDP from implementing a carbon tax.2  Goulder et al. (2019) also 

consider a U.S. carbon tax starting at $40 per ton and rising at 2 percent annually.  They find the 

GDP costs over the 2016 ­ 2050 period discounted at 3 percent equal to less than onethird of 

one percent of GDP. 




          
2
   Trump  cited  a  NERA  (2017)  study  commissioned  by  an  industry  group  to  analyze  how  meeting  an  80  percent 
reduction by 2050 would affect various industry sectors.  Among other issues, the headline number cited by Trump 
(7 percent reduction in GDP) is from a NERA scenario in which sector specific regulations are imposed with very 
different  marginal  abatement  costs  across  sectors.  If  marginal  abatement  costs  are  allowed  to  equalize  across 
sectors in that study, the costs are reduced by over twothirds. 

                                                                                                                         3 
          
         


        Turning to the empirical literature, Metcalf (2019) finds no adverse GDP impact of the 

British Columbia carbon tax based on a differenceindifference  analysis of a panel of Canadian 

provinces over the time period 1990 ­ 2016.  Using a panel of European countries over the time 

period 1985 ­ 2017, he finds, if anything, a modest positive impact on GDP.  That imposing a 

carbon tax might have positive impacts on GDP is not implausible once one considers the 

governments' use of carbon tax revenue.  In the early 1990s, for example, carbon taxes were 

imposed in a number of Scandinavian countries as a revenue source to finance reductions in 

marginal tax rates for their income taxes (see Brannlund and Gren, 1999, for background on 

these reforms).  Variation in the use of revenues from newly enacted carbon taxes could 

differentially impact economic growth and is something we explore in this paper.   

        Bernard et al. (2018) use a vector autoregression (VAR) to estimate the impact of the BC 

carbon tax on provincial GDP, controlling for the pretax price of gasoline (or diesel) and US 

economic variables; they find no impact of the tax on GDP. In earlier work with a more limited 

version of the data set used in this paper, we ( Metcalf and Stock (2020)) use local projections 

to estimate the impact of carbon taxes in European countries on GDP and found no adverse 

impacts of the tax on economic growth or employment. These results are consistent with 

Yamazaki (2017) analysis of the employment effects of the British Columbia carbon tax.  

Yamazaki found modest positive impacts on employment in the province.  While aggregate 

impacts were small, he found significant job shifting from carbon intensive to noncarbon 

intensive sectors.     

        Focusing on emissions, Lin and Li (2011) estimate differenceindifference regressions 

comparing individual countries with carbon taxes (Finland, the Netherlands, Norway, Denmark, 


                                                                                                    4 
         
        


and Sweden) with a set of control countries and find mixed results.  In 4 of the 5 countries, the 

growth rate of emissions falls by between 0.5 and 1.7. Only the estimate for Finland is 

statistically significant at the 10 percent level, with the coefficient suggesting a drop in the 

growth rate of emissions of 1.7 percent.  

       Martin et al. (2014) assess the United Kingdom's Climate Change Levy's (CCL) impact on 

energy and emissions indicators for various manufacturing sectors. As discussed in Metcalf 

(2019), the CCL is not a true carbon tax given its differential taxation of fossil fuels.  While CO2 

emissions fall by 8.4 percent, but imprecisely estimated, their results are also consistent with 

the CCL leading to fuel substitution away from electricity and toward coal.  This follows from 

the lower tax rate on coal than natural gas.   

       A recent paper by Andersson (2019) focuses on the impact of Sweden's carbon tax on 

transportation emissions.  He focuses on transportation as this is the sector most impacted by 

the Swedish carbon tax.  He finds an emissions reduction on the order of 11 percent.  While this 

might appear modest given the fact that Sweden has the highest carbon tax in the world, most 

analysts argue that the transportation sector is the most difficult sector to decarbonize given 

the efficiency of the internal combustion engine. 

       Turning to British Columbia, Rivers and Schaufele (2015) find that the province's carbon 

tax, which covers gasoline, diesel, and natural gas, significantly reduces gasoline consumption.  

They estimate that the carbon tax has a stronger impact on gasoline demand ­ by a factor of 

four ­ than a comparable increase in the price of gasoline, a surprising finding that the authors 

attribute to the high salience of the carbon tax.  Metcalf (2019) estimated differencein

difference regressions using Canadian province data and find that the BC tax reduced emissions 


                                                                                                        5 
        
          


on the order of 5 to 8 percent since it's imposition in 2008.  Prettis (2019) estimates a 5 percent 

reduction in transportation emissions from the BC carbon tax, with potentially larger longrun 

emissions, but does not detect an economywide emissions reduction attributable to the tax. 

           As noted at the outset, this paper builds on Metcalf and Stock (2020).  In addition to 

considering additional econometric model specifications for employment and GDP, we also 

assess the carbon taxes impacts on country emissions.  We also test whether macroeconomic 

outcomes are affected by the use of carbon tax revenue.  Specifically, we consider whether 

green tax reforms ­ reforms where carbon tax revenues are used to lower existing distortionary 

tax rates ­ has a different impact on macro outcomes than when the revenue is simply added 

to general revenue.3 

III.  Carbon Taxes in Europe 

         Carbon taxes were first enacted in Europe with Finland leading the way in 1990.  

Following an early wave of carbon tax enactments primarily in the Nordic countries, more 

countries enacted carbon taxes and currently sixteen European countries have carbon taxes in 

place.  We focus on the socalled EU+ countries that are also part of the EUETS and so exclude 

Ukraine from our analysis.  We focus on EU+ countries to control consistently for the impact of 

the ETS on growth.  The ETS went into effect with a pilot phase (Phase I) in 2005.  In Phase I, 

power stations and certain energy intensive sectors were subject to the cap.4  Phase II (2008 ­ 


          
3
   We can't rule out the possibility that adding carbon tax revenues to general revenue allows a country to avoid a 
future tax increase as opposed to an increase in spending.  In that case, we would not expect a different outcome 
than when the revenue is explicitly earmarked for reductions in distortionary tax rates.   
4
   The sectors are power stations and other combustion plants of at least 20 MW, oil refineries, coke ovens, iron and 
steel plants, cement clinker, glass, lime, bricks, ceramics, pulp, and paper and board.  Aluminum, petrochemicals, 
ammonia, nitric, adipic, and glyoxylic acid production. and CO2 capture, transport, and storage were added in Phase 
III. 

                                                                                                                   6 
          
         


2012) added domestic aviation (in 2012), and Phase III (2013 ­ 2020) added various additional 

sectors.5 

           Countries with carbon taxes are as follows (listed in chronological order of 

enactment):6 

Finland (1990):  The first wave of carbon taxes in Europe began with Finland's enactment of a 

tax in 1990.  As was also the case in subsequent Nordic carbon tax implementations, Finland's 

carbon tax was enacted during a time of income tax reform to lower high marginal income tax 

rates (Carl and Fedor, 2016).  Between 1990 and 1994, Finland taxed all fossil fuels including 

gasoline, diesel, fuel oil, coal, natural gas with some fuels (e.g. natural gas) taxed at a lower rate 

per ton carbon dioxide.7  Between 1994 and 1997, Finland switched to a combined carbon and 

energy tax before switching back to a carbon tax in 1997.  The tax base since 1997 was 

predominantly motor and heating fuels.  Tax revenues are not specifically earmarked for 

particular uses but coincides with reductions in income tax rates both initially and over time 

(OECD, 2019).  It raised a little under $1.5 billion in 2018, according to the World Bank Carbon 

Pricing Dashboard. 

Poland (1990): According to the World Bank's States and Trends of Carbon Pricing, Poland has 

the lowest carbon tax rate among those countries with a carbon tax. It also covers a small share 



         
5
   Twentyfive of the thirtyone countries in our sample have been subject to the ETS from its inception.  Romania 
and Bulgaria joined in 2007 while Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein joined the ETS starting with Phase II in 2008.  
Croatia joined the ETS as of Phase III in 2013.  See European Commission (2015) for a history and membership of the 
ETS. 
6
    This section draws on material from Sumner et al. (2011), Carl and Fedor (2016), Marten and Dender (2019), and 
World Bank Group (2019b). 
7
    https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?page=view&type=99&nr=183&menu=1449,  accessed  March 
29, 2020.   

                                                                                                                  7 
         
         


of emissions (less than five percent).  Revenues are on the order of $1 million annually and are 

earmarked for environmental spending (OECD, 2019).   

Norway (1991):  Norway was also one of the early Nordic carbon tax adopters, with the tax 

adopted as part of broader income tax reform (see also Brannlund and Gren (1999) who 

document the green tax reforms in Denmark, Norway, and Sweden).  Like other Nordic 

countries, the taxes go into general revenue and are not earmarked though it is understood 

that they, in part, make up for lost income tax revenue from lowering income tax rates.  The tax 

covers oil, gasoline, and natural gas in the transportation and industrial sectors (primarily) with 

modest contributions from agriculture as well as the residential and commercial sectors (OECD, 

2018).8   

Sweden (1991):  Sweden's carbon tax applies primarily to transport and heating fuels (Hammar 

and Akerfeldt, 2011).  Initially enacted with lower rates for trade intensive sectors of the 

economy, the gap between the standard and reduced rates has gradually been reduced until it 

was eliminated in 2018.  As Andersson (2019) notes, roughly 90 percent of the tax revenue 

comes from the transport sector.   As with other Nordic countries, Sweden's carbon tax was 

enacted as part of a broader tax reform that saw reductions in income tax rates as well as an 

expansion of the value added tax to cover gasoline and diesel.      

Denmark (1992):  Denmark is another country that implemented a carbon tax as part of a 

broader tax reform movement in the early 1990s.  Like other Nordic countries, the taxes go into 

general revenue and are not earmarked though it is understood that they, in part, make up for 


         
8
  Emissions from offshore oil and gas production are subject both to the EUETS and the carbon tax (Svenningsen et 
al., 2019, p. 80). 

                                                                                                               8 
         
          


lost income tax revenue from lowering income tax rates.  The tax covers oil, gasoline, and 

natural gas in the transportation and industrial sectors (primarily) with modest contributions 

from agriculture as well as the residential and commercial sectors (OECD, 2018).   

Slovenia (1996): Slovenia was the first former Soviet block country to implement a carbon tax.  

Revenues are earmarked, in part, for green spending (at least in 2005).  The tax falls primarily 

on emissions from the buildings and transport sector. 

Estonia (2000): Estonia has a modest carbon tax that applies primarily to transport fuels (OECD, 

2018).  Revenues are not earmarked but go into general revenue. 

Latvia (2004):  Latvia's carbon tax applies to emissions from industry and the power sector not 

subject to the EU ETS (World Bank Carbon Pricing Dashboard).  Carbon tax revenue is applied to 

general revenue.   

Switzerland (2008):  While Switzerland is not part of the EUETS, it has its own cap and trade 

system (since 2008) and has formally linked its system with the EUETS as of 2019.  Its carbon 

tax applies to energy related CO2 emissions not covered by the country's ETS.  Firms in trade 

exposed sectors with large carbon tax burdens can opt out of the system if they commit to a set 

reduction in emissions by given dates.  Switzerland earmarks onethird of the carbon tax 

revenue for subsidize energy reduction in the building sector, either through energy efficiency 

investments or distributed generation ­ geothermal primarily ­ investments (Carl and Fedor, 

2016, and OECD, 2019).9  




          
9
   Liechtenstein is required as a result of a bilateral treaty with Switzerland to enact the same environmental laws 
as in Switzerland.  As a result, it also enacted a carbon tax in 2008.  All revenues are added to general revenue.  
Similar exemptions exist as in Switzerland.  We have not included Liechtenstein in the empirical analysis. 

                                                                                                                    9 
          
         


Ireland (2010):  Ireland enacted a carbon tax in the wake of the 2008 fiscal crisis that 

confronted the country with the risk of collapse of the Irish banking system and collapse of 

property values (Convery et al., 2013).  Revenues enter the general budget though there is 

some minor earmarking for environmental projects.10  The tax applies to all fossil fuel emissions 

and can overlap with coverage of the ETS.  Firms, however, are eligible for a rebate of the 

carbon tax for emissions subject to the ETS. 

Iceland (2010): Like Ireland, Iceland enacted a carbon tax following the financial crisis of 2008.  

Initially, it pegged the tax rate to the EUETS allowance price but soon raised the rate to raise 

additional revenue for the national budget (Svenningsen, et al., 2019).  The carbon tax applies 

to fossil fuel consumption in the country; given the extensive use of geothermal and 

hydropower for power generation (nearly all) and household heating (over 90 percent), the 

carbon tax is primarily a tax on transport fuels. 

United Kingdom (2013):  The UK Carbon Price Floor (CPF) applies to power generators subject 

to the EUETS and is designed to set a floor price on powerrelated CO2 emissions.  Revenues 

are part of general revenue and are not earmarked.  Confusingly, the UK also applies a Climate 

Change Levy which is not a true carbon tax as it applies different rates per ton of carbon dioxide 

to different fuels with, for example, coal taxed at half the rate of natural gas (Martin, et al., 

2014).   



         
10
   In the December 2009 Financial Statement of the Irish Minister for Finance, the Minister stated that the revenue 
would be used "to boost energy efficiency, to support rural transport and to alleviate fuel poverty.  The Carbon Tax 
will also allow us to maintain or reduce payroll taxes."  See the Statement at 
http://budget.gov.ie/Budgets/2010/FinancialStatement.aspx#item9, accessed on March 29, 2020.  In the absence 
of explicit earmarking, we view this statement as consistent with using the revenue to contribute to general 
revenue and avoid a payroll tax increase. 

                                                                                                                 10 
         
          


Spain (2014): Spain's carbon tax is a tax on fluorinated gases.  The tax is applied when 

equipment is recharged and can be rebated to the extent the gases are recovered and recycled.  

Revenue enters the general revenue with no earmarking. 

France (2014): France's carbon tax covers nearly all fossil fuels not subject to the EUETS.  

Certain industrial process emissions are exempt from the tax.   Initially, revenue from the tax 

was earmarked to finance green spending (Carl and Fedor, 206).  Over time the share of 

earmarked revenue has declined with the share allocated to general revenue rising. 

Portugal (2015): Portugal's carbon tax generally applies to emissions from sectors not covered 

by the EUETS.  A unique feature of Portugal's tax is that the rate is indexed to the average 

allowance price of the EUETS from the previous year (World Bank Carbon Pricing Dashboard 

and Pereira et al., 2016).  The carbon tax was enacted as part of a broader set of tax reforms 

and revenue from the tax was used to lower existing income taxes. 

         Table 1 summarizes information about carbon taxes across these EU+ countries.  Figure 

1 shows the time trend of carbon tax rates in the EU+ countries since their enactment.  There is 

considerable variation in rates as well as time of enactment for the taxes.  (Note that the scale 

of the top graph differs from that of the next two.) 

         Figure 2 shows GDP per capita growth rates before and after each country's enactment 

of the carbon tax.  The dots indicate mean values and bars 90 percent confidence intervals.  

There is no clear pattern in changes in growth rates following enactment of the carbon tax.11  

We therefore turn next to an econometric analysis. 


          
11
    The  event  study  graphs  are  based  on  regressions  without  controls  and  simply  illustrate  the  importance  of 
undertaking a more systematic analysis.  Graphs for employment and emissions are included in the Appendix.   

                                                                                                                        11 
          
         


IV.  Data and Econometric Approach 
        Our data on real GDP and carbon tax rates come from the World Bank Group (2019a).12  

Employment data are from the EU Eurostat database.  Data on the share of greenhouse gas 

emissions covered by the tax come from World Bank Group (2019a), and energy price and 

energy excise tax data are from the International Energy Agency (2019).  Data on country 

carbon dioxide emissions from fuel consumption are from Eurostat and cover the years 1990 

through 2018.  We focus on carbon dioxide emissions from fuel combustion in road transport, 

the commercial and institutional sector, and the household sector.  These are sectors most 

typically included in country level carbon taxes.   

        Identifying the dynamic causal effect of a carbon tax on GDP growth is complicated by 

the possibility of simultaneity: poor economic outcomes could lead the tax authorities to 

reduce the rate or to postpone a planned increase.13 As discussed in Metcalf and Stock (2020), 

it is useful to think of changes to a carbon tax as having two components, one responding to 

historical economic growth, the other being unpredicted by past growth. Changes in the latter 

category could include tax changes based on historically legislated schedules, changes in 

ambition based on the environmental preferences of the party in power, or responses to 

international climate policy pressure. Our identifying assumption is that this latter category of 


         
12
    Real carbon tax rates are nominal tax rates divided by the GDP deflator (home country currency), converted to 
US dollars at 2018 exchange rates. We used national statistical agency data for GDP and prices, instead of World 
Bank data, for Ireland and Norway. For Ireland, we used adjusted Gross National Income, which eliminates 
distortions from intellectual property inflows due to Ireland's status as a tax haven (Worstall, 2016), and the CPI. 
Norway maintains dual accounts, onshore and offshore, the latter including oil revenues; we use onshore GDP and 
its deflator to avoid spuriously confounding carbon tax effects with Norway's offshore oil production.   
13
    British Columbia, for example, has announced a delay in the 2020 scheduled increase in its carbon tax due to the 
COVID10 pandemic shock to the economy.  See information at 
https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/climatechange/planningandaction/carbontax, accessed on 
June 5, 2020. 

                                                                                                                 12 
         
         


changes ­ those not predicted by historical owncountry GDP growth and current and past 

international economic shocks ­ are exogenous. This assumption allows us to estimate the 

dynamic effect on GDP growth of the unexpected component of a carbon tax using the Jordà 

(2005) local projection (LP) method, adapted to panel data. Specifically, we use OLS to estimate 

a sequence of panel data regressions, 

(1)     100                                                                               . 

where   is the real carbon tax rate for country i at date t and   is the effect of an unexpected 

change in the carbon tax rate at time t on annual GDP growth h periods hence.  

        In all regressions, the tax rate is interacted with its 2019 share of its emission coverage. 

This specification assumes that any damage (or benefit) of the tax to an economy would be, in 

the first instance, proportional to the covered share of the economy. 

        All regressions include both country and year fixed effects. Including the former 

addresses the possibility that countries with higher mean growth rates might be the ones more 

likely to adopt and increase a carbon tax, in which case the tax could spuriously appear 

beneficial. In principle, under our exogeneity assumption it should not be necessary to include 

year effects, but we do so for two reasons. First, because the countries are all European, they 

share common political pressures, which could induce common changes in carbon prices, and 

have common economic influences. These common influences, even if exogenous, could 

appear as confounders, so we identify the effect of the tax increase from countrylevel 

surprises in carbon prices after controlling for common movements (year effects). Second, even 

if year effects are not needed for identification, because of common macroeconomic 




                                                                                                   13 
         
         


movements (such as the global recession of 2009), including year effects could reduce standard 

errors. Standard errors are heteroskedasticityrobust (PlagborgMoller and Wolf (2019)).  

        We also estimate panel structural VAR (SVAR) regressions with the tax rate and GDP 

growth as dependent variables, four annual lags of each as regressors, and country and year 

fixed effects. This is a panel version of the standard time series structural VAR. The 

identification conditions are the same as in the LP regression. In population the estimand is the 

same.  Although the SVAR and LP methods have the same identifying condition and the same 

estimand, in finite samples they can differ and they will have different standard errors. Thus, 

using the SVAR estimator provides a robustness check on the LP estimator.  SVAR standard 

errors are computed by parametric bootstrap.14   

        In Metcalf and Stock (2020), we also estimated distributed lag regressions.  These 

regressions require the stronger identification condition that the carbon tax is strictly 

exogenous, that is, there is no feedback from GDP growth to the tax rate.  We test this 

condition by computing a test of feedback from GDP growth to the tax rate, that is, a panel 

Granger Causality test of the coefficients on GDP growth in a regression of the carbon tax rate 

on its lags and lagged GDP growth.  To ensure stationary regressors so that standard F critical 

values can be used, we compute this test using the growth rate of the variables.  As discussed in 

the next section, the test tends to reject lack of feedback to the tax rate (at least at the 10 

percent level), indicating that the distributed lag identifying conditions are not supported by 

the data. Accordingly, we do not present distributed lag results here. 


         
14
   See Stock and Watson (2018) and PlagborgMoller and Wolf (2019) for details on methodology and relation 
between VARs and LPs. 

                                                                                                             14 
         
         


        We consider the counterfactual of a onetime permanent increase in the carbon tax by 

$40, for a tax that covers 30% of the country's emissions, a coverage rate that is close to the 

sample mean. We compute this dynamic response from the LP and SVAR impulse responses 

using the method in Sims (1986), which entails computing the sequence of shocks necessary to 

yield the specified counterfactual carbon tax increase. In practice, the carbon tax series is highly 

persistent so the dynamic effects we estimate here are close to the (scaled) structural impulse 

response functions at the horizons we consider.  

        A key issue in the dynamic model is the long run effect of the carbon tax on the growth 

rate of GDP, that is, whether a carbon tax permanently changes not just the level of GDP but 

also the slope of the GDP growth path.  The standard theory underlying computable dynamic 

equilibrium models of a carbon tax models the longrun growth rate as determined by 

fundamentals, and that those fundamentals are not affected by the relative price change 

induced by carbon tax.  If so, the tax might affect GDP growth in the short run but would revert 

to the long run growth rate in time.  In effect, the tax would shift GDP to a new level after 

which it would move in parallel with its path had the carbon tax not been imposed, see for 

example the Goulder and Hafstead (2017) E3 model or Nordhaus's DICE model.15 

        This "parallel path" hypothesis imposes a testable restriction on the LP and SVAR 

specifications, specifically that the longrun effect of a shock to the carbon tax on GDP growth is 

zero. We estimated the LP and SVAR specifications both with this zero longrun growth effect 

restriction imposed ("restricted" case) and not imposed ("unrestricted"). In both the SVAR and 


         
15
    Models have been developed that allow the long run growth rate of GDP to be affected by climate damages.  
See, for example, Moyer et al. (2014).  But this is more the exception than the rule. 

                                                                                                             15 
         
        


LP specifications, in the unrestricted case  enters in levels, in the restricted case,  enters in 

first differences. For the SVAR, the restriction is that the longrun structural impulse response 

from the tax to GDP growth in the levels specification is zero, which we test directly. Because 

the LP approach computes impulse responses out to a maximum finite horizon h in equation 

(1), it does not estimate the longterm effect at arbitrarily distant horizons. Consequently, for 

the LP test of the longrun restriction, we approximate the longterm effect by the effect at the 

8year horizon.  

       The discussion in this section has focused on the effect of a carbon tax on GDP growth. 

We use the same methods to analyze the effect on the growth rate of employment and 

emissions. 

V.  Results 
       We begin with results for GDP, then turn to employment and emissions. 

A.     GDP  

       Figure 3 shows the IRF for the LP model for real GDP, estimated using all 31 countries 

over the full 19852018 sample, where the carbon tax rate is interacted with the share of 

emissions covered by the tax.  Figure 3a shows results from the unrestricted model, that is, the 

model that allows for a nonzero longterm effect of the tax on GDP growth.  The predicted 

effect is positive in each year through year 6 except for year 4.  In no year, however, is the 

effect significant at the 5% level (in most years it is within one standard error of zero).   The 

results for the restricted model (figure 3b), in which a zero longterm effect of the tax rate on 

GDP growth is imposed, are similar to those for the unrestricted model.  Again, the point 

estimate is generally no more than one standard deviation away from zero.   


                                                                                                     16 
        
         


        Figure 4 shows the IRFs for the SVAR model.  The unrestricted IRF (figure 4a) is always 

positive and near constant at about 0.4 percentage points.  The restricted IRF (figure 4b) is 

much closer to zero and, in fact, the period 6 estimate is essentially zero (though not imposed 

explicitly by the model).   In general, the SVAR results are very similar to the LP results.  In all 

cases, the standard error bands in the SVAR restricted models approach zero in later years. For 

the restricted models, this is a consequence of the joint stationarity of GDP growth and the 

change in the carbon tax. For the unrestricted models, this convergence of the IRF to zero need 

not be the case, but the restriction is supported by the data so the unrestricted and restricted 

estimates are similar. The SVAR and LP models are consistent estimators of the same objects in 

population, but even so it is striking how similar the empirical results are using the two 

methods. This is true generically for these data, across dependent variables and regressors. We 

therefore henceforth only report LP results in the text, relegating selected SVAR estimates for 

key specifications in the Appendix.   

        Table 2 summarizes the results for tests of the restriction that the longrun effect on the 

growth rate of GDP of the tax is zero. Neither the LP nor SVAR tests reject this hypothesis: For 

the LP model, the test statistic equals 0.33 (pvalue = 0.75).  For the SVAR model, the test 

statistic is 1.34 (pvalue = 0.18).   We find similar test results for other cuts of the data 

(discussed below) and report results in Table 2.   

        Table 3 reports tests of the hypothesis that the carbon tax rate is strictly exogenous 

(Granger causality tests). The test statistic equals 2.21 for our full sample and has a pvalue of 

0.066, rejecting strict exogeneity at the 10 percent level.   We reject strict exogeneity for the 

GDP regressions at the 10 percent level or lower for other cuts of the data (see Table 3). 


                                                                                                        17 
         
        


       The results illustrated in Figures 3 and 4 do not suggest particularly large positive 

impacts of a carbon tax on GDP.  But neither do they support a claim of large adverse impacts.  

It is possible, however, that effects accumulate over time.  Figure 5 shows cumulative IRSs for 

the LP model.  The unrestricted model cumulative IRF (top panel) shows a positive impact on 

growth by year 6 of roughly 2 percentage points but standard error bands are large with the 95 

percent confidence interval ranging from 2 to +6 percentage points.  When restricting the long

run growth rate to be zero, the impact is now negligible in all six years.  In this and subsequent 

subsamples, we find no evidence to support the view that European carbon taxes have had a 

significant impact on GDP, either positive or negative.  

B.     Total Employment 

       Figure 6 shows IRFs for total employment.  In both the unrestricted and restricted cases, 

employment initially rises and then subsequently falls.  The cumulative impact (Figure 7) is 

positive over a six year period with a point estimate of 1.15 percentage points in the 

unrestricted LP model and 0.35 percentage points in the restricted model.  In neither model do 

we reject a zero cumulative impact.  Results (in the Appendix) for manufacturing employment 

are similar to total employment but the estimates are less precise.    As with GDP, we can reject 

significant negative employment impacts from the carbon tax. 

C.     Emissions 

       Impulse response functions measure annual changes in the variables of interest 

following a policy change such as the $40 per ton carbon tax modeled throughout.  We focus on 

the effect of the carbon tax on the level of CO2 emissions in road transport and the commercial, 

institutional, and household sectors.  This levels effect is estimated by the cumulative structural 


                                                                                                 18 
        
         


impulse response function, because emissions enter in growth rates.  Unlike GDP and 

employment, there is no a priori expectation of a "parallel path" hypothesis, that is, that in the 

long run the growth rate of emissions would be unaffected by the carbon tax.  In fact, a basic 

premise of climate policy is that a tax could help bend the curve on emissions growth rates 

(through innovation and green technological progress).  But we would be surprised if we found 

evidence of a change in the long run emissions growth rate given the length of our sample and 

the magnitude of most country tax rates.  While we can reject the hypothesis of zero longrun 

changes in the emissions growth rate for the full sample in the LP model, we cannot reject it in 

the SVAR model nor can we reject the zero longrun change in other samples for either model 

(Table 3). 

        Results for the full sample are shown in Figure 8.   Emissions fall by 6.5 percentage 

points by the end of year 6 in the unrestricted model (top panel) though standard error bands 

are wide and we cannot reject no change in emissions.  In the restricted model (bottom panel), 

emissions fall by as much as 5.6 percentage points in the first 4 years but stabilize at a 3.8 

percent reduction by year 6.  The estimates are imprecise, with a 95% confidence interval 

including both no emissions reductions and larger emissions reductions.  

        We also note that while strict exogeneity is rejected in some or all of the samples (at a 

10 percent level or better) for GDP and employment measures, it is generally not rejected for 

emissions.  This is perhaps not surprising since we would expect that adverse macro shocks 

would be readily observable to decisionmakers and might lead to policy changes in climate 

policy. While a transitory increase in emissions might, through the political process, spur 




                                                                                                  19 
         
        


greater ambition, the empirical evidence does not suggest that this channel is a significant 

determinant of tax rate changes.  

VI.    Robustness 

       The finding of an overall slight positive effect on economic activity is intriguing, and 

raises the question as to whether this positive effect could arise from the use of the carbon tax 

revenue to improve the overall efficiency of the tax system, giving rise to a double dividend.  

Another possibility is that countries with a long experience with the carbon tax have a different 

response than countries with less experience. There is in fact considerable variation in tax rates, 

use of revenues, or the length of time the carbon tax has been in effect.  We explore in this 

section whether any of these factors matter for GDP or employment growth as well as 

emissions.   

A.     Revenue Recycling 

       We begin by asking whether growth impacts are larger for those countries that stated 

an intention to recycle the carbon tax revenue through cuts in income or payroll tax rates.  The 

Double Dividend Hypothesis suggests this should be efficiency enhancing and, presumably, 

improve growth prospects (e.g. Goulder, 1995).  There is limited data on how countries actually 

use carbon tax revenues.  Many early moving countries (Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland) 

enacted carbon taxes as part of a Green Tax Reform designed to reduce marginal income tax 

rates.  Switzerland explicitly earmarked twothirds of carbon tax revenue for tax cuts.  Portugal 

also earmarked revenue for tax cuts as part of a Green Tax Reform.  We treat this group of six 

countries as a group that partially or fully used carbon tax revenue to lower existing income tax 

rates.  While our designation is necessarily imprecise and recognizing that tax revenues are 


                                                                                                   20 
        
        


fungible, we investigate whether growth impacts are larger for this group of countries relative 

to the full sample of carbon tax enacting countries.  Note too that we consider countries to be 

revenue recycling based on stated intentions rather than actual outcomes.  Regardless of what 

countries say they are going to do, we cannot observe the counterfactual outcome had the 

carbon taxes not been implemented and it is possible that some of these countries used carbon 

tax revenue for nonrevenue recycling purposes (and vice versa for those countries that have 

not stated an intention to recycle carbon tax revenues through lower tax rates).   

       Figure 9 shows the results for GDP growth (top panel) and total employment (bottom 

panel) from the LP regressions focusing on these six countries relative to countries with no 

carbon tax.  GDP growth is initially a bit larger in this subsample (0.5 percent growth in GDP 

rate in year 2 versus 0.2 percent in full carbon tax sample as per figure 3b) but the coefficients 

are imprecisely estimated, and we cannot reject that the growth rates are the same (and both 

equal to zero).  The employment impacts are initially larger (bottom panel) than in the full 

sample (compare to Figure 6b).  The growth rate in year 2 is 0.9 percentage points higher 

whereas in the full sample for the comparable regression, it is 0.5 percentage points higher.  

The cumulative impact by year 6 is 0.8 percentage points higher employment growth versus 0.4 

percentage points in the full sample.  As with GDP growth, we can't reject that they are the 

same (and equal to zero).  With only six countries in the treatment group (and short spans of 

the carbon tax for Switzerland and Portugal), it is difficult to make definitive statements about 

revenue recycling with our data.   

       Another way to get at this question is to look at those countries that are not deemed 

revenue recycling countries.  This is a larger group and perhaps we can observe meaningful 


                                                                                                  21 
        
          


differences here.  Figure 10 shows GDP growth impacts (top panel) and total employment 

impacts.  The estimates are quite noisy but suggest an initial decline in GDP and employment 

followed by a rebound in years 3 ­ 5.  The effect fades away by year 6.  The cumulative impact 

for GDP is positive but barely exceeds its standard error.  The cumulative impact by year six for 

total employment is negative but less than its standard error.  The point estimates provide 

some modest support for growth enhancing benefits of recycling carbon tax revenues through 

tax cuts, but standard errors are large and our measure of revenue recycling reflects only stated 

initial intentions, not actual use of the revenues, so one should be cautious before drawing 

conclusions about the efficiency benefits of revenue recycling through tax cuts based on these 

regressions.  

         Emissions initially fall faster in the nonrevenue recycling countries relative to the 

revenue recycling countries, but emissions reductions begin to converge: emissions are 4.9 

percent lower in the nonrevenue recycling countries by year 6 while they are 3.1 percent lower 

in the revenue recycling countries (Figure 11).  As in the full sample, the estimates are 

imprecise, and we cannot reject no change in cumulative emissions.16 

B.       Large Carbon Taxes 

         Countries also differ in the magnitude of their carbon tax rates.  We would expect larger 

impacts in countries with higher tax rates, holding all else equal.  Here we focus on those 

countries whose shareweighted carbon tax rates are at least $10 per ton in at least one year 


          
16
    Results look somewhat different in the regressions where we allow the long run growth rate of emissions to 
change.  Cumulative emissions fall in both samples with a larger cumulative decline in the nonrevenue recycling 
countries.  Emissions fall by 3.7 percent in the revenue recycling countries by year 6 and by 18.6 percent in the 
nonrevenue recycling countries.  For this latter set of countries, the 95 percent confidence interval in year 6 runs 
from 4.7 to 32.6 percent. 

                                                                                                                   22 
          
        


(thus corresponding to $30/ton covering onethird of emissions).  Those countries are 

Denmark, Finland, France, Ireland, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland.  Figure 12 shows the 

impact of the tax in these countries on GDP growth.  In both the unrestricted model (top panel) 

and restricted model (bottom panel) the GDP growth impact is initially positive, dips negative in 

years 3 and 4, and then returns to positive.  The cumulative impact by year 6 is 1.75 percentage 

points in the unrestricted model and 0.16 percentage points in the restricted model.  A similar 

pattern holds for employment (not shown). 

       Surprisingly, emissions fall by only 2 percent in the unrestricted and restricted models 

by year 6 (Figure 13); this is a smaller amount than in the full sample where emissions fell by 6.5 

percent in the unrestricted model and 3.8 percent in the restricted model.  As with the full 

sample, coefficient estimates are imprecisely estimated.  

C.     Scandinavia 

       We also considered whether our results are being driven by the early Scandinavian 

adopters (Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden).  The GDP and total employment impulse 

response functions for the Scandinavian countries are quite noisy and hover around zero (with 

large standard errors).  Dropping these countries from the EU data set also increase the 

standard errors considerably.  While the Scandinavian countries are not driving results, they 

help reduce standard errors considerably.   We report those results in the appendix. 

D.     Alternative Tax Rate Measures  

       Our tax rate series is based on data collected by the World Bank and uses the highest 

carbon tax rate (per ton CO2) when there are multiple rates. In most cases, this highest rate is 

the rate on gasoline and diesel for road use.  We multiply that rate by the share of emissions 


                                                                                                  23 
        
            


covered by the carbon tax in 2018.  Recently Dolphin et al. (2019) have constructed a series of 

tax rates on carbon dioxide emissions built up from fuel level tax rates.  Working with sector 

and fuel specific data, they compute the share of various fossil fuels in each sector covered by a 

carbon tax and construct an emissions weighted carbon price (ECP) as the weighted average of 

sectorfuel specific carbon tax rates, weighted by their emissions share in 2013.  We re

estimated our regressions using their data, and selected results are shown in the Appendix.17  

Despite differences in the base year for fixing emissions shares, exchange rates, and different 

methodologies for constructing the share weighted tax rates, the results using the Dophin et al 

(2019) emissionsweighted carbon price are very similar to those reported using our price 

derived from World Bank data.  We conclude from this that our results are robust to how 

carbon taxes are measured ­ whether based on country reported carbon tax rates or built up 

from sector specific excise tax rates for taxing carbon. 

VII.       Conclusion 

           Placing a price on carbon pollution is widely viewed as the most costeffective approach 

to reducing emissions.  Resistance to this approach is significant in part due to concerns about 

the economic impact on jobs and growth.  Using variation in the use of carbon taxes in 

European countries that are all part of the EU Emission Trading System (ETS), we find no 

evidence to support claims that the tax would adversely impact employment or GDP growth.  

We find modest evidence for emissions reductions arising from the tax.  It is worth noting, 

however, that since the sectors for which emission reductions are least costly are already 



            
17
       We thank the authors for sharing the country aggregate tax rates with us. 

                                                                                                  24 
            
        


covered by the ETS and so not subject to the carbon tax, emission reductions in countries that 

apply a broadbased carbon tax should view these reductions as lower bounds on potential 

emission reductions.   

         

        
                              




                                                                                              25 
        
        


References 

Andersson, Julius J. 2019. "Carbon Taxes and CO2 Emissions: Sweden as a Case Study."
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(4), 1-30.

Bernard, Jean-Thomas; Maral Kichian and Misbahul Islam. 2018. "Effects of B.C.'S Carbon
Tax on GDP," USAEE, Research Paper Series No. 18-329.

Brannlund, Runar and Ing-Marie Gren eds. 1999. Green Taxes: Economic Theory and
Empirical Evidence from Scandinavia. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Carl, Jeremy and David Fedor. 2016. "Tracking Global Carbon Revenues: A Survey of Carbon
Taxes Versus Cap-and-Trade in the Real World." Energy Policy, 96, 50-77.

Convery, Frank; Louise Dunne and Deirdre Joyce. 2013. "Ireland's Carbon Tax and the Fiscal
Crisis," OECD, OECD Environment: Paris, Working Paper No. 59.

Dolphin, Geoffroy; Michael G. Politt and David M. Newbery. 2019. "The Political Economy
of Carbon Pricing: A Panel Analysis." Oxford Economic Papers, 72(2), 472-500.

European Commission. 2015. "EU ETS Handbook," European Commission: Brussels,

European Commission. 2019. "Eurostat Database," https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/database,
Accessed on December 20, 2019.

Goulder, Lawrence H. 1995. "Environmental Taxation and the 'Double Dividend': A Reader's
Guide." International Tax and Public Finance, 2, 157- 183.

Goulder, Lawrence H. and Marc Hafstead. 2017. Confronting the Climate Challenge. New
York: Columbia University Press.

Goulder, Lawrence H.; Marc A. C. Hafstead; GyuRim Kim and Xianling Long. 2019.
"Impacts of a Carbon Tax across US Household Income Groups: What Are the Equity-Efficiency
Trade-Offs?" Journal of Public Economics, 175, 44-64.

Hammar, Henrik and Susanne Akerfeldt. 2011. "CO2 Taxation in Sweden: 20 Years of
Experience and Looking Ahead."

Jordà, Òscar. 2005. "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections."
American Economic Review, 95(1), 161-182.

Lin, Boqiang and Xuehui Li. 2011. "The Effect of Carbon Price on Per Capita CO2 Emissions."
Energy Policy, 39, 5137-5146.

Marten, Melanie and Kurt van Dender. 2019. "The Use of Revenues from Carbon Pricing,"
Paris, OECD Taxation Working Papers No. 43.

                                                                                         26 
        
        



Martin, Ralf; Laurie B. de Preux and Ulrich J. Wagner. 2014. "The Impact of a Carbon Tax
on Manufacturing: Evidence from Microdata." Journal of Public Economics, 117, 1-14.

Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2019. "On the Economics of a Carbon Tax for the United States." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, (Spring), 405-458.

Metcalf, Gilbert E. and James H. Stock. 2020. "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impacts of
Carbon Taxes." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 110(May), 101-106.

Moyer, Elisabeth J.; Mark D. Wooley; Nathan J. Matteson; Michael J. Glotter and David A.
Weisbach. 2014. "Climate Impacts on Economic Growth as Drivers of Uncertainty in the Social
Cost of Carbon." Journal of Legal Studies, 43(2), 401 - 425.

NERA. 2017. "Impacts of Greenhouse Gas Regulations on the Industrial Sector," NERA,
Washington, DC.

Pereira, Alfredo M.; Rui M. Pereira and Pedro G. Rodrigues. 2016. "A New Carbon Tax in
Portugal: A Missed Opportunity to Achieve the Triple Dividend?" Energy Policy, 93, 110-118.

Plagborg-Moller, Mikkel and Christian K. Wolf. 2019. "Local Projections and VARs Estimate
the Same Impulse Responses," Princeton: Department of Economics, Princeton University,

Prettis, Felix. 2019. "Does a Carbon Tax Reduce CO2 Emissions? Evidence from British
Columbia," Department of Economics, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC.

Rivers, Nicholas and Brandon Schaufele. 2015. "Salience of Carbon Taxes in the Gasoline
Market." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 74, 23-36.

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. 2018. "Identification and Estimation of Dynamic Causal
Effects in Macroeconomics." Economic Journal, 128, 917-948.

Sumner, Jenny; Lori Bird and Hillary Dobos. 2011. "Carbon Taxes: A Review of Experience
and Policy Design Considerations." Climate Policy, 11, 922-943.

Svenningsen, Lea Skraep; Liv Laerke Hansen; Michael Munk Sorenson; Emelie von Bahr;
Hrafnhildur Bragadottir; Kennet Christian Uggeldahl; Hanne Soiland; Oyvind Lone;
Jorgen Schou and Troels Hansen. 2019. "The Use of Economic Instruments in Nordic
Environmental Policy 2014 - 2017," Nordic Council of Ministers, Copenhagen.

Trump, Donald J. 2017. "Statement by President Trump on the Paris Climate Accord,"
https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/statement-president-trump-paris-climate-
accord/, Accessed on December 10, 2019.




                                                                                          27 
        
        

World         Bank        Group.       2019a.      "Carbon        Pricing        Dashboard,"
https://carbonpricingdashboard.worldbank.org/map_data, Accessed on Dec. 1, 2019.

World Bank Group. 2019b. "States and Trends of Carbon Pricing 2019," World Bank Group,
Washington DC.

Worstall, Tim. 2016. "Absolutely Fascinating - Apple's EU Tax Bill Explains Ireland's 26% GDP
Rise,"     https://www.forbes.com/sites/timworstall/2016/09/08/absolutely-fascinating-apples-eu-
tax-bill-explains-irelands-26-gdp-rise/#15945ea91a70, Accessed on Dec. 10, 2019.

Yamazaki, Akio. 2017. "Jobs and Climate Policy: Evidence from British Columbia's Revenue-
Neutral Carbon Tax." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 83, 197-216.

 
        
        
                              




                                                                                             28 
        
           


           
    Table 1.  EU+ Carbon Taxes 
                                     Rate in 
                                                 Intended       Share of Greenhouse          Carbon Tax 
                           Year of  2018 (USD 
         Country                                 Revenue        Gas Emissions in 2019      Revenue in 2018 
                         Enactment  per metric 
                                                Recycling?         Covered by Tax           (USD Millions) 
                                       ton) 
    Denmark (DNK)             1992    24.92         Yes                  40%                       543.4 
    Estonia (EST)             2000      3.65        No                    3%                         2.8 
    Finland (FIN)             1990    70.65         Yes                  36%                     1,458.6 
    France (FRA)              2014    57.57         No                   35%                     9,263.0 
    Iceland (ISL)             2010    25.88         No                   29%                        44.0 
    Ireland (IRL)             2010    24.92         No                   49%                       488.8 
    Latvia (LVA)              2004      9.01        No                   15%                         9.1 
    Norway (NOR)              1991    49.30         Yes                  62%                     1,659.8 
    Poland (POL)              1990      0.16        No                    4%                         1.2 
    Portugal (PRT)            2015    11.54         Yes                  29%                       154.9 
    Slovenia (SVN)            1996    29.74         No                   24%                        83.1 
    Spain (ESP)               2014    30.87         No                    3%                       123.6 
    Sweden (SWE)              1991   128.91         Yes                  40%                     2,572.3 
    Switzerland (CHE)         2008    80.70         Yes                  33%                     1,177.7 
    UK (GBR)                  2013    25.71         No                   23%                     1,091.0 
Notes: Coverage is the share of a country's emissions covered by the carbon tax.  See text for revenue 
recycling details. 
Source: World Bank Group (2019a) 
 
                                   




                                                                                                      29 
           
            


Table 2.  Test of Long Run Effect of Carbon Tax on Growth Rates and Emissions 
    Full Sample 
                                          GDP per           Total    Manufacturing 
                          GDP                                                                   Emissions 
                                           Capita        Employment  Employment 
    LP                 0.33                0.17            0.63         3.37                       2.09 
                       0.75                 0.87            0.53        0.001                      0.04 
    SVAR               1.34                 2.07            0.62        0.51                       1.26 
                       0.18                 0.04            0.53         0.61                      0.21 
    Revenue Recycling Countries 
    LP                 0.05                 0.44              0.72              3.59               0.95 
                       0.96                 0.66              0.47              0.000              0.34 
    SVAR               1.39                 2.43              0.17              0.46               0.40 
                       0.16                 0.02              0.87              0.65               0.69 
    Large Carbon Tax Countries 
    LP                 0.41                 0.36              0.14              3.29               0.53 
                       0.69                 0.72              0.89              0.001              0.60 
    SVAR               1.00                 0.92              1.23              0.16               0.34 
                       0.32                 0.36              0.22              0.87               0.73 
    Scandinavian Countries 
    LP                 0.44                 0.60              0.80              2.20                0.19 
                       0.66                 0.55              0.42              0.03                0.85 
    SVAR               0.95                 1.00              1.04              0.16                0.16 
                       0.34                 0.32              0.30              0.87                0.87 
    Table reports results of the test that there is no longrun change in the growth rate.  Failure to reject 
    the null supports the no longrun change hypothesis.  The table reports the tstatistic for the test in 
    the top row and its pvalue in the second row.  See text for description of test. 
 
 
                                     




                                                                                                             30 
            
           


Table 3.  Test of Strict Exogeneity 
                                           GDP per         Total    Manufacturing 
                               GDP                                                            Emissions 
                                            Capita      Employment  Employment 
    Full Sample               2.21           2.53          1.04         0.82                     0.65 
                              0.066         0.038         0.384         0.51                     0.63 
    Revenue Recycling         1.98           2.02          1.05         0.63                     0.70 
    Countries                 0.094         0.089          0.38         0.64                     0.59 
    Large Carbon Tax          3.86           4.09          2.41         1.97                     1.57 
    Countries                 0.004         0.003         0.047        0.096                     0.18 
    Scandinavian              2.55           2.54          3.65         1.60                     3.81 
    Countries                 0.037         0.038         0.006         0.17                    0.004 
    Table reports results of a strict exogeneity test that there is no feedback from shocks to GDP to tax 
    rates.  The table reports the F statistic with (8, inf) degrees of freedom in the top row and its p
    value in the second row.  See text for description of test. 
 
 
                                    




                                                                                                             31 
           
     


                                  
                                  




                                                          




                                                          




                                                          
        Figure 1.  Real Carbon Tax Rates Over Time 
              (See Table 1 for Country Abbreviations) 
           

                                                             32 
     
 


 




    Figure 2.  Carbon Tax Enactment and GDP Per Capita Growth Rate 
 
                                                                




                                                                      33 
 
       


   




          Figure 3a.  GDP IRF for LP Regression ­ Unrestricted  
                                      
                                      




                                                                    
           Figure 3b.  GDP IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted  
 
 
 
 
                  


                                                                       34 
       
     


 




                                                                   
        Figure 4a. GDP IRF for SVAR Regression ­ Unrestricted  
                                   
                                   




                                                                   
        Figure 4b.  GDP IRF for SVAR Regression ­ Restricted  
                 




                                                                      35 
     
     




        Figure 5a.  GDP CIRF for LP Regression ­ Unrestricted  
                                   
                                   




         Figure 5b. GDP CIRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted  
                 




                                                                  36 
     
 




    Figure 6a.  Total Employment IRF for LP Regression ­ Unrestricted 
                                     
                                     




                                                                          
     Figure 6b.  Total Employment IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted  
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                     
                                                                             37 
 
 


                                      




    Figure 7a.  Total Employment CIRF for LP Regression ­ Unrestricted  
                                      




                                                                          
     Figure 7b.  Total Employment CIRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted 
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                      
                                                                             38 
 
 




    Figure 8a.  Emissions CIRF for LP Regression ­ Unrestricted 
                                  




     Figure 8b.  Emissions CIRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted 
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  
                                  

                                                                   39 
 
     


                                         
                                         




               Figure 9a.  GDP IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                 Revenue Recycling Carbon Tax Countries Only 
                                          




        Figure 9b.  Total Employment IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                 Revenue Recycling Carbon Tax Countries Only 
                                        
                       



                                                                            40 
     
 


                                      




                                                                          
           Figure 10a.  GEP IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
           NonRevenue Recycling Carbon Tax Countries Only 
                                      




                                                                          
    Figure 10b.  Total Employment IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
           NonRevenue Recycling Carbon Tax Countries Only 
                                                                    




                                                                             41 
 
     




        Figure 11a.  Emissions CIRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                       Revenue Recycling Countries 
                                       
                                       




        Figure 11b.  Emissions CIRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                    Non ­ Revenue Recycling Countries 
                   




                                                                       42 
     
 


                                




                                                               
    Figure 12a.  GDP IRF for LP Regression ­ Unrestricted: 
              Large Carbon Tax Countries Only 




     Figure 12b.  GDP IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
              Large Carbon Tax Countries Only 
                                
                                
                                

                                                                  43 
 
     


                                         




         Figure 13a.  Emissions CIRF for LP Regression ­ Unrestricted: 
                         Large Carbon Tax Countries 
                                         




        Figure 13b.  Total Emissions CIRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                           Large Carbon Tax Countries 
                                         
                                         
                       



                                                                             44 
     
        


Appendix ­ Additional Tables and Figures 
 
I.  Event Study Figures 




                                                                                   
             Figure A1.  Carbon Tax Enactment and Total Employment Growth Rate 




                                                                                   
        Figure A2.  Carbon Tax Enactment and Manufacturing Employment Growth Rate 

                                                                                      45 
        
     


                                  




                                                               
        Figure A3.  Carbon Tax Enactment and CO2 Emissions 
 
 




                                                                  46 
     
        


II.  Impulse Response Functions ­ Manufacturing Employment 
 




           Figure A4.  Manufacturing Employment IRF for LP Regression ­ Unrestricted  
                                                




            Figure A5.  Manufacturing Employment IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted  
 
                              



                                                                                         47 
        
        


III.  Impulse Response Functions Focusing on Role of Scandinavian Countries 




                       Figure A6.  GDP IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted:  
                               Excluding Scandinavian Countries 
                                                  
                                                  




                                                 
               Figure  A7.  Total Employment IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                                Excluding Scandinavian Countries  
                                                 
                                                 
                                                                                    48 
        
     


                                         




               Figure A8.  GDP IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                          Scandinavian Countries Only 
                                          
                                          
                                          




                                                                             
        Figure A9.  Total Employment IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                           Scandinavian Countries Only 
                      



                                                                                49 
     
            


IV  Results Using Emissions Weighted Carbon Prices from Dolphin, et al. (2019) 
           Below are impulse response functions for the GDP and Total Employment growth rates 
and a cumulative impulse response function for total emissions for the LP restricted model 
using Dolphin et al.'s emissions weighted carbon prices.  Results are very similar when the LP 
unrestricted or SVAR approaches are used.  These results are roughly comparable to ours since 
the mean emissions share in the Dolphin et al. data for their fixedweight carbon price is 34 
percent.18  The three figures that follow should be compared to figures 3b, 6b, and 8b 
respectively in the paper.   




                                                                                      
                             Figure A10.  GDP IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                                             ECP tax data used 
                                                        




            
18
       Personal communication with Geoffroy Dolphin on June 3, 2020.  

                                                                                                  50 
            
 




                                                                       
    Figure A10.  Total Employment IRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                            ECP tax data used 
                                     




       Figure A11.  Emissions CIRF for LP Regression ­ Restricted: 
                           ECP tax data used 
                                     
                                     




                                                                          51 
 
