                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       CREDIT BOOMS, FINANCIAL CRISES AND MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY

                                         Mark Gertler
                                       Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
                                       Andrea Prestipino

                                      Working Paper 27481
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27481


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We would like to thank the participants of various seminars and conferences, particularly Juliane
Begenau, Jonathan Heathcote, Urban Jermann, Vincenzo Quadrini and Alejandro Van der Ghote
for thoughtful comments. The Financial Support of the National Science Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mark Gertler, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Credit Booms, Financial Crises and Macroprudential Policy
Mark Gertler, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, and Andrea Prestipino
NBER Working Paper No. 27481
July 2020
JEL No. E00

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop a model of banking crises which Is consistent with two important features of the
data: First, banking crises are usually preceded by credit booms. Second, credit booms often do
not result in a crisis. That is, there are "good" booms as well as "bad" booms in the language of
Gorton and Ordonez (2019). We then consider how the optimal macroprudential policy weighs
the benefits of preventing a crisis against the costs of stopping a good boom. We show that
countercyclical capital buffers are a critical feature of a successful macropudential policy.


Mark Gertler                                    Andrea Prestipino
Department of Economics                         Federal Reserve System
New York University                             Washington DC, 20551
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor                    andrea.prestipino@frb.gov
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu

Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
kiyotaki@princeton.edu
1         Introduction
We develop a model of banking panics which is consistent with two important features of the
data: First, banking crises are usually preceded by credit booms. Second, credit booms often
do not result in crises. That is, there are "bad booms" as well as "good booms" in the language
of Gorton and Ordonez (2019). We then use the model to study macroprudential policy.
        We first describe the main facts we think a model of financial crises should capture. Figure
1 portrays the link between credit growth and financial crises, using data from Krishnamurthy
and Muir (2017). The evidence is based on a panel of annual data of industrialized countries,
ranging from 1869 to 2018. The authors use the narrative based classification in Jord`
                                                                                     a et al.
(2011) to determine periods in which a country experienced a financial crisis. The figure then
plots the average behavior of output, credit growth and credit spreads, around the time a crisis
occurs. In each of the three panels, the crisis occurs at year zero. The upper-right panel shows
that credit growth on average steadily increases prior to the crisis before declining afterward, as
a number of authors have recently noted, e.g. Schularick and Taylor (2012). The bottom panel
shows that prior to a crisis, GDP growth on average increases relative to trend by roughly two
percent, but when the crisis hits it experiences a sharp and persistent decline of nearly eight
percent. Finally, as support for the notion that the output contractions reflect financial crises,
credit spreads increase on average prior to and during the crisis, before eventually going back
to a normal level, as shown in the upper-left panel.
        Figure 2, however, makes clear that high credit growth does not always lead to a crisis, nor
is it necessary for a crisis to arise. The data in the figure plots annual demeaned credit growth
in a country lagged two years (the horizontal axis) versus one year (the vertical axis).1 The red
dots are episodes where a country experienced a financial crisis while the blue are instances
where a crisis did not occur. If we think of a credit boom as a period in which credit growth is
above average for two consecutive years, then the upper right quadrant reflects periods preceded
by credit booms. Accordingly, crisis episodes happening after credit booms are all the red dots
in the upper right hand quadrant in the figure, while the blue dots in the upper right quadrant
are episodes in which a credit boom did not result in a crisis. As the figure shows, more often
than not, a credit boom does not result in a financial crisis. Conditional on a credit boom, the
probability of a crisis is just 4.9 percent. It is true, however, that a credit boom makes a crisis
more likely: conditional on no credit boom, the probability of a crisis drops to 2.8 percent.
        Our goal in this paper is to first develop a macroeconomic framework with banking panics
that is consistent with the evidence in Figures 1 and 2, and then to use the model to study
regulatory policy. The framework we develop is based on Gertler et al. (2020b), henceforth
    1
   Credit growth data is from Jord` a et al. (2011). To demean the data we compute for each country seperate
means of credit growth for the pre-war period and post-war periods.


                                                     2
GKP (2020), which is a standard New Keynesian macro model modified to include banks and
banking panics that disrupt real activity. Within that framework, we capture both credit booms
preceding crises and the banking collapse and disruption of real activity that follows. In the
spirit of Geanakoplos (2010) and Bordalo et al. (2018), the source of the boom is optimistic
beliefs by financial intermediaries (or banks in short) about future returns to capital that are
eventually disappointed.2 This leads to a buildup of bank credit that is funded by an increase
in bank leverage, mostly in the form of short term debt. High levels of debt, in turn, make
the system vulnerable to a run by increasing the exposure of banks to negative returns on
their assets, so that even small negative shocks can trigger system wide runs that result in deep
contractions in economic activity. In this latter regard, the model captures the highly nonlinear
dimension of financial crises. We use global methods to solve the model numerically in order
to characterize these nonlinearities.
       There are several dierences from our earlier work. First, while in our earlier paper we used
a canonical New Keynesian framework with capital accumulation and focused our study on the
Great Recession, here we consider a simple endowment economy but allow for recurrent credit
booms that may or may not result in banking crises. This allows us to capture the statistical
relationship between credit booms and financial crises described above. The presence of good
and bad credit booms sets the stage for our study of macroprudential regulation. By restricting
financial intermediation, macroprudential policies can prevent the large credit booms that are
the root cause of financial crises. However, since the regulator can't tell apart bad credit
booms from good ones, attempts at preventing crises will often end up stifling good booms.
By matching the relative frequency of good and bad credit booms in the data, our framework
allows us to study quantitatively how the optimal policy weighs the benefits of preventing crises
against the costs of stopping good booms. We also analyze the features of optimal regulation
and show, for example, that countercyclical capital buers are a critical feature of a successfully
designed macroprudential policy.
       One final important modelling dierence from our earlier work is that we allow for equity
injections into the banking sector. In our earlier work we assumed that bank capital was
only accumulated via retained earnings. What this implies is that to meet equity capital
requirements, the only margin of adjustment is for banks to reduce assets. Allowing for new
equity injections introduces a second margin of adjustment. We assume however that at the
margin, equity injections are costly. If they were costless, equity finance would become the sole
source of funding for banks, eliminating the possibility of runs or any other type of banking
   2
     Though we use a dierent belief mechanism from Bordalo et al. (2018), we follow these authors in our earlier
work (Gertler et al. (2020b)) by showing that investor forecast errors from our mechanism during the recent
boom and bust are consistent with the evidence. See also Boz and Mendoza (2014) and Boissay et al. (2016)
for other models that try to capture the boom-bust cycle in credit associated with financial crises.


                                                       3
instability.3 However, there is a very large literature in finance that argues that equity finance
is costly for banks and stresses the important role of debt finance in contexts where agency
problems aect the relationship between bank managers and outside investors.4 Accordingly, in
this paper we assume that equity finance comes at a cost. While we do not explicitly model the
frictions that underpin this cost, we discipline its impact on banks funding choices by matching
the observed average leverage ratio and equity issuance rate of financial firms. In particular,
while the data shows that equity issuance rose during the financial crisis, it remained small as
a fraction of total equity. In particular, Figure 4 shows that the average annual equity issuance
of financial firms was one percent of trend equity between 1985 and 2007, and peaked at around
2.4% during 2008-2010.5 Accordingly as a check that our parametrization is reasonable, we show
that the model implied equity injections after a banking panic are in line with that observed
during the recent financial crisis.
    Our paper contributes to a large literature that studies the role of financial intermediaries
in macroeconomic fluctuations. Much of this literature builds on the conventional financial
accelerator model of Bernanke et al. (1998), and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997). While the tra-
ditional models were developed to study how procyclical movement in nonfinancial borrowers
balance sheets work to amplify and propagate macroeconomic fluctuations, Gertler and Karadi
(2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) showed how the basic mechanism could be applied to
study financial firms as well. One limitation of the original models was that, by studying the
local behavior of the economy around a non-stochastic steady state, they could not capture
the non linear dimension of financial crises. To address this limitation, a series of papers have
tried to capture the nonlinear dimension of financial crises by exploiting occasionally binding
financial constraints, e.g. Mendoza (2010), He and Krishnamurthy (2019) and Brunnermeier
and Sannikov (2014). While we also allow for occasionally binding constraints, the main source
of non-linearity in our paper is the occurrence of a bank run. As in our earlier work, e.g.Gertler
and Kiyotaki (2015), Gertler et al. (2016) and Gertler et al. (2020b), we model bank runs as
rollover panics following the Calvo (1988) and Cole and Kehoe (2000) models of sovereign debt
crises.6 The existence of a bank run equilibrium depends on the health of banks balance sheets.
When banks balance sheets are weak, fears of a bank run can become self-fulfilling even in the
   3
     With one hundred percent equity financing, the banks creditors absorb the risk, making the banking system
perfectly safe.
   4
     See, for example, Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Diamond and Rajan (2001) .
   5
     This data does not include the government purchase of subordinate debts and preferred stocks through the
Troubled Asset Relief Program during the crisis.
   6
     This is in contrast with the traditional literature on banking panics originating from Diamond and Dybvig
(1983), in which sequential service constraints were key in order to generate bank runs. Our modeling of bank
runs as rollover crises seems to capture well the bank runs that were at the heart of the recent financial crisis.
See Bernanke et al. (2010), Bernanke (2018) and Gorton (2010).



                                                        4
absence of any negative fundamental shock.7 Bank runs, in turn, force banks to liquidate assets
at firesale prices, causing a sudden collapse in bank equity, and a deep and prolonged economic
contraction.
    We also contribute to the growing literature that studies the role of macroprudential regu-
lation in preventing crises. Beginning with Lorenzoni (2008), a lengthy literature has emerged
that examines bank regulation in a macroeconomic setting. The main conceptual motive for
regulation in this literature is the presence of a pecuniary externality, where individual banks
fail to take account of the impact of their risk exposure on the dynamics of asset prices. This
work has been both qualitative, e.g. Angeloni and Faia (2013), Jeanne and Korinek (2019),
Chari and Kehoe (2016), and quantitative, e.g., Bianchi and Mendoza (2018), Benigno et al.
(2013), and Begenau and Landvoigt (2018)). We dier in two main ways. First, since we allow
for endogenous nonlinear financial panics that lead to real economic disasters, the main gain
from macroprudential policy in our model is reducing the likelihood of one of these disasters. In
our view, avoiding such disasters is the primary objective of macroprudential policy in practice.
More formally, the externality in our model is that banks fail to account for the impact of their
individual risk exposure on the likelihood of a panic. In addition, by modeling credit booms as
well as busts and making the distinction between good and bad credit booms, we are able to
characterize the tradeo between reducing the likelihood of banking crises versus stifling good
credit booms.
    Section 2 develops the baseline model of banking and banking panics. Section 3 introduces
beliefs and then numerically illustrates how the model can generate credit booms and busts,
including good booms as well as bad booms. Section 4 then analyzes macroprudential policy.
The Appendix provides a detailed development of the model and the nonlinear computational
algorithm for solving it.


2     Baseline Model
The framework is an endowment economy with two goods, consumption Ct and capital Kt .
The latter is used to produce consumption goods. We suppose capital is fixed in supply and
normalize the total to be unity. The financing of capital takes on one of two forms. First, banks
may intermediate the quantity Ktb . By "intermediate", we mean that banks issue deposits to
   7
     Some recent examples where self-fulfilling financial crises can emerge depending on the state of the economy
include Benhabib and Wang (2013), Bocola and Lorenzoni (2017), Farhi and Maggiori (2018) and Perri and
Quadrini (2018). For further attempts to incorporate bank runs in macro models, see Angeloni and Faia (2013),
Cooper and Ross (1998), Martin et al. (2014), Robatto (2019) and Uhlig (2010) for example. Adrian et al.
(2019) empirically study the possibility of multiple equilibria in the dynamics of financial conditions and GDP
in the US.



                                                       5
households and then use the funds together with their own equity to acquire capital. Second,
households directly hold the quantity Kth , implying that in the aggregate


                                                  Ktb + Kth = 1.                                             (1)

The division of capital financing between intermediated finance versus direct holding is endoge-
nous and determined in the general equilibrium.
       We suppose that households are less e cient in evaluating and monitoring capital projects
than banks. We capture this notion by assuming that household direct finance entails a man-
                               2
agement cost     2
                         Kth , which is increasing and convex in the quantity of directly held capital,
Kth . The increasing marginal managerial cost is meant to capture that a household has limited
capacity to manage capital.8
       In addition to directly holding capital and supplying deposits to banks, we suppose that
households are the owners of banks. (Think of households as owning banks that are dierent
from the ones in which they hold deposits.) Accordingly households are the recipients of bank
dividend payouts and decide how much equity to inject into banks. In particular, we assume
that households can costlessly inject an amount ¯ of equity in the banking system, but face
                   N   ¯)2 when equity injections  N exceed   ¯. We introduce costly equity
a convex cost  ¯ (   2
                           t                                   t
injections to capture in a simple reduced form way the frictions involved for banks in raising
equity.9 We then pick the parameters of the cost function to match the empirical properties of
equity injections in the banking sector, as shown in Figure 4.
       Let Zt be a shock to the flow return on capital and W (for labor income) an endowment of
consumption goods that the household receives each period. Since the total supply of capital
is fixed at unity, the aggregate resource constraint is given by

                                                         h 2         N        ¯)2 ,
                                   C t = Yt = Z t + W    (K )        ¯ (t                                    (2)
                                                        2 t         2
where Zt obeys the following first order process

                                            Zt+1 = 1     + Zt + "t+1 .                                       (3)

       As we will make precise below, we suppose that banks face constraints in borrowing funds
from depositors. Bank equity helps reduce these frictions, which accounts for why households
   8
    We take the quadratic form for convenience since it implies that the marginal managerial cost is linear.
   9
    Jermann and Quadrini (2012) provide a related way to model costs of equity infusion: They suppose the firm
faces a quadratic cost of deviating from a postive dividend target. Equity injections are then costly since they
involve negative dividend payouts. We model the costs on the household side because it simplifies the algerbra
within our framework. Another approach is Gertler et al. (2012) in which, everything else equal, agency frictions
increase as banks shift funding from short term debt to equity.



                                                         6
                                                                     N
will want to inject equity, even if it is costly at the margin, i.e. t >¯ in equilibrium. The costs
of equity injections, though, work to limit the amount of equity in the banking system. This
limit on bank equity in turn helps account for why banks do not intermediate the entire capital
stock in equilibrium and instead households hold a fraction, even though direct household
finance entails costs, i.e. Kth > 0.
       Note that the model implies that net output declines as the share of bank financing of capital
falls because of the direct managerial costs 2
                                               (Kth )2 . Thus the model implies in a reduced form
way that disintermediation leads to a drop in output.10 A secondary factor contributing to
the costs of disintermediation involves the costs of equity issuance. As the share of banking
financing of capital declines due to a tightening of credit constraints, the marginal value of
bank equity increases, causing equity injections and hence the costs of equity injections to rise.
It will turn out, however, that these costs are quite small relative to the household managerial
costs for direct finance. Accordingly, it is the managerial costs that largely account for the
negative eect of disintermediation on net output.
       Finally, it is instructive to compare the rates of the return on bank intermediated capital,
 b                                              h
Rt +1 ,   versus that on directly held capital Rt +1 . Let Qt denote the relative price of capital. Then


                                           b        Zt+1 + Qt+1
                                          Rt +1 =               ,
                                                         Qt

                                           h        Zt+1 + Qt+1
                                          Rt +1 =               .
                                                     Qt + Kth
                             h                  b
Due to the managerial cost, Rt +1 is less than Rt+1 . Further, this gap widens as households
directly hold a larger share of the capital stock, since the marginal managerial cost, Kth , is
increasing in Kth . The net eect is that in situations where banks shed assets, Qt must drop
su ciently in order for households to absorb them. In the case of a fire sale, which will arise
in the event of a run, Qt must drop sharply.


2.1        Households
There is a representative household that contains a measure unity of family members. The
fraction f of the members are bankers and the fraction 1 f are workers. Each worker receives an
endowment (eectively labor income). Each banker manages a financial intermediary and pays
dividends to the household. Within the household there is complete consumption insurance.
An advantage of this setup is that we introduce financial intermediation but at the same time
  10
     Gertler et al. (2020b) provide a more realistic description of how a banking collapse leads to an output
collapse. In their framework the banking panic leads to a sharp contraction in investment which reduces
aggregate demand and output due to nominal rigidities.


                                                     7
avoid the complication of heterogeneous households.
       The household chooses consumption and saving, as well as the allocation of its portfolio
between bank deposits and direct capital holdings. In addition, it can inject new equity into
the banking system by providing startup equity to new banks.11
       Further, there is turnover: Each period some bankers exit the business and become workers.
When they exit, they pay as dividends any residual retained earnings back to the households.
An equal number of workers become new bankers. We introduce turnover in banking to give
each banker a finite expected horizon. This ensures that banks use leverage to finance assets
in the stationary equilibrium. Otherwise, with an infinite horizon, they could over time retain
su cient earnings to purely self finance. In particular, with i.i.d. probability 1                          , a banker
exits in the subsequent period and with probability                   the banker survives and continues to
                                                                          1
operate, making a banker's expected horizon equal to                  1
                                                                              periods. Each period the exiting
bankers are replaced by (1             )f workers turned bankers, keeping the total populations of
bankers and workers constant.
                                                                                                  ¯
                                                                                                  
       Each new banker receives a fixed startup transfer from the household,                 (1       )f
                                                                                                           . Moreover,
households can inject additional equity, It , into new banks. We assume that these injections
entail a quadratic resource cost. In particular, letting  N = ¯+ It , be the total amount of equity
                                                                  t
                                                                     N
transferred to new bankers, we assume resource costs associated with t of the form
                                     ( 
                                            N
                                         ¯ (t
                                                ¯)2
                                                       tN    ¯
                                                             
                                N       2
                           f t     =                             .
                                              0      otherwise

       As we describe below, the presence of financial market frictions implies that bankers are not
able to arbitrage away excess returns on their investment, so that, in equilibrium, the rate of
return on their assets is above the interest rate they pay on deposits. Therefore, bankers will
always prefer to keep accumulating net worth and only payout dividends when they exit.
       Accordingly, for a household with bank equity XtN 1 at t                  1, the total dividend payouts
from bank equity the household receives at t, t , and the total equity it is left with at t, XtN ,
  11
    We assume for simplicity that all equity injections by households are received by new bankers. Because, as
we show later, what matters is the equity in the banking system as a whole rather than the distribution accross
banks, our results are robust to an alternative specification in which equity injections are received by all active
banks in an amount that is proportional to their retained earnings.




                                                        8
are given by, respectively:

                                                         t = (1    ) XtN 1 Rt
                                                                            N
                                                         |      {z           }                           (4)
                                                           Dividend at t
                                                   %
                                  XtN 1
                                  | {z }
                              Equity at t      1 &
                                                         XtN = XtN 1 Rt
                                                                      N    N
                                                                         + t
                                                         |       {z          }                           (5)
                                                             Equity at t
       N
where Rt is the growth rate of bank net worth from t                1 to t. Time t dividends are given by
the total net worth of the fraction (1          ) of bankers that exit and return to the household.
                                                                                 N
Total bank equity at time t is the sum of total net worth of surviving bankers, Rt XtN 1 , and
                          N
injections into new banks t .
   We can now describe the household optimization problem. Let Ct denote consumption, Dt
bank deposits and Rt the return on deposits. Then the household chooses Ct , Dt , Kth , XtN , t
                                                                                              N

to maximize

                                                   1
                                                   X
                                                         i
                                        Ut = E t             ln Ct+i                                     (6)
                                                   i=0

subject to


                               h 2
       Ct + Dt + Qt Kth +             N
                               (K ) + t     N
                                        + f t = W + Rt Dt                  1   + (Zt + Qt )Kth 1 + t ,   (7)
                              2 t
where dividends, t , and the evolution of equity holdings are given by (4) and (5). The left
hand side (LHS) of the budget constraint in equation (7) is the use of funds - consumption and
saving in deposit, capital and equity, including the costs of direct finance and equity injection.
The right hand side (RHS) is the source of funds - wages, returns on deposit and capital and
dividend distribution from retired bankers.
                    Ct
   Let t,t+1       Ct+1
                          denote the household stochastic discount factor. Then the household's
first order conditions for deposits and direct capital holdings are given by:

                                           Et (t,t+1 Rt+1 ) = 1,                                         (8)

                                                                 
                                                 Zt+1 + Qt+1
                                   Et      t,t+1                    = 1.                                 (9)
                                                  Qt + Kth

                                                    9
Note that the return on deposits Rt+1 may be risky due to the possibility of default. (See
equation (15) below.)
                                                                                                    ~h
   Let ~th
           be the multiplier on the equity evolution equation in (5) and                 h
                                                                                         t   =       t
                                                                                                 U 0 (Ct )
                                                                                                             be the
multiplier in terms of consumption goods. Then the first order conditions with respect to
equity holdings XtN and equity injections t
                                          N
                                            are given by, respectively:

                                 h
                                                                      h     N
                                                                                  
                                 t   = Et t,t+1 (1             +      t+1 )Rt+1      ,                         (10)

                                     1 + f0 N
                                            t          h       N
                                                           and t            ¯.
                                                                                                               (11)
                                                       t

          h
Note      t   is the shadow value to the household of having another unit of bank equity in its
portfolio. According to equation (10) this shadow value equals the expected discounted return
to bank capital, taking into account that the bankers exit with probability 1                    and continue
with probability      . Equation (11) states that the household adds bank equity to the point
where the marginal benefit (the right side) equals the marginal cost of new injections (the
left). The first equation in (11) holds with equality and the second with strict inequality, if the
shadow value of bank equity to the household exceeds unity.


2.2       Bankers
                        b
Bankers fund assets Qt kt with net worth (or retained earnings) nt and deposits dt :

                                                  b
                                             Q t kt = d t + nt .                                               (12)

Retained earnings nt are given by the return on bank investments minus debt funding costs:

                                              b        b
                                       n t = Rt Q t 1 kt   1       Rt d t 1 .                                  (13)

In the event of default (either due to a run or insolvency), retained earnings go to zero.
      As we discussed earlier, the banker operates on behalf of the household and faces an exit
probability 1       . The banker's objective is to maximize the expected present discounted value
of dividend payouts to the household. Given the banker faces financial market frictions, which
we will introduce shortly, it turns out to be optimal for the banker to delay dividend payouts
until exit.12 Accordingly we can express the banker's objective as:


                                Vt = Et {t,t+1 [(1         )nt+1 + Vt+1 ]} .                                   (14)

      There are two additional features critical to generating banking panics. First, deposits are
 12
      See the Appendix.



                                                     10
                                                                  ¯ t be the promised deposit
short term and contingent only on the possibility of default. Let R
rate, pt the default probability. Then the return on deposits is given by:
                                  (
                                      R¯t,    with probability 1 pt
                         Rt+1 =                                        ,                               (15)
                                         ¯t,
                                    xt+1 R      with probability pt

where xt+1 is the depositor recovery rate at t + 1, which equals the ratio of bank assets to its
promised deposit obligations as
                                                    b        b
                                                   Rt +1 Qt kt
                                        xt+1 =        ¯ t dt .                                         (16)
                                                      R
Notice that the recovery rate does not depend upon the place on the queue because we did not
impose the sequential service constraint. Notice also that default is possible only if xt+1 < 1.
This consideration will turn out to be important for determining whether an equilibrium with
a banking panic can exist, as we discuss shortly.
   Second, we introduce an agency problem between a bank and its depositors that limits the
bank's ability to obtain funds. Absent such a limit, a financial panic cannot emerge: A panic
withdrawal would simply lead the bank to go to the credit market to oset the deposit loss. In
particular, we introduce the following moral hazard problem: After the banker borrows funds
at t, it may divert the fraction  of assets for personal use (specifically to pay as dividends
to its owner/family). If the bank does not honor its debt, creditors can recover the residual
funds and shut the bank down. Recognizing this temptation, rational depositors require that
the following incentive constraint be satisfied:

                                                 b
                                            Q t kt  Vt .                                               (17)

The left side of (17) is the banker's gain from diverting funds while the right hand side is the
continuation value Vt from operating honestly.
                                                    b
   The bank's decision problem is to choose assets kt , deposits dt and future net worth nt+1 ,
to maximize the objective (14), subject to the constraints of (12), (17) and the evolution of
net worth at t + 1 implied by (13) . We describe the solution informally and defer a detailed
derivation to the Appendix.
   From the bank balance sheet condition (12) and the evolution of the net worth (13) , the
rate of return on bank net worth is given by

                           nt+1    N       b                   Qt k b
                                = Rt +1 = Rt+1          Rt+1          + Rt+1 .                         (18)
                            nt                                  nt
                                                                         Qt k b
The first term in the RHS shows how the bank can use leverage,            nt
                                                                                  > 1, to amplify its return
on net worth whenever the return on its assets exceed the deposit rate, i.e. when excess returns


                                                   11
  b
 Rt +1         Rt+1   are positive. The second term is the rate of return on deposits (which the bank
can save by having an additional unit of net worth). Note that if the bank had no leverage
           b
(i.e., Qn
        tk
          t
            = 1), then the rate of return on bank equity would simply equal the rate of return on
                        b
capital held by banks, Rt +1 . In the case where (appropriately discounted) excess returns are
positive, banks will want to boost their profit margins by increasing borrowing.
       The incentive constraint (17), on other hand, limits the ability of banks to increase their
                                   b
borrowing. To see this, let        t   be the bank franchise value per unit of its net worth - Tobin's Q
ratio, or the shadow value of bank net worth:

                                                          b        Vt
                                                          t   =       .                                                  (19)
                                                                   nt
Using (18) and (19) to substitute for nt+1 , Vt and Vt+1 in (14) , we get an expression for the
shadow value of equity as the discounted expected return on bank equity:

                                       b
                                                                              b     N
                                                                                          
                                       t   = Et t,t+1 (1             +        t+1 )Rt+1      .                           (20)

Then, combining equations (17) and (19) yields the following endogenous capital requirement,
t :

                                                           nt             
                                                  t            b          b
                                                                              .                                          (21)
                                                          Q t kt          t

As we discuss in the appendix the shadow value of net worth is independent of bank specific
                                                      b
characteristics and it exceeds unity, i.e.            t   > 1.13 Therefore, given that  is strictly between
zero and one, the capital requirement t lies strictly between zero and unity as well.
                                                 b
       Notice that the shadow value of net worth t is increasing in risk-adjusted expected excess
                                                N
returns, because the return on bank equity Rt   +1 , in the RHS of (20), is increasing in excess
                                      b
returns of bank assets over deposit Rt +1   Rt+1 .14 When the marginal risk-adjusted expected
                                                                                         b
excess returns are positive, the bank would like to increase its leverage multiple, Qn
                                                                                     tk
                                                                                       t
                                                                                           , as much
as possible. Equation (21) however implies that banks will be limited in the amount of leverage
they can take. According to (21), the required bank equity - asset ratio is increasing in the
                                                                                                 b
diversion rate  and decreasing in the shadow value of net worth                                  t.   A rise in  increases the
bank's temptation to divert assets, everything else equal. To satisfy the incentive constraint
  13                                                        N
     Notice that in principle the return on bank net worth Rt +1 in equation (20) could depend on bank specific
portfolio choices. The appendix shows that in practice all banks choose the same leverage and hence have the
same rate of return on net worth.
  14
     The risk adjusted expected excess return is defined as
                                                                  b      b
                                       Et [t,t+1 (1       +       t+1 )(Rt+1      Rt+1 )].




                                                              12
the bank must reduce deposits, leading it to scale back assets relative to net worth. Conversely,
                    b
an increase in      t   raises the franchise value Vt reducing the bank's temptation to divert. As a
result, the bank can satisfy the incentive constraint with a smaller capital asset ratio.
       There are three implications of (21) that are relevant to the analysis of runs that follows.
First, the bank cannot operate with nt  0. A bank with zero or negative net worth can never
satisfy the incentive constraint: It will always want to divert the proceeds from any deposits it
issues. It turns out that the inability of the bank to operate with zero net worth is critical for
the existence of a bank run equilibrium, as we describe shortly.
                                                                             b
       Second, the required capital ratio      b   varies inversely with     t.   Thus, the endogenous capital
                                               t
                                                    b
requirement is relaxed in periods when              t   rises, allowing banks to operate with lower capital
                                         b                             b
ratios in these instances. Since         t   depends positively on Et Rt +1           Rt+1 , periods in which
expected excess returns on bank assets rise are also periods in which banks capital ratios are
low.15 The significance for our purposes, is that the probability of a run equilibrium increases
when banks capital ratios are low. In our experiments below we explore two possible ways
that expected excess returns increase causing bank capital ratios to decline and the bank run
probability to rise: negative fundamental shocks and positive belief shocks.
       Finally, since t does not depend on individual bank's characteristics, banks portfolio choices
are homogeneous in bank net worth and the aggregate demand for capital by banks is simply
                                                               1
                                                   Qt Ktb =      Nt ,                                         (22)
                                                               t

where Nt is total bank net worth.16 Hence, in what follows, we only use the portfolio choices
Ktb and Dt of a representative bank with net worth Nt .
  15
      In the data, net worth of our model corresponds to the mark-to-market dierence between assets and
liabilities of the bank balance sheet. It is dierent from the book value often used in the o cial report, which is
slow in reacting to market conditions. Also bank assets here are securities and loans to the non-financial sector,
which exclude those to other financial intermediaries. In the data, the net mark-to-market capital ratio of the
financial intermediation sector - the ratio of net worth of the aggregate financial intermediaries to the securities
and loans to the nonfinancial sector - tends to move procyclically, even though the gross capital ratio - the ratio
of net worth to the book value total assets (including securities and loans to the other intermediaries) of some
individual intermediaries may move procyclically. While Adrian and Shin (2010) show book leverage, i.e. the
inverse of book capital ratio, is procyclical for investment bankers, He et al. (2010) and He et al. (2017) show
that market leverage is countercyclical, in line with our model prediction of procyclical captial ratios.
   16                                                                                                  b
      When the constraint is binding, equation (21) holds with equality so that t only depends on t      and hence
it is independent of individual bank's net worth nt . When the constraint is not binding, t will be pinned down
by an arbitrage condition that expected discount excess returns equal zero (where the discount factor takes
into account that the constraint might bind in the future). The arbitrage condition also depends on aggregate
variables only so that it still does not depend on individual bank's net worth. See Appendix for details.




                                                          13
2.3    Bank Runs
Within our framework, a bank run is a rollover panic, similar to the Cole and Kehoe (2000)
model of self-fulfilling debt crisis. In particular, a self-fulfilling bank run equilibrium (rollover
crisis) exists under the following circumstances: An arbitrary depositor believes that if other
households do not roll over their deposits, the depositor will lose money by rolling over. This
condition is met if banks' net worth goes to zero in the event of the run. As we discussed
earlier, banks with zero net worth cannot operate. Because they cannot credibly promise not
to abscond with deposits, any household who lends money to banks in the wake of the run will
lose money.
   The timing of events is as follows: At the start of t + 1, depositors decide whether to roll
over deposits. If a run equilibrium exists at t + 1, they may choose not to roll over. If the panic
happens, banks liquidate capital and sell to households at the liquidation price Qt+1 . Because
households are less e cient at holding capital, Qt+1 will lie below the normal market price Qt+1 .
Depositors then get back a fraction of the promised return, depending on the recovery rate xt+1
as defined in equation (16).
   For computational simplicity as well as realism, we assume that new banks do not enter
during the period of the panic: They wait until the next period when the run has stopped.
Thus we have
                                  N
                                  t = 0, if there is a run at t.                                (23)

   As discussed, the run equilibrium exists if bank net worth goes to zero in the event of the
panic. This will be the case if the depositor recovery rate is less than unity. It follows that the
run equilibrium exists at t + 1 if the liquidation value of bank assets is less than the promised
obligation of deposits:
                                    ( Q             b   ¯
                                       t+1 + Zt+1 )Kt < Rt Dt ,                                 (24)

which is the same as the condition xt+1 < 1. The liquidation price in turn is given by the
household's first order condition for capital holding,


                          Qt+1 = Et+1 [t+1,t+2 (Zt+2 + Qt+2 )]     Kth
                                                                     +1 ,                       (25)

evaluated at Kth
               +1 = 1.
   Let t+1 be a sunspot variable that takes on a value of unity if the sunspot occurs and zero
otherwise. Then a run occurs at t + 1 if (i) condition (24) is met, and (ii) t+1 = 1. In order to
not introduce any exogenous cyclicality into the likelihood of a banking panic, we assume the
sunspot appears with fixed probability { s . Then, letting ZtR
                                                             +1 be the threshold value of Zt+1




                                                 14
below which a run is possible, the probability of a run pR
                                                         t is given by


                                           t = P r {Zt+1 < Zt+1 } · { ,
                                          pR                R        s
                                                                                                  (26)

where ZtR
        +1 is the value of productivity at which banks are just able to pay their deposit
obligations even if prices drop to their liquidation value Q      R
                                                            t+1 (Zt+1 ) :

                                                                              ¯t
                                                                           Dt R
                                          Q      R        R
                                           t+1 (Zt+1 ) + Zt+1 =                  .                (27)
                                                                            Ktb
       Equations (26) and (27) suggest two forces that can raise the likelihood of a run equilibrium
existing. The first is bad luck: a sequence of negative shocks to the productivity of capital can
increase the likelihood that Zt+1 will fall below the threshold value ZtR
                                                                        +1 . The second is banks'
financial fragility, measured by the ratio of the deposit obligation to the book value of capital,
   ¯t
Dt R
 Ktb .    A rise in leverage increases ZtR                                                    R
                                         +1 , raising the likelihood that Zt+1 will be below Zt+1 . To
foreshadow, a credit boom will increase the banking sectors' exposure to panics by increasing
leverage.


2.4        Aggregation and Equilibrium
If there is no run at time t, the aggregate net worth of active banks is given by the net worth
of surviving bankers from t           1 plus new net worth injected by households into new banks:
                                                                               
                                  Nt =        (Zt + Qt ) Ktb   1
                                                                                   N
                                                                       Dt 1 R t +  t .            (28)

Notice that it is possible that, even without a bank run the realization of productivity could
be so low that the banks are forced to default. In this case, equations (15) and (28) imply that
                                       N 17
aggregate net worth is simply given by t .
       Using the expression for the rate return on bank equity and for leverage, (18, 22, 23), yields:
                                   (
                                          N         N
                                        Rt  Nt 1 +  t  if there is no run at t
                      Nt = XtN =                                               ,
                                              0         if there is a run at t

where
                                           N      b                1
                                          Rt = ( Rt       Rt )             + Rt .                 (29)
                                                                   t   1
                                               N
Here we see the rate of return on bank equity Rt is increasing in the excess return weighted
by the bank leverage multiple at t             1, the inverse of the bank equity - asset ratio.
  17
       See Appendix for a characterization of the probability of insolvency without runs.




                                                         15
2.5       Summary of Key Model Ingredients
We conclude this section by summarizing the key features of the model that lead to the possibil-
ity of (i) banking distress aecting the real economy and, in the extreme, (ii) outright banking
panics that precipitate sharp persistent contractions in real activity.
       First, to have financial intermediation matter to real activity, banks must be more e cient
than households (or more generally non-experts) in evaluating and monitoring capital.18 Oth-
erwise a contraction in banking would not matter: Households would simply absorb the capital
in their respective portfolios without any eect on real activity, and the price and rate of return
on capital would remain unchanged. In particular, we capture banks' advantage by assuming
that households face a management cost that is increasing and convex in the amount of assets
that they hold directly in their portfolios. The convex cost captures the idea that households
face capacity constraints in managing capital. It also implies that following a decline in bank
intermediation, because of households limited ability to absorb capital, the price of capital de-
clines and the rate of return increases. In the limiting case of a panic, which features a firesale
of bank assets to households, the price declines sharply.
       In our simple endowment economy model, the shift from bank intermediated to direct
household finance reduces net output due to the rise in managerial costs. But we view this
mechanism as a convenient way to model the real eects of disintermediation in an endowment
economy. In Gertler et al. (2020b), which features a small scale macro model with banking, the
decline in asset prices and increase in excess returns following a banking panic leads to a decline
in investment and real activity. Also, while here a bank run causes the entire banking sector
to be wiped out, in Gertler et al. (2016) we show that the same model of banking instability
can be adapted to characterize runs on a sub-sector of the broad financial industry. Hence, one
should think of the banks in our model as the most exposed and vulnerable sub-sector of the
financial industry, corresponding for instance to the shadow banking sector in the run up to
the Great Recession.
       Second, to account for why banks do not intermediate the entire capital stock, we suppose
that there is an agency problem which limits their ability to borrow in credit markets. In
particular, we assume that banks fund assets with short term debt and equity (or net worth).
Further, it is costly for banks to raise equity. Because of the agency problem, the amount of
short term debt a bank can issue depends positively on its net worth. The greater the fraction
of assets a bank funds with equity, the larger is the relative stake that it has in its asset holdings,
making it more likely it will not mishandle depositor funds. This in turn induces creditors to
  18
    In GKP (2020) we allow for the more realistic possibility that banks have an advantage in evaluating and
monitoring only a subset of capital investments. That is, we suppose that households face convex managerial
costs only when the share of capital they hold exceeds a threshhold ratio.



                                                    16
lend more to the bank as its equity increases. The endogenous equity constraint gives banks
the incentive to raise equity in order to relax the constraint. As we have discussed, though,
banks rely heavily on leverage, even when they are under financial distress. We capture this
behavior by assuming that it is costly for households to inject equity into the banking system.
Further, we parametrize this cost function so that the model is consistent with both the trend
and cycle in new issues of bank equity.
    Finally, what makes banks financial fragile and vulnerable to runs? Here there are two key
considerations. First, from the incentive constraint that falls out of the agency problem, banks
cannot operate with zero net worth. With zero net worth, they will be unable to raise funds:
Any rational creditor will realize that a bank with zero net worth has no stake in its' portfolio
and will thus only mishandle funds. Second, banks rely heavily on short term debt. These
two considerations open up the possibility of a self-fulfilling roll over panic. In such a panic,
depositors collectively decide not to roll over their deposits to banks, forcing banks to liquidate
assets. An equilibrium with a rollover crisis exists if the panic forces bank net worth to zero.
In this instance, no individual creditor has the incentive to deviate from the group and supply
the bank with credit, since the bank has zero net worth. Finally, we note that bank net worth
goes to zero during a panic when the depositor recovery rate is less than unity; that is, when
the liquidation value of bank assets lies below the face value of the banks deposit obligations. It
follows that a run equilibrium is more likely to exist when bank leverage is high. As we discuss
shortly, our belief driven credit booms are situations in which bank leverage increases. In this
respect, the credit boom raises the likelihood of a bank run and can lead the system to a panic
even in the absence of negative fundamental shocks to banks' assets.
    The Appendix provides a detailed description of the equilibrium equations.


3     Credit Booms and Busts: A Numerical Illustration
We now show via numerical simulation how the model can generate credit booms and busts
consistent with the evidence presented in Figures 1 and 2. For expositional reasons, we first
start with the bust phase of a crisis. That is, we consider a model where fundamental shocks
are the outside force that drives the economy into a crisis zone where runs can occur. Here the
idea is to illustrate how the model can generate a financial collapse which has spillover eects
for the real economy.
    We first describe how we calibrate our model. Then we illustrate how, starting with a
banking system that is "safe", i.e. not susceptible to runs, a series of negative shocks can
weaken bank balance sheets, moving the economy to a crisis zone where a financial collapse can
occur. We then introduce our belief mechanism and show how it can generate a credit boom

                                                17
that may or may not lead to a bust.


3.1       Calibration
Table 1 shows the parameter values used in our experiments together with the calibration
targets. There are ten parameters. Four are reasonably standard: including the discount factor
 , the serial correlation of the capital productivity shock, z , the standard deviation of this
shock      and the household "labor" endowment W. We set           at 0.99, a standard value in the
literature. We choose a similarly conventional value for  = 0.95. We pick       z   so that the model
produces a standard deviation of output equal to 1.9 percent, consistent with the evidence.
Finally, we set W equal to twice the size of steady state capital income Z to capture the idea
that on average the labor share is twice the capital share.
      Six parameters govern the financial sector and are nonstandard. They include: the fraction
of assets banker can divert , the banker survival rate , the parameter governing marginal
household direct financing costs , the new bankers endowment   ¯, the parameters governing
costs of equity injections,  , and the sunspot probability { s . We choose these parameters to
hit the following six targets: (a) The average bank equity - asset ratio  equals 0.1; (b) An
average annual spread between the return on bank assets Rb and the deposit rate R of two
hundred basis points;19 (c) The average household share of asset holding equals one half; (d)
An average annual run probability of 3.7 percent (roughly, one every twenty-five years); (e) An
output contraction during a bank run of ten percent on average, consistent with the evidence
from Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017); (f) An average ratio of bank equity injections and trend
financial equity of 1 percent.


3.2       A Run Driven by Fundamental Shocks
Before introducing a belief mechanism that can generate credit booms and busts, we first
illustrate how the model can generate a nonlinear financial crisis with fundamental shocks as
the underlying driving force. Under our parametrization, a run equilibrium does not exist in
the risk adjusted steady state. We accordingly suppose that at time 1, there is a negative
innovation to productivity just large enough to move the economy into a crisis zone, i.e., an
environment where a run equilibrium exists. Intuitively a large negative productivity shock
can open up the possibility of a run by (i) reducing bank net worth and hence increasing bank
leverage and (ii) reducing the liquidation price of bank assets.
      The solid line in the upper left panel of Figure 3 displays the path of the productivity shock.
The diamond on the vertical axis is the threshold value of the productivity shock, ZtR
                                                                                     +1 , below

 19
      See Philippon (2015).


                                                  18
which a run equilibrium exists at t + 1. The threshold is almost two standard deviations below
the risk adjusted steady state value of Zt . As the panel illustrates the shock puts Zt+1 just
below the threshold ZtR
                      +1 . Moving forward through time, the dotted line gives the crisis zone
threshold for Zt+i for each value of i > 1 after the run has occurred.20
       Given the economy reaches the crisis zone in period 1, we suppose there is a run, i.e. the
sunspot appears and households do not rollover deposits. The solid line in each of the remaining
panels gives the response of the economy in the case of the run. For comparison the dashed
line shows the response for the case where the sunspot is not observed and hence the run
does not occur. The run leads to a firesale of bank assets, causing bank net worth and bank
intermediation to go to zero. Because it is costly for households to absorb the assets, the
spread between the expected return on bank assets and the risk free rate jumps more than
three hundred basis points, causing the shadow value of bank equity to more than triple. The
disintermediation of bank assets leads to a sharp drop in output of more than ten percent. The
figure makes clear the nonlinear aspect of the crisis. Absent the panic, output only drops less
than one percent. In the wake of the run, the level of bank net worth slowly recovers as new
banks enter and households increase equity injections in the financial sector in response to the
sharp rise in the shadow value of bank equity. However, given that injecting equity is costly,
the share of assets intermediated by banks recovers only slowly and so does output.
       As discussed above, the assumption that equity injections in the financial sector are costly is
key in order for financial frictions to have a bite and for banking panics to be possible. Figure 4
shows that while we calibrated our cost function to match the average level of equity injections
over time, our model predictions about the increase in equity injections after a crisis captures
quite well the observed market response during the recent financial crisis.


3.3       News Driven Optimism and Credit Booms
One of the major weaknesses of the model of bank runs driven by fundamental shocks is that
financial crises often occur without major productivity shocks, as in the recent Global Financial
Crisis. To address this, we now extend the model to allow for credit booms, building on our
earlier work, GKP (2020). In that framework, news that bankers receive about the possibility of
improved fundamentals lead to a credit buildup. However, because the improved fundamentals
do not materialize, the high leverage pushes the economy into a crisis zone where a banking
panic is possible. Here we allow for the possibility that the credit booms can lead to good as
well as bad outcomes. Good outcomes are possible either because the improved fundamentals
arise or because, even if they don't, depositors do not coordinate on the run equilibrium and the
  20
    If the run does not happen the threshold reverts back to its mean, as can be deduced by the behavior of
the run probability and inspection of equation (26).


                                                    19
panic never materializes. In this latter case, the credit boom raises the share of intermediated
finance, which is expansionary even if the improved fundamentals do not arise. In the end, our
goal is to match the data presented earlier in Figure 2, which shows that, while high credit
growth makes a crisis more likely, it typically does not lead to a crisis. Conversely, crises can
occur in the absence of large credit growth.
       Following GKP (2020), we model beliefs by considering a variant of a "news" shock. Under
the standard formulation, at time t, individuals suddenly learn with certainty that a funda-
mental disturbance of a given size will occur j periods in the future. We relax this assumption
in two ways. First, we assume that there is a probability the shock may not occur. Second, we
assume that rather than having a single date in the future when the shock can occur, there is a
probability distribution over a number of possible dates. As time passes without the occurrence
of the shock, individuals update their priors on these various possibilities. We also assume that
only bankers, who are the experts at managing assets, have optimistic beliefs. In fact, it is the
relative optimism of bankers compared to households that generates the vulnerability of the
financial system.21
       In particular, with some fixed probability { n , at time tN bankers receive news that there
may be a high return on capital in the form of a large positive capital productivity shock. But
they do not know for sure (i) whether the shock will occur and (ii) conditional on the shock
arriving, when it will occur. If the shock is realized at some time  > tN , it takes the form of
a one time impulse to the capital productivity shock process of size B > 0. Formally, the news
bankers receive is that the capital productivity will follow the process

                               Z = 1        +  Z        1
                                                                 e for  > tN
                                                            +  + B

      e = B if the large shock realizes at  , and B
where B                                           e = 0 otherwise. Given the capital
productivity shock is serially correlated, there will be a persistent eect of B . However, given
it is a one time shock, if it occurs, there will be no subsequent realizations of this impulse.
In contrast to our earlier paper, though, we will allow for recurrent (though infrequent) news
shocks as we describe below.
   When they receive the news at tN , bankers' prior probability that a shock will eventually
                  ¯ . Conditional on the shock happening, the future date when it will happen,
occur is given by P
tN +  2 {tN + 1, tN + 2, ..., tN + T }, is random. In particular  is distributed according to a
  21
     As we describe in Appendix, we assume that households are aware that bankers became optimistic but do
not change their beliefs about the productivity of capital, i.e. they do not believe the news. This allows us to
have diverse beliefs without having households extract information from prices. A similar assumption is made
for the same reason, for instance, in Cogley and Sargent (2009). Because households know bankers are more
optimistic, they understand that there is less danger for bankers to divert their assets and loose their franchise.
This allows bankers to raise their leverage multiple.



                                                        20
probability mass function  which we assume to be a discrete approximation of a truncated
normal with mean µB , standard deviation               B
                                                           , and support [ 1 , T ]. Thus at date tN , the
probability that the shock happens at tN +  is given by
                                            (
                                              ¯ ·  , for  = 1, 2, ..., T
                                              P
                              etN + = B ) =
                       Pr tN (B                                          .
                                                    0, for  > T

As long as no shock is observed for  quarters, i.e. until date t= tN +  (                     tN + 1), bankers
update their beliefs using Bayes rule:
                                                             ¯·
                                                             P
                                     etN + = B ) =
                            Pr tN + (B                      Pv  ¯
                                                      1        j =1 P · j
                                                  PT       ¯
                                                   j = +1 P · j            
                                               =    P ¯             · PT         ,                           (30)
                                                 1     j =1 P · j       j = +1 j

                                  etN + = B ) = 0 for  > T. The first term in the last line
for  =  + 1, ..., T, and Pr tN + (B
is the posterior probability of the shock ever happening, which we denote by P t and which
is decreasing with t. The second term is the probability that the shock realizes at tN + 
conditional on the shock eventually happening. The latter is increasing with  until  = T                        1,
before becoming zero.
       Observe that the process will generate a burst of optimism that will eventually fade if the
good news is not realized. Early on, bankers will steadily raise their forecasts of the near term
return on capital as they approach the date where, a priori, the shock is most likely to occur.
As time passes without the realization of the shock, bankers' become less certain it will ever
occur: The optimism proceeds to vanish.
       We now illustrate how with the belief mechanism just described, the model generates a
boom/bust scenario. Table 2 describes our calibration of the belief process. We assume that
bankers receive the optimistic news ten quarters in advance of the prior on the most likely date
the boom in fundamentals is likely to occur. Our empirical motivation is the housing boom
which began in early 2005 and peaked roughly ten quarters later. Accordingly we pick the
mean of the conditional distribution of  , µB , so that the prior on when the shock is most likely
                                                                                                            B
to occur is ten quarters after to receipt of the news. We pick the standard deviation                           to
ensure that by six quarters after the conditional mean, if the shock has not occurred, bankers'
will give up hope that it will ever occur.22 Next we set the size of the impulse B to equal a
two standard deviation shock, that is, a shock which is unusually large but not beyond the
                                                                                              ¯,
realm of possibility.23 Finally, we pick the prior probability that the shock will even occur P
  22
     Given our discrete approximation of the normal distribution, a choice of B translates into a maximum
numbers of periods within which the shock can occur.
  23                                                            ¯tN , and the size of the shock when it occurs, B,
     Note that the prior probability that the shock will occur, P


                                                       21
to ensure that economy reaches the crisis zone six quarters after the conditional mean without
any fundamental shocks.
    Figure 5 characterizes the dynamics of beliefs and the credit boom that can emerge absent
any fundamental shocks. The top-left panel gives the prior distribution for the time the shock
will happen, conditional on it happening, i.e. {tN +i }T
                                                       i=1 . The top-middle panel then illustrates
the ingredients bankers use to forecast the shock. The blue line gives the probability the shock
will eventually happen, P t . When the news is received at t = 1, the probability jumps to its
prior value near unity. Time passing without the shock occurring leads bankers' to reduce this
probability. The optimism fades rapidly as time passes the conditional mean, the most likely
time the shock was expected to occur. The dashed red line then gives the probability the shock
will occur in the subsequent period, conditional on it eventually happening. Notice that this
conditional probability equals unity at date tN + T          1 when the next period is the last possible
date for the shock to occur, see equation (30) with  = T             1. The estimate that the shock will
occur in the subsequent period is then the product of the blue and red lines.
    We choose our belief process to capture the idea that, once bankers become optimistic, their
optimism is relatively resilient to disappointing news until the later stages of the boom. The
relative optimism of bankers during the early stage of the boom leads to a shift in the allocation
of capital finance from household to bank portfolios. Further, the way banks expand their asset
holding is by increasing their borrowing. As a result, bank leverage increases, which in turn
increases the vulnerability of the banking system to a panic.
    To illustrate the boom/bust nature of beliefs, the top-right panel portrays one quarter ahead
forecast of the productivity shock (the dashed red line). After receiving the news at t = 1,
optimism steadily builds. However, as time continues to pass without a large productivity
improvement happening, the optimism fades. Note that throughout the boom and bust in
beliefs, the true fundamental shock (the blue line), is unchanged. Thus, there is serial correlation
in the forecast errors of the capital productivity shock.
    The bottom-left panel shows the response of output to the news. The increase in bankers'
optimism leads bankers to expect higher returns on assets which induces a rise in bank in-
termediation and, in turn, an increase in output of nearly one percent. There is however a
nontrivial buildup of debt as bankers fund the twenty five percent increase in assets mostly by
issuing deposits in the bottom-middle panel. The bank capital ratio (equity to assets) in fact
                                                                                              b
declines as bankers' optimism raises their perceived shadow value of net worth                t,   relaxing the
                        24
incentive constraint.        (See equation (21).) The increase in leverage raises the probability the
only influence the expected capital productivity through their product P ¯tN · B.
  24
     As discussed by Gertler et al. (2016), there were additional factors contributing to the leverage buildup,
including financial innovation. For simplicity we abstract from these factors and note only that including them
would increase the debt buildup further and the resulting degree of fragility.


                                                      22
economy moves into a crisis zone where a run is possible, as the bottom-right panel shows. In
this regard, the boom lays the seeds of the bust.
       We now illustrate how a wave of optimism can generate a credit boom that leads to a banking
panic. Figure 6 illustrates the experiment. The news of a possible improvement in fundamentals
is received in period 1. The prior probability distribution is as described in the previous
figure. The top-left panel is the one period ahead forecast of capital productivity. Expected
productivity increases as the economy approaches the prior conditional mean. However, because
the productivity boom is not realized, the expected productivity begins to decline in the later
periods. As just described, bankers' optimism leads to an overall increase in bank assets funded
by a rise in bank leverage, which moves the economy into a crisis zone. In the top-middle panel,
the solid line is realized productivity, which is unchanged throughout. As before, the dotted line
is the threshold value for the capital productivity shock, ZtR
                                                             +1 , below which a run equilibrium
exists. As the panel makes clear the news shock moves the economy steadily toward a crisis
zone, which it reaches roughly three years later.25
       Here we illustrate a case in which, once the economy reaches the crisis zone, the sunspot
appears and a rollover panic ensues. The dierence from the earlier case is that we do not require
a fundamental shock to move the economy to a crisis zone, so we do without it. Overall, the
eect of the banking crisis is very similar to the case without the debt boom. The contraction
in output in terms of both amplitude and persistence is similar to the case of the fundamentals
driven panic. As before the spread between the expected rate of return on bank assets and
the risk-free rate increases prior to and during the crisis (in the middle-middle panel), again
consistent with the evidence presented in the introduction. One important dierence is that the
wave of optimism generates a credit boom prior to the crisis, also consistent with the facts we
presented earlier. Finally, as shown in the bottom-right panel, despite the increase in fragility
of the banking sector households do not start injecting equity until after the crisis occurs.
This is because the increase in fragility in this case is by an excessive optimism of financial
intermediaries that is not shared by households. Accordingly, households' expectations of future
bank excess returns do not increase with those of bankers, leading their subjective probability
of a crisis to rise. As a result, households' desire to hold bank equity slightly declines before
the crisis occurs.
       We next illustrate that, consistent with the earlier evidence we presented, it is possible to
have a credit boom that does not lead to a crisis. There are two possible reasons for why. First,
the positive fundamental shock actually materializes. Second, the shock does not materialize
  25
    The run threshold in the figure is the one associated with the case in which the run does not happen.
This facilitates comparison with figure 7 and helps to visualize that the threshold crosses the realized level of
productivity 13 quarters after the shock, making the run possible. The behavior of the threshold after a run is
as depicted in Figure 3.


                                                       23
but the panic doesn't arise even though the economy is in a crisis zone because depositors do
not coordinate on the bad equilibrium (i.e. the sunspot doesn't appear). Figure 7 displays both
cases. As in the previous experiment, bankers receive positive news at time 1. The solid lines
portray the case where the large productivity improvement materializes as bankers expected.
In this case the expected jump in productivity arises in period 10, the peak of the conditional
prior mean. The runup to period ten is identical to the case where a panic occurs, as portrayed
in the previous figure. However, the realization of the productivity improvement leads to an
increase in output (in the middle-right panel), which moves the economy out of the crisis zone
as the top-middle panel shows. The dashed lines are the case where the boom never occurs
but a panic still does not arise because the sunspot does not appear. There is in fact a rise in
output, though smaller than in the case where the productivity boom is realized. The source
of the rise in output is the optimism that gives rise to an increased in the share of capital
intermediated by banks.26
       Thus far we have characterized single episodes of credit booms and displayed circumstances
where they may or may not lead to a bank run. As a prelude to analyzing macroprudential
regulation, we next consider recurrent credit booms and busts. Our goal is to match the evidence
on the link between credit growth and the frequency of financial panics described in Figure 2.
We assume that the probability of receiving news { n is equal to 2 percent per quarter, which
corresponds to once every twelve and a half years on average. Further, once news is received,
there is no additional news realization until the current process has played out, i.e. there is no
news from tN + 1 until either tN + T or the period in which the boom actually happens.27
       We suppose the true probability the boom actually happens is fifty percent conditional on
bankers receiving the news. We capture the idea that bankers are optimistic by supposing
that upon receiving the news, they have a strong prior probability of .999 that the boom will
happen. Given that credit booms are relatively infrequent it is not unreasonable to suppose
that bankers have not had enough experience to learn the true probability of good realizations.
Alternatively, think of the high prior as capturing a "This Time is Dierent" mentality.28
       We simulate the model and then record the relation between the occurrence of a crisis in
a given year and credit growth in the two preceding years in Figure 8. The left panel shows
the data from Jord`
                  a et al. (2011) as in Figure 2. The right panel is the simulation result of
the model. The model does a reasonable job of capturing that, as in the data, crises are more
likely following a sustained period of positive credit growth. Within the model, conditional
on positive credit growth in the prior two consecutive years, a crisis occurs 4.9 percent of the
  26
     Interestingly, without the realization of productivity improvement, the bank net worth increases more than
the case of the realization, as long as there is no run, because the excess return on bank asset is larger.
  27
     Thus the unconditional mean arrival rate of news is lower than two percent per quarter.
  28
     See Reinhart and Rogo (2009).


                                                      24
time just as in the data. Runs without credit booms are a bit more frequent in the model than
in the data, i.e. 3.2 against 2.8, but overall the predictive power of credit booms for banking
crises as captured by the odds ratio of bank runs with and without a boom is in line with the
empirical counterpart: 1.5 in the model against 1.8 in the data. One dierence though is that
credit growth in the model is less persistent than in the data.


4        Macroprudential Regulation
Within our framework, the decentralized banking equilibrium is ine cient for two reasons.
First, as in Lorenzoni (2008), there is a pecuniary externality that leads banks to fail to inter-
nalize the impact of their leverage decisions on the behavior of the price of capital. Second,
banks also fail to internalize the impact of their leverage decisions on the likelihood of a panic
- we call this externality "run externality". The ine ciency of the decentralized equilibrium
provides a rationale for macroprudential policy. Indeed, it turns out that the quantitative gains
from macroprudential policy in our framework are associated with the run externality.
       We consider a macroprudential regulator that sets a time varying bank capital requirement
¯ t . This implies that the relevant capital requirement for banks, t , is now the maximum
between the regulatory requirement, ¯ t , and the market imposed capital requirement m
                                                                                     t , given
by equation (21). That is,


                                                       t , m
                                             t = max (¯    t ),                                             (31)

with m
     t = /
                  b 29
                  t.
   We consider a simple policy rule for bank capital requirements that allows for a counter-
                   ¯ be a threshold value of net worth in the banking system above which the
cyclical buer. Let N
capital requirement is set at the "normal value" ¯ . When bank net worth falls below N , the
requirement is relaxed.30 We assume for simplicity the regulatory requirement goes to zero. In
this instance the market requirement m
                                     t will apply.
       We restrict policy to be determined by the simple rule
                                                  (
                                                      ¯ Nt   ¯
                                                             N
                                           ¯t =                .
                                                             ¯
                                                      0 Nt < N

We look for (¯ ¯ ) that maximize welfare, which we take to be the unconditional expected
             , N
  29                                                                   b
     The presence of regulation implies that the equilibrium value of t  will be dierent in the regulated economy
as we explain below.
  30
     For computational reasons, the criterion to relax the capital requirement is based on the level of bank net
worth. However, given the very high correlation between bank net worth and output in the model, similar
results would follow if the criterion for relaxing the capital requirement was based on output.


                                                       25
utility of the representative household. Note that the rule allows for a countercyclical capital
buer, since the capital requirement is relaxed when aggregate bank net worth drops below the
threshold N.31
       Figure 9 shows the market determined capital requirement in the unregulated equilibrium.
                                                          DE
At the value of equity in the risk adjusted steady state NSS , the capital requirement is ten
percent. As bank net worth falls below the risk adjusted steady state the market capital
requirement falls as well. With low bank net worth, bank credit availability is lower, implying
high excess returns to bank assets. The high excess returns are associated with a high shadow
value of bank net worth, which relaxes the incentive constraint permitting greater leverage and
hence leads to a lower market determined capital requirement. Conversely, as net worth goes
above steady state, excess returns fall which tightens capital requirements.
   Figure 10 then compares the optimal regulatory capital requirements in the solid line with
ones arising in the unregulated equilibrium in the dashed line. The threshold N ¯ lies below
the risk adjusted steady state value NSSDE
                                           . When net worth falls below N ¯ , the regulatory
                                                          ¯ , the requirement goes to twelve
requirement falls to zero. Conversely, when it goes above N
percent, which is above the steady state requirement for the unregulated equilibrium. For
                                                                   ¯.
computational reasons, we smooth out the increase as N rises above N
       Figure 10 shows the pattern of capital requirements for the regulated equilibrium. Regula-
tory capital requirements are binding for intermediate levels of net worth. When bank net worth
is very low, ¯ t drops to 0 so that market requirements become binding. When net worth is high
enough, the induced decline in excess returns causes market determined capital requirements
to exceed ¯.
       Note that as bank net worth is just below the threshold where capital requirements are
binding, the market determined requirement for the regulated economy actually falls below the
capital requirement for the unregulated case. This is because the shadow value of bank net
worth is higher in the regulated economy than in the unregulated economy. Intuitively, when
regulatory requirements are binding, the shadow value of net worth in the regulated economy is
higher than in the unregulated equilibrium since the run probability is lower and excess returns
on bank assets are higher due to the anticipated regulation in future. This in turn has a positive
impact on the shadow value of net worth when banks are close to the regulatory threshold since
they will eventually move to the region where the regulatory requirements applies.32
       We next analyze how the optimal macroprudential policy aects behavior. In Figure 11
we consider a optimism driven credit boom of the type that leads to a banking panic. The
  31
     See Kashyap et al. (2004) for a discussion of countercyclical capital requirements. Faria-e Castro (2019) is
another papaer that studies countercyclical capital buers in a model with bank runs.
  32
     See Van der Ghote (2018) for a similar argument for a coordinating monetary and financial regulation
policies.


                                                       26
dotted line portrays the credit boom and bust that occurs in the unregulated equilibrium. The
solid line is the behavior with the macroprudential policy put in place. For comparability, we
suppose the economy begins in the unregulated equilibrium, so that in both cases the initial
state is the risk adjusted steady state of the unregulated economy. The macroprudential policy
is then imposed at time 0. The tightening of capital requirements produces an initial drop in
bank intermediation. As in the unregulated equilibrium, the optimism wave which fails to be
validated by a productivity boom leads to an increase in the run probability. But this increase
is far more modest than in the unregulated equilibrium. Absent any large negative shock to
fundamentals, the economy never enters a crisis zone. The regulation avoids a panic in this
case. The cost is that output growth is muted during the optimism phase.
    In Figure 12 we consider a case where the credit boom is a false alarm. We consider the
example where the fundamental does not materialize but the panic still does not occur (i.e.,
the sunspot does not appear). In this case the unregulated economy would produce a modest
output boom. Thus, in this instance, the unregulated economy yields a better outcome. The
same would be true for the case where the productivity boom is realized. Accordingly, the gain
from macroprudential regulation is reducing the likelihood of a costly banking panic. This gain
of course must be weighed against the cost of constraining the economy during credit booms
that are false alarms.
    Figure 13 shows how macroprudential policy aects the distribution of output and welfare.
By preventing boom bust cycles in credit as well as good booms, macroprudential policy induces
a much less variable distribution of output while having only negligible eects on average output.
This stabilization properties however have non-negligible eects on welfare as the policy is
eective in reducing the probability of the large and persistent drops in output associated with
bank runs.
    The overall eects of the optimal macroprudential policy on output, the run probability
and welfare are reported in the middle column of Table 3, which also reports the behavior of
the decentralized economy in the left column. Macroprudential policy cuts the quarterly run
probability more than half, to 0.4 percent from 0.9. The capital requirements lead to a reduction
in quarterly output of 0.6 percent during periods without a banking crises. However, because
the likelihood of costly banking panics is reduced, average output is 0.1 percent higher.33 The
average output with regulation is slightly higher than without regulation because the loss of
output due to banking crisis is deep and persistent even though the crises are rare and the
average output is lower during booms. Combined with the reduction in the variance and left
skewness of the output distribution, this delivers an increase in welfare of 0.25 percentage points
   33
      In Gertler et al. (2020a), we elaborate on the point that the main gains from macroprudential policy come
from reducing the likelihood of costly panics.



                                                      27
of steady state consumption per period. Note that this is a very conservative estimate since we
are using log preferences with a coe cient of relative risk aversion of unity.
    The last column in Table 3 portrays the case where we eliminate the countercyclical capital
buer and instead assume that regulatory capital requirements are uniform over the cycle. This
policy has the same eect on the run probability as the optimal coutercyclical policy, but this
reduction in the run probability comes at a much higher cost in terms of output which ends up
being almost one percent below the unregulated equilibrium on average. The net eect is that
the policy produces a welfare loss of about three quarters percent of steady state consumption
each quarter.
    Figure 14 illustrates why not relaxing the capital requirement in bad times has harmful
eects. Under the optimal policy (the dotted line), relaxing capital requirements allows banks
greater freedom to issue deposits to invest in high excess return assets after the crisis at date
0. This in turn allows banks to build their equity base at a faster pace, returning the economy
to normal. By contrast, if capital requirements are rigid and not relaxed after the crisis (the
solid line), banks build equity at a much slower pace, implying a more protracted period of low
output.


5     Concluding Remarks
We develop a simple quantitative model of credit booms and busts. The framework is consistent
with the evidence that credit booms tend to lead crises, but most of the time a boom does
not lead to a bust. The model also replicates other key features of financial crises, including
increasing credit spreads and sharply contracting output. Importantly, the model captures the
nonlinear dimension of financial crises. Much of the time, the economy operates in a "safe
zone" with a banking system that is financially strong and not susceptible to a run. However, a
belief driven credit boom or a series of bad fundamental shocks can raise bank leverage ratios,
making the system vulnerable to runs. These runs, further have costly eects on the real
economy. Because the model is highly nonlinear, we use global methods to solve it numerically,
as discussed in the appendix.
    We then use the framework to study macroprudential policy. The particular policy we
consider is a capital requirement that limits bank leverage. The primary goal of this policy
is to reduce the likelihood of a disastrous financial collapse. Because in our model, as in the
data, credit booms could be good as well as bad, regulators face a tradeo between reducing
the likelihood of crisis versus stifling a good credit boom. We consider a simple regulatory
policy that allows for a countercyclical capital buer. We then solve for the parameters of
the rule the maximize welfare. We find that the regulatory policy indeed improves welfare

                                               28
mainly by reducing the frequency of costly financial panics. Further, the countercyclical buer
is important. Not relaxing capital requirements in a crisis has the eect of amplifying the
downturn, thus reducing welfare.
   There are several directions for new research. Limits on banks' ability to raise equity capital
plays a key role. It constrains their ability to raise funds and opens up the possibility that they
can become vulnerable to panics. We relied on a reduced form function to capture costs of
capital injections that was consistent with the evidence on new equity issuance.         However,
a deeper understanding of these costs would be desirable. Similarly, that banks rely heavily
on short term non-contingent debt plays a key role in making them occasionally susceptible
to panics. A deeper treatment of this issue is also in order. Finally, our model blurs the
distinction between commercial and shadow banks. Of course, any regulation of commercial
banks will aect the allocation of funds between commercial and shadow banks (e.g. Begenau
and Landvoigt (2018)). Adding in this consideration is an important topic for future research.




                                                29
References
Adrian, T., N. Boyarchenko, and D. Giannone (2019). Multimodality in macro-financial dy-
 namics. FRB of New York Sta Report (903).

Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2010). The changing nature of financial intermediation and the
 financial crisis of 2007­2009. Annu. Rev. Econ. 2 (1), 603­618.

Angeloni, I. and E. Faia (2013). Capital regulation and monetary policy with fragile banks.
 Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (3), 311­324.

Begenau, J. and T. Landvoigt (2018). Financial regulation in a quantitative model of the
  modern banking system. Available at SSRN 2748206 .

Benhabib, J. and P. Wang (2013). Financial constraints, endogenous markups, and self-fulfilling
  equilibria. Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (7), 789­805.

Benigno, G., H. Chen, C. Otrok, A. Rebucci, and E. R. Young (2013). Financial crises and
  macro-prudential policies. Journal of International Economics 89 (2), 453­470.

Bernanke, B. (2018). The real eects of the financial crisis. Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity 20.

Bernanke, B., M. Gertler, and S. Gilchrist (1998). The financial accelerator in a quantitative
  business cycle framework. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bernanke, B. S. et al. (2010). Causes of the recent financial and economic crisis: testimony
  before the financial crisis inquiry commission, september 2, 2010. Technical report, Board of
  Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US).

Bianchi, J. and E. G. Mendoza (2018). Optimal time-consistent macroprudential policy. Journal
  of Political Economy 126 (2), 588­634.

Bocola, L. and G. Lorenzoni (2017). A model of financial crises in open economies. Technical
  report, Working Paper.

Boissay, F., F. Collard, and F. Smets (2016). Booms and banking crises. Journal of Political
  Economy 124 (2), 489­538.

Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Shleifer (2018). Diagnostic expectations and credit cycles.
  The Journal of Finance 73 (1), 199­227.

Boz, E. and E. G. Mendoza (2014). Financial innovation, the discovery of risk, and the us
  credit crisis. Journal of Monetary Economics 62, 1­22.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and Y. Sannikov (2014). A macroeconomic model with a financial sector.
  American Economic Review 104 (2), 379­421.

Calomiris, C. W. and C. M. Kahn (1991). The role of demandable debt in structuring optimal
  banking arrangements. The American Economic Review , 497­513.


                                              30
Calvo, G. A. (1988). Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations. The American
  Economic Review , 647­661.

Chari, V. V. and P. J. Kehoe (2016). Bailouts, time inconsistency, and optimal regulation: A
 macroeconomic view. American Economic Review 106 (9), 2458­93.

Cogley, T. and T. J. Sargent (2009). Diverse beliefs, survival and the market price of risk. The
  Economic Journal 119 (536), 354­376.

Cole, H. L. and T. J. Kehoe (2000). Self-fulfilling debt crises. The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies 67 (1), 91­116.

Cooper, R. and T. W. Ross (1998). Bank runs: Liquidity costs and investment distortions.
  Journal of monetary Economics 41 (1), 27­38.

Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig (1983). Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity. Journal
  of political economy 91 (3), 401­419.

Diamond, D. W. and R. G. Rajan (2001). Liquidity risk, liquidity creation, and financial
  fragility: A theory of banking. Journal of political Economy 109 (2), 287­327.

Farhi, E. and M. Maggiori (2018). A model of the international monetary system. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 133 (1), 295­355.

Faria-e Castro, M. (2019). A quantitative analysis of countercyclical capital buers. FRB St.
  Louis Working Paper (2019-8).

Geanakoplos, J. (2010). The leverage cycle. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009 24.

Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2011). A model of unconventional monetary policy. Journal of
 monetary Economics 58 (1), 17­34.

Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2010). Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle
 analysis. In Handbook of monetary economics, Volume 3, pp. 547­599. Elsevier.

Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2015). Banking, liquidity, and bank runs in an infinite horizon
 economy. American Economic Review 105 (7), 2011­43.

Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Prestipino (2016). Wholesale banking and bank runs in
 macroeconomic modeling of financial crises. In Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 2, pp.
 1345­1425. Elsevier.

Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Prestipino (2020a). Banking panics as endogenous disasters
 and the welfare gains from macroprudential policy. American Economic Review, Papers and
 Proceedings, Forthcoming.

Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Prestipino (2020b). A macroeconomic model with financial
 panics. The Review of Economic Studies 87 (1), 240­288.

Gertler, M., N. Kiyotaki, and A. Queralto (2012). Financial crises, bank risk exposure and
 government financial policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 59, S17­S34.

                                              31
Gorton, G. and G. Ordonez (2019). Good Booms, Bad Booms. Journal of the European
 Economic Association . jvy058.

Gorton, G. B. (2010). Slapped by the invisible hand: The panic of 2007. Oxford University
 Press.

He, Z., B. Kelly, and A. Manela (2017). Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence from many
  asset classes. Journal of Financial Economics 126 (1), 1­35.

He, Z., I. G. Khang, and A. Krishnamurthy (2010). Balance sheet adjustments during the 2008
  crisis. IMF Economic Review 58 (1), 118­156.

He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy (2019). A macroeconomic framework for quantifying systemic
  risk. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (4), 1­37.

Jeanne, O. and A. Korinek (2019). Managing credit booms and busts: A pigouvian taxation
  approach. Journal of Monetary Economics, 107, 2­17.

Jermann, U. and V. Quadrini (2012). Macroeconomic eects of financial shocks. American
  Economic Review 102 (1), 238­71.

Jord`  ` M. Schularick, and A. M. Taylor (2011). Financial crises, credit booms, and external
    a, O.,
  imbalances: 140 years of lessons. IMF Economic Review 59 (2), 340­378.

Kashyap, A. K., J. C. Stein, et al. (2004). Cyclical implications of the basel ii capital standards.
 Economic Perspectives-Federal Reserve Bank Of Chicago 28 (1), 18­33.

Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997). Credit cycles. Journal of political economy 105 (2), 211­248.

Krishnamurthy, A. and T. Muir (2017). How credit cycles across a financial crisis. mimeo.

Lorenzoni, G. (2008). Ine cient credit booms. The Review of Economic Studies 75 (3), 809­833.

Martin, A., D. Skeie, and E.-L. v. Thadden (2014). Repo runs. The Review of Financial
 Studies 27 (4), 957­989.

Mendoza, E. G. (2010). Sudden stops, financial crises, and leverage. American Economic
 Review 100 (5), 1941­66.

Perri, F. and V. Quadrini (2018). International recessions. American Economic Review 108 (4-
  5), 935­84.

Philippon, T. (2015). Has the us finance industry become less e cient? on the theory and
  measurement of financial intermediation. American Economic Review 105 (4), 1408­38.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. S. Rogo (2009). This time is dierent: Eight centuries of financial
  folly. princeton university press.

Robatto, R. (2019). Systemic banking panics, liquidity risk, and monetary policy. Review of
  Economic Dynamics 34, 20­42.



                                                32
Schularick, M. and A. M. Taylor (2012, April). Credit booms gone bust: Monetary policy,
  leverage cycles, and financial crises, 1870-2008. American Economic Review 102 (2), 1029­
  61.

Uhlig, H. (2010). A model of a systemic bank run. Journal of Monetary Economics 57 (1),
 78­96.

Van der Ghote, A. (2018). Coordinating monetary and financial regulatory policies. Technical
  report, ECB Working Paper.




                                            33
Figure 1: This figure is from Krishnamurthy and Muir (2017). It plots the behavior of credit
spreads,This
         GDP,    and
             figure JT the
                       GSPN quantity  of credit
                             ,SJTIOBNVSUIZ       around
                                            BOE .VJS 
    a financial
                                                             *U plots the crisis  with
                                                                           behavior    ofthe crisis
                                                                                         credit     beginning
                                                                                                spreads,      at
date 0. GDP,
        GDP   and the quantity of credit around a financial crisis with the crisis beginning at date 0.
                and  credit  are  expressed   in deviation   from    (country     specific)  trend.  Spreads are
        GDP and credit     are expressed
                         normalized   by in EFWJBUJPO
                                          dividing   by  the DPVOUSZ
                                                       GSPN              TQFDJGJD

                                                              unconditional         USFOE. Spreads are
                                                                                  mean.
         normalized by dividing by the unconditional mean.




                            Spread Path                                 Credit Path
              .6




                                                            5
                                                            4
              .4




                                                         2 3
                                                        Crisis
              .2
              0




                                                            1
              -.2




                                                            0
                    -5             0               5             -5           0              5
                                 time                                       time


                             GDP Path
              2
              0
              -2
              -4
              -6
              -8




                    -5             0               5
                                 time




                                                       34
             Figure 2: Credit Booms and Financial Crises.


                               No Crisis at t           Crisis at time t

Run Frequency after boom: 4.9 pct; After no boom: 2.8 pct.; (Boom: top right quadrant )
1.5




   1




0.5




   0




-0.5




  -1




-1.5
   -1.5            -1             -0.5             0              0.5              1      1.5




                                            35
                                             Figure 3: Run after a large negative shock.

                                                                                                       Sunspot           No Sunspot



                     0                                                                         1                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                        0
                    -2                                                                       0.8
    from SS




                                                                                                                                    from SS
                                                                                                                                                      -20




                                                                        Level (pct)
                    -4                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                      -40
                    -6                             Zt
                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                                                                      -60
    %




                                                                                                                                    %
                                                   ZR
                                                    t+1
                    -8                                                                       0.2
                                                   Z R , SS                                                                                           -80

                -10                                                                            0                                               -100
                         0   10      20       30          40                                       0     10        20    30    40                           0   10      20      30   40




                     0                                                                       400                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                       -2
                                                                 Level Annual Basis Points




                -20                                                                          350
from SS




                                                                                                                                        from SS
                                                                                                                                                       -4
                -40                                                                          300
                                                                                                                                                       -6
                -60                                                                          250
                                                                                                                                                       -8
%




                                                                                                                                        %
                -80                                                                          200
                                                                                                                                                      -10

          -100                                                                               150                                                      -12
                         0   10      20       30          40                                       0     10        20    30    40                           0   10      20      30   40




                    12                                                                       300                                                      2.5

                    10
                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                             200
                                                               from SS




                     8
      Level (pct)




                                                                                                                                        Level (pct)




                                                                                                                                                      1.5
                     6                                                                       100
                                                                                                                                                        1
                     4
                                                               %




                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                      0.5
                     2

                     0                                                                  -100                                                            0
                         0   10      20       30          40                                       0     10        20    30    40                           0   10      20      30   40
                                  Quarters                                                                    Quarters                                               Quarters




                                                                                                              36
        Figure 4: Financial firms equity issuance as a fraction of trend equity.


                                   Issuance Rate           Mean (1985 Q1 - 2007 Q3)


      2.5




        2




      1.5
pct




        1




      0.5




        0
       1985       1990      1995               2000            2005              2010   2015   2020




                                                      37
                                              Figure 5: Belief dynamics and credit booms.




           0.2                                                      1
                                                                                                               1.4                             Zt
          0.18                                                     0.9
                                                                                                                                               Et Z t+1
                                                                                                               1.2
          0.16                                                     0.8

          0.14                                                     0.7                                           1




                                                                                                    from SS
          0.12                                                     0.6                                         0.8

           0.1                                                     0.5
                                                                                                               0.6
          0.08                                                     0.4




                                                                                                    %
                                                                                                               0.4
          0.06                                                     0.3
                                                                                                               0.2
          0.04                                                     0.2

          0.02                                                     0.1                                           0


             0                                                      0                                         -0.2
             1




                                                                          1




                                                                                                                      1
                                                    21




                                                                                              21




                                                                                                                                        21
                                     5




                                                                                   5




                                                                                                                               5
            t=




                                                                         t=




                                                                                                                     t=
                                    .




                                                                                  .




                                                                                                                              .
                                 10




                                                                               10




                                                                                                                           10
                                                   t=




                                                                                             t=




                                                                                                                                       t=
                                t=




                                                                              t=




                                                                                                                          t=
             2                                                     30                                         0.55

                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                   25
           1.5                                                                                                0.45

                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                   20
from SS




                                                         from SS




             1                                                                                                0.35
                                                                                                   Level




                                                                   15                                          0.3

           0.5                                                                                                0.25
%




                                                         %




                                                                   10
                                                                                                               0.2

             0                                                                                                0.15
                                                                    5
                                                                                                               0.1

          -0.5                                                      0                                         0.05
                  1




                                                                          1




                                                                                                                      1
                                         21




                                                                                              21




                                                                                                                                        21
                           .5




                                                                                   .5




                                                                                                                               .5
                 t=




                                                                         t=




                                                                                                                     t=
                       10




                                                                               10




                                                                                                                           10
                                     t=




                                                                                             t=




                                                                                                                                       t=
                      t=




                                                                              t=




                                                                                                                          t=




                                 Quarters                                               Quarters                                    Quarters




                                                                                        38
                                              Figure 6: A bank run after a credit boom.


                                                         Sunspot observed                                             No Sunspot observed



                    2                                                                       2                                                              50
                                                                                                                               Zt
                    1                                                                       1                                  ZR
                                                                                                                                t+1
   from SS




                                                                                                                                         from SS
                                                                                                                                                             0
                    0                                                                       0


                    -1                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                           -50
   %




                                                                                                                                         %
                    -2                                                                     -2


                    -3                                                                     -3                                                       -100
                         0   10   20   30     40   50   60                                      0        20          40             60                           0   10   20   30     40   50   60




                                                                                         1000

                    6                                                                                                                                        0
                                                             Level Annual Basis Points




                                                                                          800
                    5                                                                                                                                       -2




                                                                                                                                             from SS
      Level (pct)




                    4                                                                     600
                                                                                                                                                            -4

                    3
                                                                                          400                                                               -6



                                                                                                                                             %
                    2
                                                                                                                                                            -8
                                                                                          200
                    1
                                                                                                                                                           -10
                    0                                                                       0
                         0   10   20   30     40   50   60                                      0   10   20   30     40   50        60                           0   10   20   30     40   50   60




              15                                                                          400                                                              2.5


                                                                                          300                                                                2
                                                                    from SS




              10
Level (pct)




                                                                                                                                             Level (pct)




                                                                                          200                                                              1.5


                                                                                          100                                                                1
                    5
                                                                    %




                                                                                            0                                                              0.5


                    0                                                                    -100                                                                0
                         0        20          40        60                                      0   10   20   30     40   50        60                           0        20          40        60
                                   Quarters                                                               Quarters                                                         Quarters




                                                                                                         39
                                                                                     Figure 7: Good booms.


                                                                  Boom Happens                                               No Sunspot is Observed


                                                                                                            Realized Productivity
                             2                                                                      2                                                              50
                                                                                                                                         Zt
                                                                                                                                                                   40
                             1                                                                      1                                    ZR
                                                                                                                                          t+1
              from SS




                                                                                                                                                        from SS
                                                                                                                                                                   30
                             0                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                   20
                             -1                                                                    -1
                                                                                                                                                                   10
              %




                                                                                                                                                        %
                             -2                                                                    -2
                                                                                                                                                                     0

                             -3                                                                    -3                                                              -10
                                  0   10   20   30     40   50   60                                     0         20          40              60                         0   10   20   30     40   50   60




                                                                                                  800                                                              1.5

                             6
                                                                      Level Annual Basis Points




                             5                                                                    600




                                                                                                                                                         from SS
                                                                                                                                                                     1
               Level (pct)




                             4
                                                                                                  400
                             3
                                                                                                                                                                   0.5


                                                                                                                                                         %
                             2
                                                                                                  200
                             1

                             0                                                                      0                                                                0
                                  0   10   20   30     40   50   60                                     0    10   20    30    40    50        60                         0   10   20   30     40   50   60




               12.5                                                                                 5                                                            1.16


                        12                                                                                                                                       1.14
                                                                                                    0
                                                                           from SS
Level (pct)




                                                                                                                                                   Level (pct)




               11.5                                                                                                                                              1.12
                                                                                                   -5
                        11                                                                                                                                         1.1
                                                                           %




                                                                                                  -10
               10.5                                                                                                                                              1.08


                        10                                                                        -15                                                            1.06
                                  0        20          40        60                                     0    10   20    30    40    50        60                         0        20          40        60
                                            Quarters                                                               Quarters                                                        Quarters




                                                                                                                   40
            Figure 8: Good and bad booms in the model and in the data.
Figure 8: Good and Bad Booms in the Model and in the Data
                                                         No Crisis at t
                                                         Crisis at time t
             1.5                                                    1.5




                1                                                     1




             0.5                                                    0.5




                0                                                     0




             -0.5                                                  -0.5




               -1                                                    -1




             -1.5                                                  -1.5
                -1.5     -1   -0.5      0      0.5   1     1.5        -1.5   -1   -0.5      0      0.5   1   1.5




     Run Frequency                   3.7 pct                                             3.6 pct


 Run Freq. after Boom
                                     4.9 pct                                             4.9 pct
  (top right quadrant)


Run Freq. after no Boom              2.8 pct                                             3.2 pct


       Odds Ratio                     1.79                                                1.51




                                                            41
                Figure 9: Equilibrium capital ratios in the decentralized economy.
                                              FIGURE 9
                                            Capital Ratio
Capital Ratio




                                                                   Decentralized Equilibrium




                                              Net Worth




                                               42
                Figure 10: Equilibrium capital ratios in the regulated economy.
                                           FIGURE 10
                                          Capital Ratio
Capital Ratio




                                                                  Decentralized Equilibrium
                                                                  Capital Requirement
                                                                  Regulated Equilibrium




                                             Net Worth




                                              43
                                        Figure 11: Avoiding runs with macroprudential regulation.


                                                                                                    Regulated                  Unregulated



                           2                                                               2                                                                         20

                                                                                           0                                                                          0
                           1
             from DE SS




                                                                          from DE SS




                                                                                                                                           from DE SS
                                                                                           -2                                                                 -20
                           0
                                                                                                                                                              -40
                                                                                           -4
                          -1
                                                                                                                                                              -60
                                                                                           -6                        Zt
             %




                                                                          %




                                                                                                                                           %
                          -2
                                                                                                                     ZR
                                                                                                                      t+1
                                                                                                                          (Unregulated)                       -80
                                                                                           -8
                          -3                                                                                                                            -100
                               0   10    20   30     40   50   60                               0          20             40          60                                  0   10   20   30     40   50   60




                          40                                                                                                                                          2

                          20                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                      0
from DE SS




                                                                                                                                                        from DE SS
                           0                                                               5
                                                                             Level (pct)




                    -20                                                                    4                                                                         -2

                    -40                                                                    3
                                                                                                                                                                     -4
                    -60                                                                    2
%




                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                     -6
                    -80                                                                    1

             -100                                                                          0                                                                         -8
                               0   10    20   30     40   50   60                               0     10   20   30        40     50   60                                  0   10   20   30     40   50   60




                           3                                                               5                                                                         50

                    2.5
                                                                                           0
                                                                    from DE SS




                                                                                                                                           from DE SS




                           2                                                                                                                                          0
      Level (pct)




                    1.5                                                                    -5

                           1                                                                                                                                  -50
                                                                    %




                                                                                                                                           %




                                                                                 -10
                    0.5

                           0                                                     -15                                                                    -100
                               0   10    20   30     40   50   60                               0     10   20   30        40     50   60                                  0   10   20   30     40   50   60
                                          Quarters                                                          Quarters                                                                Quarters




                                                                                                           44
                                   Figure 12: Stifling good booms with macroprudential regulation.


                                                                                                   Regulated               Unregulated



                           2                                                              2                                                                          20

                                                                                                                 Zt
                                                                                                                                                                      0
                           1
                                                                                          1                      ZR   (Unregulated)
             from CE SS




                                                                         from CE SS




                                                                                                                                           from CE SS
                                                                                                                  t+1
                                                                                                                                                              -20
                           0
                                                                                          0                                                                   -40
                          -1
                                                                                                                                                              -60
             %




                                                                         %




                                                                                                                                           %
                                                                                          -1
                          -2
                                                                                                                                                              -80

                          -3                                                              -2                                                            -100
                               0   10   20   30     40   50   60                               0          20          40              60                                  0   10   20   30     40   50   60




                          40                                                                                                                                          2

                          20                                                              6
                                                                                                                                                                      0
from CE SS




                                                                                                                                                        from CE SS
                           0                                                              5
                                                                            Level (pct)




                    -20                                                                   4                                                                          -2

                    -40                                                                   3
                                                                                                                                                                     -4
                    -60                                                                   2
%




                                                                                                                                                        %
                                                                                                                                                                     -6
                    -80                                                                   1

             -100                                                                         0                                                                          -8
                               0   10   20   30     40   50   60                               0     10   20    30    40     50       60                                  0   10   20   30     40   50   60




                           3                                                              5                                                                          50

                    2.5
                                                                                          0
                                                                   from CE SS




                                                                                                                                           from CE SS




                           2                                                                                                                                          0
      Level (pct)




                    1.5                                                                   -5

                           1                                                                                                                                  -50
                                                                   %




                                                                                                                                           %




                                                                                -10
                    0.5

                           0                                                    -15                                                                     -100
                               0   10   20   30     40   50   60                               0     10   20    30    40     50       60                                  0   10   20   30     40   50   60
                                         Quarters                                                          Quarters                                                                 Quarters




                                                                                                           45
Figure 13: Distribution of output and welfare: decentralized and regulated economy.


                               Decentralized Equilibrium          Regulated Equilibrium



    8000                                                   6000




    7000

                                                           5000



    6000



                                                           4000

    5000




    4000                                                   3000




    3000

                                                           2000



    2000



                                                           1000

    1000




       0                                                      0
        -0.15   -0.1   -0.05      0      0.05                     -1.5   -1   -0.5    0   0.5   1   1.5




                                                    46
                       Figure 14: Recovery from a run: the role of countercyclical buers.




                             Asset Price                                             Net Worth                                                   Output
               0                                                        0                                                      0




                                                                      -10
              -2


                                                                                                                              -2

                                                                      -20
              -4



                                                                      -30

              -6                                                                                                              -4



                                                                      -40
from DE SS




                                                        from DE SS




                                                                                                                from DE SS
              -8


                                                                      -50                                                     -6


             -10
%




                                                        %




                                                                      -60                                       %



             -12                                                                                                              -8

                                                                      -70



             -14
                                                                      -80

                                                                                                                             -10


             -16
                                                                      -90




             -18                                                     -100                                                    -12
                   0    10   20   30     40   50   60                       0   10   20   30     40   50   60                      0   10   20     30     40   50   60
                              Quarters                                                Quarters                                               Quarters




                                                                                     47
Table 1: Calibration
                TABLEof baseline
                         1       parameters.
               Calibration




                    48
             TABLE 2
Table Calibration of News
      2: Calibration  of news shocks.




                 49
                                         TABLE 3
                                 Effects of Macro Pru
                        Table 3: Eects of macroprudential regulation.




    Run Frequency                 0.9 pct            0.4 pct             0.4 pct




 AVG Output Cond No Run
                                   0 pct             -0.6 pct           -0.7 pct
from Decentralized Economy




        AVG Output
                                   0 pct             0.1 pct            -0.9 pct
from Decentralized Economy




     Welfare Gain
                                   0 pct             0.25 pct           -0.77 pct
Permanent Consumption




                                             50
A      Appendix
Sections A.1 and A.2 describe the banker's problem and properties of bankers Tobin's Q in a
baseline version of the model without news shocks.


A.1     Bankers Problem

Let Vt (nt ) be the optimal value of a bank with net worth nt . This solves the Bellman equation

                  Vt (nt ) =      max           Et t,t+1 [(1        )nt+1 + Vt+1 (nt+1 )] ,    (A.1)
                                b ,d ,n
                               kt   t t+1 ,r
                                           ¯t


subject to the flow of funds constraint

                                                       b
                                                  Q t kt = d t + nt ,                          (A.2)

the incentive constraint

                              b
                         Q t kt  Et t,t+1 [(1                )nt+1 + Vt+1 (nt+1 )] ,


the evolution of net worth given by

                                               b        b
                                   nt+1 = max Rt +1 Qt kt               r
                                                                        ¯t dt , 0 ,            (A.3)

and the promised rate r
                      ¯t satisfying the demand schedule of depositors
                                                                        b
                     d    ND                 d D        (Qt+1 + Zt+1 ) kt
                1 pt Et {t,t+1 r     ¯t } + pt Et t,t+1                                 = 1,   (A.4)
                                                               dt

where pd                                           ND
       t is the probability of default at t+1 and Et  and EtD are conditional expectations
given default and no default. Notice that we are not explicitly capturing the dependence of
pd
 t on banks' individual portfolio choices. As we explain in Gertler, Kiyotaki and Prestipino
(2020), this dependence does not aect first order conditions so we will simply abstract from
it here. The analysis of global optimality of this problem is the same as the one in Gertler,
Kiyotaki and Prestipino (2020) so we refer the reader interested in the details to that paper.
    To simplify the problem above, it is useful to introduce the individual bank leverage multiple
                                                          b
                                                 ~t = Qt kt = 1 ,                              (A.5)
                                                       nt     t
which is the inverse of the capital ratio. We can then use (A.5) and (A.2) in (A.3) and (A.4)to




                                                         A.1
rewrite the evolution of net worth as
                                                                 
                                                           N
                                                nt+1 = nt rt    ~t ,                                                             (A.6)
                                                             +1


where                           n                                                           o
                  N
                 rt    ~t = max     b
                                   Rt                                   ¯t ~t
                                                                        r          ¯t ~t , 0 ,
                                                                              ~t + r                                             (A.7)
                    +1                +1

and                                             h                                                         i
                                                               ~t
                                                    1       ~t       pd E D
                                                                    1 t t
                                                                                         b
                                                                                  t,t+1 Rt +1
                                 ¯t ( ~t ) =
                                 r                                                                            .                  (A.8)
                                                           1        pd  ND
                                                                     t Et  {t,t+1 }
   We can then rewrite the problem as
                       n      h                                          io
      Vt (nt ) = max Et t,t+1 (1             N
                                      ) n t rt    ~t + V     n t r N   ~t   ,                                                    (A.9)
                                               +1       t+1        t+1
                   ~t


subject to
                      n     h                                                               io
             ~
              t nt  Et t,t+1 (1                                N
                                                        ) n t rt        ~t + V     nt rt+1 ~t
                                                                                       N
                                                                                               .                                (A.10)
                                                                 +1           t+1


Now, guess that the value function Vt (nt ) is linear and given by

                                                        Vt (nt ) =            
                                                                              t nt .


The problem becomes
                                            n                                                                      o
                                                                                                      N           ~t ,
                        t nt   = max Et t,t+1 nt (1                            )+          t+1       rt +1
                                  ~t


subject to                       n                                                                         o
                                                                                               
                        ~
                         t nt  Et t,t+1 nt (1                                )+                    N
                                                                                                  rt      ~t .
                                                                                         t+1         +1

The constraint is binding when
                                                                                 
                                                                    t         ¯t ~t
                                                                             dr
                                       µt   (       t      1)                                  > 0,                             (A.11)
                                                                 ¯t ( ~t )
                                                                 r                d ~t

where
                                                                                          
                                                                                                  
               µt =        1     pd
                                  t Et
                                      ND
                                         t,t+1 (1                             )+          t+1
                                                                                                        b
                                                                                                     [ Rt +1       r
                                                                                                                   ¯t ( t ) ,   (A.12)
                                                                                          
                                                                                                  
                t =        1     pd
                                  t E ND
                                      t   t,t +1  (1                          )+          t+1        ¯t ( t ) .
                                                                                                     r                          (A.13)

In this case, the optimal leverage is given by:

                                                                             
                                                                    t   =    t.



                                                                    A.2
Otherwise optimal leverage is given by

                                                                           t dr
                                                                              ¯t ( t )
                                               µt        (   t     1)                  = 0.                                (A.14)
                                                                           r
                                                                           ¯t d t
In either case optimal leverage does not depend on nt and is therefore constant across banks so
that                                                                                                      
                                              N           N                       N          QKtb
                                             Rt +1   =   rt +1   ( t) =          rt +1                        ,            (A.15)
                                                                                              Nt
and Tobin's Q
                                        
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           N
                                        t   = Et t,t+1 (1                        )+              t+1      Rt +1 ,          (A.16)

does not depend on nt either, which verifies the guess.


A.2        Dividend payout and bank Tobin's Q
In writing down the recursive optimization problem in (A.9) and (A.10) we have guessed that
the bank does not pay dividends until exit. Here we show that this is indeed optimal whenever
financial constraint are either binding or they are expected to bind with positive probability
                                                                                                          
some time in the future. In this case, in fact, we have that                                              t   > 1.

     To describe the optimal dividend policy of the bank, let V ,t (nt ) be the optimal value of a
bank with net worth nt that can pay dividends                                t    at t :

                                        V,t (nt ) =               max            t   + Vt (nt                 t)
                                                                 0 t  n t
                                                                                             
                                                         =        max            t   +       t   ( nt         t)
                                                                 0 t  n t

     
If   t   < 1 the bank will want to pay out dividends                                     t   = nt and shut down. Thus there is no
                        
equilibrium with        t   < 1 with active banks. Therefore

                                                                       
                                                                       t     1.                                            (A.17)

                    
Moreover when       t   > 1 it is optimal to set                   t   = 0.
                            
     To show that           t   > 1 whenever financial constraint are expected to bind with positive
probability some time in the future we proceed in steps.
                                  
     (a) If Kth > 0 then          t   > 1.
     Notice that, if at time t households are holding some capital, i.e. Kth > 0, from the house-
hold's utility maximization condition we have

                                              h                               Qt              b
                                1 = Et t,t+1 Rt +1 =                                Et t,t+1 Rt +1
                                                                           Qt + Kth
                                              b
                                  < Et t,t+1 Rt +1 .                                                                       (A.18)

                                                                       A.3
       But then since the bank can always choose to hold capital without leverage, we have

                                             
                                                                                                           b
                                                                                                                 
                                             t         Et t,t+1 (1                        +          t+1 )Rt+1                             (A.19)
                                                                 b
                                                       Et t,t+1 Rt +1 , by (A.17)

                                                 > 1, by (A.18) .

                                                                                                                    
      (b) If     s   > 1 with positive (time t) probability for s                                      t then       t   > 1.
      Household optimality condition for deposit holdings is

                                                              Es   1   ( s       1,s Rs )     = 1,                                         (A.20)

where Rs is the return on deposits at time s.
      Since an individual bank can always choose to hold no capital and lend to other banks, i.e.
set    s 1     = 0 and ds      1   =     ns 1 , we have

                                                                                                  
                                   s 1           Es   1   [ s      1,s (1             +           s ) Rs ]                                 (A.21)


                                                                                              
                                            = 1 + Es               1   ( s      1,s Rs    (   s       1)) , by (A.20)


                                                                   by (A.17)
                                            > 1                                   
                                                      and Prs           1   {     s   > 1} > 0
                                                                             
and proceeding backward we have                           t   > 1 if         s   > 1 with positive (time t) probability for s                  t.
              H                                                                                                         
      (c) If Ks > 1 with positive (time t) probability for s                                             t then         t   > 1.
      Follows directly from (a) and (b) .
      (d) If financial constraints are binding with positive (time t) probability for s                                                    t then
 
 t    > 1.
                               
      We show that if          t   = 1 then the constraints are never binding with probability one. This is
                                                              
equivalent because, from (A.17) , if                          t   is not strictly greater then unity then it must be unity.
                                                                                      H
      If   t   = 1, then (a) and (b) imply that                          s   = 1 and Ks = 1 with probability one for s                         t.
Then we have that
                                            t dr
                                               ¯t ( )             b                                             h
                      µt   (   t       1)             = Et t,t+1 Rt +1                            1 = Et t,t+1 Rt +1               1  0,   (A.22)
                                            r
                                            ¯t d
                                                                                               
where the first equality in (A.22) follows from using                                          t+1    = 1 in (A.12) and (A.13) and dier-
entiation of (A.8); the second equality and the last inequality of (A.22) follow from the fact
that Kth = 0. Equation (A.22) implies that financial constraints are not binding, see equations
(A.14) and (A.11) above.


                                                                             A.4
A.3        Equilibrium equations
Here we give the equilibrium equations of the complete model with news shocks.
       The state of the economy is given by Mt = {Nt , Zt , t , St } where t is the sunspot variable
and St is the state determining banker's and households beliefs, described below.
       The equilibrium equations determining


             {Ct , Kth , t
                         N     h    b           b           N               ¯                          R      I
                           ,   t , Kt , t ,     t , Nt+1 , Rt+1 , Rt , Qt , Rt , Zt+1 , Bt+1 , St+1 , Zt+1 , Zt+1 }

are given by: Household deposit demand
                                                                       
                                                                 Ct
                                                    Eth                    Rt+1     = 1.                              (A.23)
                                                                Ct+1
Household demand for capital
                                                                 
                                                           Ct       Zt+1 + Qt+1
                                              Eth                                          = 1.                       (A.24)
                                                          Ct+1       Qt + Kth

Household demand for bank equity
                                                   0 N                 h
                                              1 + f  t =               t     if no run
                                                      N
                                                                                                .                     (A.25)
                                                      t =0                        if run

Household marginal value of bank equity

                                          h
                                                                                           
                                          t   = Eth t,t+1 (1               )+       h
                                                                                    t+1
                                                                                               N
                                                                                              Rt +1 .                 (A.26)

Banks capital demand
                                                                          1
                                                           Qt Ktb =         Nt .                                      (A.27)
                                                                          t
Banks portfolio choice
                                                                                       34
                                                    t =     b    (binding IC ) .                                      (A.28)
                                                            t


Banks marginal value of wealth

                                      b
                                                                                          
                                      t   = Etb {t,t+1 (1                  )+       b
                                                                                    t+1
                                                                                               N
                                                                                              Rt +1 }.                (A.29)
  34
    In our calibration the constraint is always binding. See Gertler, Kiyotaki, and Prestipino (2019) for a formal
analysis of the bank's optimal portfolio choice that allows for occasionally binding constraints.




                                                                    A.5
Banker's net worth evolution
                                     8
                                             N      N
                                     >
                                     <   Nt Rt +1 + t+1 if no run at t + 1
                         Nt+1 =                                                    .       (A.30)
                                     >
                                     :
                                                 0            if run at t + 1

The return on net worth
                                                                   
                              N              Zt+1 + Qt+1              1
                             Rt +1   =                      Rt+1        + Rt+1 .           (A.31)
                                                  Qt                  t

The return on deposits
                                          
                             Rt+1          ¯ t , (Zt+1 + Qt+1 ) 1
                                     = min R                                  ,            (A.32)
                                                       Qt      1 t

where we are using (A.27) and (A.2) to write the return upon default as

                             (Zt+1 + Qt+1 ) Ktb   (Zt+1 + Qt+1 ) 1
                                                =                   .
                                    Dt                  Qt      1 t
Market clearing for assets
                                                 Ktb + Kth = 1.                            (A.33)

Market clearing for consumption
                                                              2
                                C t = Zt + W h          Kth          N
                                                                   f t .                   (A.34)
                                                      2
The evolution of productivity
                                         Zt+1 = Zt + Bt+1 + "t+1 ,                         (A.35)
                     Z
where "t+1  N 0,         and
                                         (
                                             ¯ if st 2 {1, ..., T } and st+1 = T + 2
                                             B
                 Bt+1 (st , st+1 ) =                                                   .   (A.36)
                                             0                otherwise




                                                      A.6
St 2 GS = {1, ..., T + 2} is a finite state Markov chain with transition probability


         2                                                                                                              3
                            St+1 = 1 St+1 = 2 St+1 = 3 ... St+1 = T + 1 St+1 = T + 2
         6                                                                                                              7
         6                                                                                                              7
         6                                                                                                              7
         6 S =1                 0           1         1                       ...           ...               1         7
         6     t                                                                                                        7
         6                                                                                                              7
TP =     6 St = 2               0               0               1         2   ...           ...               2         7
         6                                                                                                              7
         6       ...            ...             ...                 ...       ...           ...               0         7
         6                                                                                                              7
         6                                                                                                              7
         6 St = T               0               0                   0         ...       1     T               T         7
         6                                                                                                              7
         6                                                                                                              7
         4 St = T + 1           n               0                   0         ...       1     n               0         5
                                   n
           St = T + 2                           0                   0         ...           ...           1       n
                                                                                                                      (A.37)
Bankers believe that the transition probability is

                                                            P¯ i
                                            b
                                            i =             ¯ i  1   .
                                                      1     P  s=1 s


where { }T
          =1 is a discrete approximation of a normal. While households believe

                                                      h
                                                      i = 0.

Threshold for insolvency

                                                          b
               ZtI+1 = inf Z 0 s.t.       Z 0 + QI     0
                                                                              Qt Ktb           ¯t > 0 ,
                                                 t+1 (Z ) Kt                                Nt R                      (A.38)
             0                                                       0
where QI
       t+1 (Z ) is the price of capital at t + 1 if productivity is Z and no run happens:
                                                  0
                                                                               
                          0                                      0
                QIt+1 ( Z   ) = Q  N t+1  M t , Z   , S t+1  , Z   , 0 ,  S t+1 .


Similarly thresholds for run
                                                      
                           ZtR     R    R
                                                          Ktb        Qt Ktb            ¯ t = 0,
                             +1 + Qt+1 Zt+1                                         Nt R                              (A.39)

where
                               QR    R            R
                                t+1 Zt+1 = Q 0 , Zt+1 , 1 , St+1 .



A.4     Computation
It is convenient for computations to let the aggregate state of the economy be given by

                                                ^t , Zt , t , St ).
                                           Mt =(N


                                                          A.7
where                                                               N
                                                    ^ t = Nt
                                                    N
                                                                    t
                                                                        .

   We can then look for equilibrium functions

                                 h            b                     0              0           0 0    0
    # = Q (M) , C (M) ,               (M) ,       ( M ) , ZR              I
                                                           t+1 (M; S ) , Zt+1 (M; S ) , T (M; Z ,  , S )


where T (Mt ; 0 , 0 , S 0 ) is the transition law determining the evolution of the state as a function
of the state today and stochastic shocks tomorrow. All other variables can be easily recovered
from variables # by using static equilibrium conditions (see below point 5 below).
   The computational algorithm to approximate the functions in # proceeds as follows:

   1. Determine a functional space to use for approximating equilibrium functions. (We use
      piecewise linear).
                                                                                                     
   2. Fix a grid of values for the state G  0, N M  1                           4   Z
                                                                                        ,1 + 4   Z
                                                                                                          {0, 1}  {1, 2, ..., T + 2}
      and a grid of value for future shocks to Z, "0 2 G"  [1                             4 ", 1 + 4 "]

   3. Set i = 0 and guess initial values for the equilibrium objects of interest on the grid

                                                                #0 =
      n                                                                                                                              o
           0          0
          Q (M) , C (M) ,       h,0
                                      (M) ,   b,0
                                                    (M) , ZtR,
                                                            +1
                                                               0
                                                                    (M; S   0
                                                                                ) , ZtI,
                                                                                       +1
                                                                                         0           0       0
                                                                                             (M; S ) , T (M; Z ,  , S )  0   0   0
                                                                                                                                         M 2G


   4. Assume that #i has been found for i < M where M is set to 10000. Use #i to find
      associated functions #i in the approximating space, e.g. Qi is the price function that
      satisfies Qi (M) = Qi (M) for each M 2 G.

   5. Compute all time t + 1 variables in the system of equilibrium equations by using the func-
      tions #i from the previous step, e.g. for each M 2 G let Qt+1 (#i ) = Qi (T i (M; Z 0 , 0 , S 0 )) ,
      and then solve the system of equilibrium equations to get the implied #i+1 .
        Specifically :
                       n                 o
          · for any M = N^t , Zt , t , St 2 G such that there is no run at time t, i.e. N
                                                                                        ^t > 0 or
               t = 0, we can solve for
                             n                                                                                   o
                                                    h,i+1      b,i+1
                               Qi +1
                                 t , Ct
                                       i+1
                                           ,        t     ,    t     , Kth,i+1 , Ktb,i+1 , t
                                                                                           N,i+1
                                                                                                 , i
                                                                                                   t
                                                                                                     +1
                                                                                                                     ,

               where we use the shorthand Qi
                                           t
                                             +1
                                                for Qi+1 (M) , by finding the root of the system
                                         
                                          Zt+1 + Qt+1 (#i )
                                Cti+1  h
                                      Et                     = Qi t
                                                                   +1
                                                                      + Kth,i+1             (A.40)
                                               Ct+1 (#i )

                                                              A.8
                                                                  
                            h,i+1
                            t                   (1
                                                 )+ t   h      i
                                                          +1 (# )    N^t+1 (#i )
                                    =  Eth                                                               (A.41)
                           Cti+1                Ct+1 (#i )           ^ t + t
                                                                     N      N,i+1

                                                        
                                              0   N,i+1        h,i+1
                                         1 + f   t        = t                                            (A.42)
                                                                 
                            b,i+1                       b      i      ^t+1 (#i )
                            t          b (1     )+ t     +1 (# )     N
                                    = Et                                                                 (A.43)
                           Cti+1                Ct+1 (#i )           ^ t + t
                                                                     N      N,i+1


                                                              ^ t + t
                                                              N       N,i+1
                                           +1 b,i+1
                                        Qi
                                         t Kt               =                                            (A.44)
                                                                  it
                                                                    +1


                                                                   
                                                     i
                                                     t
                                                       +1
                                                          =        b,i+1
                                                                                                         (A.45)
                                                                   t

                                           Ktb,i+1 + Kth,i+1 = 1                                         (A.46)
                                                     h,i+1 2      
                                                                   N,i+1
                                                                         
                           Cti+1    = Zt + W h       Kt          f t                                     (A.47)
                                                   2
                                                                         ^t = 0 or t = 1, we
  · For any M = {0, Zt , 1, St } such that there is a run at time t, i.e N
     can solve for
                     n                                                                           o
                                        h,i+1         b,i+1
                         Qi +1 i+1
                          t , Ct   ,    t     ,       t     , Kth,i+1 , Ktb,i+1 , t
                                                                                  N,i+1
                                                                                        , i
                                                                                          t
                                                                                            +1
                                                                                                     ,

     where we use the shorthand Qit
                                   +1
                                      for Qi+1 (M) , by finding the root of the system
                                  
                           i+1  h   Zt+1 + Qt+1 (#i )
                         Ct    Et                     = Qi t
                                                            +1
                                                               +                  (A.48)
                                        Ct+1 (#i )

                                                      Kth,i+1 = 1                                        (A.49)
                                                                           
                                             Cti+1 = Zt + Wh                                             (A.50)
                                                                           2
                                                           h,i+1
                                                           t       =0                                    (A.51)
                                                       N,i+1
                                                       t     =0                                          (A.52)
                                                           b,i+1
                                                           t       =0                                    (A.53)

                                                       Ktb,i+1 = 0                                       (A.54)

                                                        i
                                                        t
                                                          +1
                                                             =0                                          (A.55)
                                                   n                 o
We then find the new implied thresholds for any M = N^t , Zt , t , St 2 G such that
there is no run at time t, given by ZtR,i
                                      +1
                                          +1
                                             (M; S 0 ) and ZtI,i +1   0
                                                              +1 (M; S ) by solving for any




                                                     A.9
      S 0 2 {1, 2, ..., T + 2}
         h                                        i                                                        
           ZtR,i +1
                    + Q  i
                            0 , Z R,i+1
                                        , 1 , S 0
                                                    Ktb,i+1               Qi +1 b,i+1        ^t      N,i+1  ¯ i+1 = 0 (A.56)
             +1                  t                                         t Kt              N       t      R t

                               8                                                                                    9
                               >
                               >                                            Z                                       >
                                                                                                                    >
                               >
                               >                                                                                    >
                                                                                                                    >
                               >
                               >                                       such that                                    >
                                                                                                                    >
                               >
                               < 2 h                                                         i              3       >
                                                                                                                    =
            ZtI,i +1                               ^ti+1 (M; Z, 0, S 0 ) , Z, 0, S 0
                                            Z + Qi N                                              Ktb,i+1
               +1 = inf                                                                                                         (A.57)
                               >
                               > 6                                                                          7       >
                                                                                                                    >
                               >
                               > 6                                                                          7=0     >
                                                                                                                    >
                               >
                               > 4                                                                          5       >
                                                                                                                    >
                               >
                               :                        +1 b,i+1          ^t     N,i+1  ¯t                          >
                                                                                                                    ;
                                                     Qi
                                                      t Kt                N      t      R i+1



      We update the evolution of the state by letting for any "0 2 G" and any S 0 2 {1, 2, ....., T + 2}
                                (
                                   B¯ if st 2 {1, ..., T } and st+1 = T + 2
                        Bt+1 =                                                .
                                   0                 otherwise

                                                            Z 0 = Zt + Bt+1 + "0
                                                            ^ i+1 (M; Z 0 , 0 , S 0 ) =
                                                            N t+1
            8
            >
            >                                              if Z 0 < ZtI,i +1   0
                                                                       +1 (M; S ) , or
            >
            >                                   0,
            <                                           Z 0 < ZtR,i +1
                                                                       (M; S 0 ) and 0 = 1
                                                                +1
            >
            >
            >
            >               h                                                              i
            :  ^ t + t
               N     N,i+1    Qi (Ti (M;"0 ,0,S 0 ))+ Zt+1 (M;"0 )   ¯
                                                                     R i+1     1
                                                                                   + ¯
                                                                                     R i+1
                                                                                             , otherwise
                                              Qi  +1                   t      i +1     t
                                                t                             t
                                   (
                                       1 if Z 0 < ZtR,i     +1
                                                              +1
                                                                   (M; S 0 ) and 0 = 1
                       RU Nt+1 =
                                       0                     otherwise
      we can then collect all the values in
                                                                     #i+1 =
          n                                                  h                   i                                         o
              Qi+1 , C i+1 ,    h,i+1
                                        ,    b,i+1
                                                        (M) , ZtR,i
                                                                +1
                                                                    +1
                                                                       , Z I,i+1
                                                                          t+1      ( M ; S 0
                                                                                             ) , T i+1
                                                                                                       ( M ; Z 0 0
                                                                                                                ,  , S 0
                                                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                               M 2G


  6. Repeat 4 and 5 until convergence of |#i+1                            #i | < conv criterion.


A.5      Insolvency
The states in which a bank is insolvent are states in which no equilibrium in which bankers
pay depositors in full can exist. In insolvency states banks default irrespective of whether
depositors run on banks, simply because fundamentals are so bad that banks cannot possibly
pay their obligations. The definition of the insolvency threshold ZtI+1 in equation (A.38) and
its computational counterpart in (A.57) accordingly select the threshold for insolvency as the


                                                                   A.10
lowest value of Z at which banks are able to satisfy their obligations absent a sunspot. Notice
that to select this value we do not impose that at the threshold ZtI+1 net surviving banks net
worth is zero, because in general this will not be the case. That is, the insolvency threshold
ZtI+1 will be dierent in general from the value ZtP
                                                  +1 given by

                                                      
                       ZtP           P
                                                         Ktb   Qt Ktb      ¯ t = 0.
                         +1 + Q 0 , Zt+1 , 0 , St+1                     Nt R                       (A.58)

                                                                     P       I
    To understand why  it is possible,    indeed usually true, that Zt+1 < Zt+1 assume that at time
t the state is Mt = N    ^t , Zt , t , St and banks total asset holdings are Ktb and total liabilities
L t = Q t K b Nt R ¯ t . Consider the following function
           t
                                     h                             i
                            ^ 0, Z 0 = Z 0 + Q N
                       ft+1 N                  ^ 0 , Z 0 , 0 , St+1 Ktb        Lt ,

which measures what the net worth of all time t banks would be at t + 1 if the the productivity
was    0                                                                                ^ 0 , i.e.
   Z and the price      of capital at t + 1 was the one associated with a net worth of N
Q N ^ 0 , Z 0 , 0 , St+1 . The time t + 1 subscript of function ft+1 captures how this value
depends on the belief state St+1 and the time t choice of assets Ktb and liabilities Lt . Clearly,
in equilibrium we have
                                    h                                                    i
     ^t+1 (Mt ; Z 0 , 0, St+1 ) =
     N                            Z +Q N0  ^t+1 (Mt ; Z 0 , 0, St+1 ) , Z 0 , 0 , St+1       Ktb   Lt
                                                                      
                                      ^t+1 (Mt ; Z 0 , 0, St+1 ) , Z 0 .
                               = ft+1 N

                                                               ^ 0 that satisfy
However, for some values of Z 0 , there are multiple values of N
                                                           
                                       N^ 0 = ft+1 N
                                                   ^ 0, Z 0 .                                      (A.59)

Figure A.1 shows this
                  using    the policy functions approximated from our model. The figure plots
the function ft+1 N^ , Z for five dierent values of Z 0 . As illustrated by the case in which
                     0  0

Z 0 = ZtH                                               0     P
        +1 , when productivity is high enough, i.e. Z > Zt+1 , there is only one value of net
                                                                     ^t+1 Mt ; ZtH
worth that satisfies equation (A.59), which is the equilibrium value N           +1 , 0, St+1 . A
default equilibrium becomes possible whenever productivity drops below the threshold ZtP
                                                                                       +1 ,
which is the lowest value for Z 0 at which banks are able to pay their deposit obligations even
if the capital price and dividends drop to the values associated with insolvency as defined in
equation (A.58) .
   Notice that while at ZtP
                          +1 default is possible, it is not an equilibrium because, contrary
to what happens during a run, we assume that agents always coordinate on the equilibrium
with highest bank net worth when a sunspot is not observed. Hence, as the figure shows, the
                                  ^t+1 Mt ; Z P , 0, St+1 > 0.
equilibrium value of net worth is N          t+1




                                                 A.11
                                                                                                   
   As Z 0 drops further below ZtP  to a value Z M
                                                    2 Z I
                                                            , Z P
                                                                   the function f t+1
                                                                                       ^
                                                                                       N 0
                                                                                           ; Z M
                                +1              t+1     t+1    t+1                             t+1
crosses the 45 degree lines three times: at zero, at an intermediate value and at the equilibrium
value N^t+1 Mt ; ZtM                        I                             0
                   +1 , 0, St+1 . Finally, Zt+1 is the lowest value of Z such that agents can
coordinate on an equilibrium in which default is avoided
                  n                                                               o
                                          ^ 0 > 0 satisfying N
       ZtI+1 = inf Z 0 such that there is N                  ^ 0 = ft+1 N
                                                                        ^ 0, Z 0    .                      (A.60)

Below ZtI+1 , as illustrated by the case ZtL     I
                                           +1 < Zt+1 all banks that were active at time t necessarily
default at t + 1 and N  ^t+1 Mt ; Z L , 0, St+1 = 0.
                                             t+1
   The figure illustrates the key reason why ZtP                   I
                                               +1 is dierent from Zt+1 , which is that the
equilibrium value of net worth is discontinuous at ZtI+1 dropping from a strictly positive value
at ZtI+1 to 0 for any value below ZtI+1 :

                            ^t+1 (Mt ; Z 0 , 0, St+1 ) = 0 < N
                        lim N                                ^t+1 Mt ; Z I , 0, St+1 .
                             I
                                                                        t+1
                      Z 0 "Z t +1


This discontinuity is present in our calibrated model for a large region of the state space
but does not generally need to be true. Theconditions under whichit is true
                                                                           are that the
                                        ^ ; Z with respect to N at N
partial derivative of the function ft+1 N 0  0                     ^ ; Z = 0; Z P
                                                                     0  0
                                                                                 t+1 is
                                           @ ft+1
strictly greater than one, i.e.             @N ^0   0; ZtP
                                                         +1 > 1, together with the natural assumption that
          @ ft+1                                     @ ft+1
limN !1    @N ^0   < 1. The condition that            @N ^0   0; ZtP
                                                                   +1 > 1 is also natural in models with financial
constraints, as it follows from the fact that the price of capital becomes extremely sensitive to
variation in bank net worth when total bank net worth is very low. This is indeed the very
force that gives rise to the possibility of runs in our model.


A.6       Impulse Response Functions
                                                  ¯ =(N
We let the risk adjusted steady state be given by M   ¯ , 1, 0, T + 1) which satisfies:

                                                ¯ =T M
                                                M    ¯ ; 0, 0 , T + 1 .

That is, it is a state that will remain constant in the absence of any shocks to productivity and
as long as bankers do not receive any news.      n                     on
  We compute responses to a sequence of n shocks irf
                                                   t
                                                     s irf s
                                                      , t
                                                             , St
                                                                 irf s
                                                                            by starting the econ-
                                                                        t=1
omy in the risk adjusted steady state, M0 = M¯ , and computing the evolution of the state
given the assumed shocks from time 1 to n and setting all future shocks to 0, i.e. t = t = 0
for t   n+1:                               8                              
                                           < T M ; irf s , irf s , S irf s if t  n
                                                 t t        t       t
                                    Mt+1 =                                         ,
                                           : T (Mt ; 0, 0, S  (St 1 )) if t > n


                                                              A.12
where S  (St 1 ) implies no news arrival and no boom realization
                                    (
                                      St 1 + 1   if St 1 2 {1, 2, ..., T }
                      S  ( St 1 ) =                                        .
                                        St 1   if St 1 2 {T + 1, T + 2}

We then plot for each variable, the values of the associated policy function computed along
this path for the state, e.g. Qt = Q (Mt ). Notice that, given our nonlinear policy func-
tions,
n        these valueson are dierent from conditional expectations given the sequence of shocks
   irf s irf s irf s
  t , t , St             .
                  t=1




                                              A.13
Figure A.1: Multiplicity and Insolvency.




                 A.14
