                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS IN CREDIT CYCLES
                     IN THE U.S. MORTGAGE MARKET

                                       Manuel Adelino
                                     William B. McCartney
                                      Antoinette Schoar

                                      Working Paper 27499
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27499


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We thank seminar participants at the Bank of Portugal, Boston College, Boston University, the
Chinese University of Hong Kong, MIT finance lunch, Nazarbayev University, NBER Corporate
Finance Summer Institute and our discussant Claudia Robles-Garcia, New York Fed, NOVA
School of Business and Economics, Philadelphia Fed, SFS Cavalcade and our discussant Gonzalo
Maturana, UCLA finance lunch, and the Wabash River Finance Conference and our discussant
Alexei Tchistyi, as well as Ed Golding, Barney Hartman-Glaser and Christopher Palmer for
helpful comments. We thank Yuting Wang for outstanding research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Manuel Adelino, William B. McCartney, and Antoinette Schoar. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Government and Private Institutions in Credit Cycles in the U.S. Mortgage Market
Manuel Adelino, William B. McCartney, and Antoinette Schoar
NBER Working Paper No. 27499
July 2020
JEL No. E03,G21,G28,G30,R30

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that the distribution of combined loan-to-value ratios (CLTVs) for purchase mortgages
in the U.S. has been remarkably stable over the last 25 years. But there was a dramatic shift
during the housing boom of the 2000s in the provision of high- CLTV loans through private
sources, which replaced almost one-for-one the share of high-CLTV loans directly guaranteed by
the government, via FHA and VA. Post 2008, FHA/VA loans increased back to 30% of all
purchase mortgages. This substitution between government and privately backed high-CLTV
loans holds within ZIP codes, properties and borrower types over the full sample period. We also
show that the increase in private high-CLTV lending follows local house price increases rather
than preceding them. These findings suggest that the housing boom was not accompanied by a
shift towards more high-CLTV loans, and instead favor models that rely on changes in collateral
values or broad changes in house price expectations.

Manuel Adelino                                 Antoinette Schoar
Fuqua School of Business                       MIT Sloan School of Management
Duke University                                100 Main Street, E62-638
100 Fuqua Drive                                Cambridge, MA 02142
Durham, NC 27708                               and NBER
and NBER                                       aschoar@mit.edu
manuel.adelino@duke.edu

William B. McCartney
Purdue University
403 West State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
wmccartn@purdue.edu
1        Introduction

Housing markets in the United States and many countries around the world have been

marked by recurring boom and bust cycles. Several of these episodes, most notably the

2008 financial crisis, are associated with a significant expansion in the amount of mortgage

debt that households take on.1 A large and influential literature in macroeconomics on the

credit channel highlights the role of house prices in creating a multiplier feedback loop for

asset values and the broader economy (see Bernanke et al. (1999) and Kiyotaki and Moore

(1997)). If contract enforcement is limited, lenders impose loan-to-value (LTV) limits to

ensure repayment and discourage strategic default. Higher asset prices allow borrowers to

access more credit relative to their income even if LTV ratios stay constant. This increase

in debt-to-income (DTI) levels can lead to a higher likelihood of distress following income

shocks. More recent leverage cycle models propose that LTV constraints themselves are

relaxed in a boom, which allows investors with higher valuations of an asset to bid more

aggressively and drive up prices (see, for example, Geanakoplos (2010)). This relaxation of

LTVs can increase the likelihood of strategic default if house prices are volatile. Therefore,

it is important to analyze the exact nature of the credit relaxation to understand what role

credit plays in either amplifying house price bubbles or causing the rise in prices in the first

place.2

        It is by now well understood that during the housing boom of the early 2000s lenders

were willing to relax DTI constraints across the whole income distribution. Prior research

has shown that the level of mortgage credit to income rose significantly in the U.S. during

this time period especially for the middle class (see, for example, Adelino et al. (2016, 2017),

Foote and Willen (2018), and Albanesi et al. (2019)). In this paper, we show that this re-

laxation of DTI constraints did not go hand in hand with a relaxation in LTV constraints
    1
     Recent work has shown that credit expansions often precede financial crises (Greenwood et al., 2020;
Krishnamurthy and Muir, 2017; Mian et al., 2017).
   2
     See, for example, Greenwald (2018) for an analysis of the role LTV and DTI constraints play for house
price cycles and monetary policy transmission.




                                                    2
in the U.S. We document that the distribution of CLTVs for purchase mortgages, which in-

cludes all liens on a property, remained unchanged across home buyers between 1996 and

2015. Loan sizes at origination increased significantly with the housing cycle (driven by the

changes in house values), but the CLTV distribution did not become more skewed towards

very high-CLTV loans. We focus on CLTVs at the time of home purchase to analyze the role

of access to finance in house price formation. It also alleviates the concern of potential bias

in appraisals that would affect measurement of CLTV for refinances.3

      The main reason why CLTVs did not increase during the housing boom is that U.S.

households already had access to very high CLTV loans (loans with a CLTV above 95%) prior

to the housing boom via directly government-backed mortgages from the Federal Housing

Administration (FHA) and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) (see also Glaeser et al.

(2012) and Ferreira and Gyourko (2015)). What changed was the source of high-CLTV loans

over the boom and bust period. While the share of privately securitized high-CLTV loans

for used home purchases increased substantially during the housing boom (in line with

Pinto (2010) and Keys et al. (2012)), we show that they replaced one for one the share of

equally high CLTV ratio loans backed by FHA and VA. In addition, the shift from gov-

ernment backed to privately supplied high-CLTV loans did not change across ZIP codes,

properties or even types of borrowers over our whole sample period. In other words, the ZIP

codes and borrower types with a high share of FHA and VA loans in the early 2000s are

the same ones where high-CLTV private loans expanded rapidly post-2002 and crowded out

FHA/VA loans. These are also the ZIP codes and borrower types where FHA share surged

post-2008.

      In a second step, we show that the type of collateral backing house purchase transac-

tions was stable over the cycle. The distribution of age and size of houses purchased with

FHA/VA versus private, high-CLTV loans is unchanged over time. In addition, we use a
  3
    Earlier papers have shown that households borrowed heavily against the increase in house prices, increas-
ing current LTVs (Mian and Sufi (2011), Justiniano et al. (2015)), and consumed out of the increased borrowing
(Campbell and Cocco (2007), Mian et al. (2013)).




                                                      3
novel application of the repeat-sales methodology (Case and Shiller, 1989) to show similar

stability in the use of high-CLTV loans even within properties over time. This approach en-

sures that the general quality of the asset remains fixed. We find that the same properties

are financed with high-CLTV loans from the different sources throughout the whole sample

period.

   Third, we look at the purchase decisions of individual households to better understand

if borrowers using high-CLTV, government loans pre-boom were different from those of pri-

vately provided, high-CLTV loans during the boom. We track the borrowing decisions of

specific households in North Carolina that move within their county. Consistent with the

ZIP code and property evidence, households who used FHA or VA loans between 1996 and

2003 are much more likely to use private-sector loans with CLTVs  95% during the 2004-

2007 period, and then to switch back to FHA-VA loans after the boom. Next, using data

from both the Credit Risk Insight Servicing McDash (CRISM) and the Survey of Consumer

Finances, we show that the debt-to-income of FHA and private, high-CLTV borrowers is

very similar in the boom. Finally, we show that the loan performance for the two groups

of loans is also the same once we control for geography and credit scores. If the private-

sector loans were different in ways unobservable to us, we would expect to see differences

in performance, especially in the crisis, but this is not what we find.

   One feature of models of leverage cycles (such as Geanakoplos (1997, 2010)) is that high-

CLTV loans allow more optimistic buyers to bid up asset prices. We explicitly investigate if

the composition or access to credit for more optimistic home buyers changed over the boom.

We measure a person's "fixed type" of optimism based on her forecasted life expectancy

relative to observed characteristics as in Puri and Robinson (2007). Our analysis shows

that the fraction of optimists with high-CLTV loans did not increase significantly in the

boom, consistent with house buyers of all types participating similarly in high-CLTV loans.

   Finally, we analyze if the switch in the provision of loans from FHA/VA to private high-

CLTV credit might itself be a driver of the house price cycle. Previous research suggests


                                               4
that privately supplied high-CLTV loans are quicker to close and are often available with

less documentation than FHA/VA loans of equivalent CLTV (LaCour-Little, 2007). We show

that the shift to privately supplied high-CLTV loans follows the growth in house prices

rather than leading it. Therefore, the areas where prices rose the most saw higher prices

before the increase in private high-CLTV share (consistent with the results in Ferreira and

Gyourko (2011)). We also use the house price instrument developed by Palmer (2015) and

Guren et al. (2018) to isolate house prices changes that are not driven by credit expansion.

Using this methdology, We find that, as before, house price increases lead the rise in private

high-CLTV loan share.

      In addition, the majority of high-CLTV private loans during the boom were made by

lenders that were already present at the beginning of the time period and provided borrow-

ers with access to both types of loans. Over the boom period, these lenders significantly

reduced their fraction of FHA loans and increased high-CLTV private loans. These results

suggest that private high-CLTV loans were available throughout our sample period by the

same lenders that also provide FHA loans and lenders did not expand the set of borrowing

options that households had.

      Our results raise important questions about how to model credit cycles. We show that

highly levered loans were available throughout the last two decades, suggesting that the

housing boom and subsequent financial crisis cannot be explained by changes in aggregate

purchase CLTVs. Instead, lenders expanded credit in proportion to rising house prices and

allowed DTI ratios to go up across the population. Our results suggest that the dynamic

of the U.S. housing market is in line with models that rely on changes in collateral values

(credit cycle models) or broad changes in house price expectations. An influential early

literature on credit cycles going back to Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and

Moore (1997) emphasizes the role of collateral values in creating a multiplier-accelerator

feedback channel in models with limited enforcement.4 Since firms and households are
  4
    See Guerrieri and Uhlig (2016) for a review of the literature exploring how credit cycles interact with
cycles in house prices.


                                                    5
constrained in how much they can borrow by the value of their assets, an increase in asset

values makes it easier to borrow, which improves the productive use of the asset, and, as

a result, increases asset values even further. In these models credit facilitates house price

increases but does not cause them.

   A recent literature on the leverage cycle, see Geanakoplos (1997, 2010), suggests that

pro-cyclical fluctuations in loan-to-value (LTV) ratios can be a causal driver of boom-bust

cycles in credit markets. The idea is that when volatility is low for an extended time period,

lenders might allow higher LTV ratios because they feel more secure stretching the avail-

able collateral. If there is a class of buyers who value the asset more highly than others, the

relaxation in LTV constraints allows these borrowers to bid prices up. Several recent papers

have used changes in the loan-to-value constraint as a modeling device for the credit expan-

sions of the early 2000s (Corbae and Quintin, 2015; Favilukis et al., 2017; Justiniano et al.,

2019; Landvoigt et al., 2015). Our results show that the leverage cycle was muted in the U.S.

given the specific nature of U.S. mortgage markets, in particular the fact that high-CLTV

loans with explicit government backing were available even before the boom. Some models

may use looser CLTV limits as a "stand-in" for a broader relaxation of credit constraints,

possibly through higher debt-to-income ratios or weaker documentation requirements. But

existing work suggests that different constraints bind in different states of the world and

have different effects when they do, see Greenwald (2018).

   Our work is also related to papers that have looked at the time series of average LTVs

in the U.S. population and found stable averages over time. Glaeser et al. (2012) show that

down payments did not change in the years between 1998 and 2008 and are therefore an un-

likely culprit for the dramatic increase in house prices. Ferreira and Gyourko (2015) also use

deeds data to show a time series of combined loan-to-value ratios for prime loans, subprime

loans, FHA/VA and small lenders. Adelino et al. (2018) also show that the distribution

of purchase CLTVs over time has been stable. Another set of studies has looked specif-

ically at private-label mortgage-backed securities using data from CoreLogic. Demyanyk


                                              6
and Van Hemert (2009), Keys et al. (2012), and Gerardi et al. (2008) document the increase

in CLTVs for privately securitized mortgages in the early 2000's. Pinto (2010) shows that

the share of mortgages purchased by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac using CLTVs above 97%

increased from 5% in 1996 to 40% in 2007.5 We build on this prior work by analyzing the

substitution effects between FHA/VA guarantees and private sector securitization in sup-

plying high-CLTV loans and its impact on house prices across the distribution of households

and properties.

        The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II explain the institutional back-

ground and the data. Section III presents the main results of the CLTV distribution over

the credit cycle. Sections IV and V present the results of CLTV changes at the ZIP code

and the personal level. In section VI we present results for timing of house price increases

and CLTV changes. The lenders providing FHA/VA and private, high-CLTV mortgages are

explored in section VII. And finally, section VIII concludes.



2        Institutional Set up and Data Description

The government programs designed and operated by the Federal Housing Administration

(FHA) and the Veteran's Administration (VA) share several characteristics. They both seek

to encourage home ownership among their target populations: low-income, middle-income,

and first-time homeowner households for FHA and military families for VA. The FHA has

stricter underwriting standards than the VA, requiring FICO scores to be above 580 in

order to qualify for minimum 3.5% down payment, debt-to-income ratios to be below some

maximum (31% front-end, 45% back-end), and that the borrower buy mortgage insurance

from the FHA. Both the FHA and the VA require that the home be the borrower's primary

residence and that the borrower has some proof of employment. FHA-insured and VA-

insured loans together account for almost all of the loans backed by "the full faith and credit
    5
    The 2009 FHA Actuarial Study is available here: https://www.hud.gov/sites/documents/DOC_16571.pdf.
The actuarial study includes refinance loans and imputes the values for those properties when calculating its
loan-to-value ratios. This imputation may lead to measurement error in CLTVs (Aragon et al., 2010).


                                                     7
guarantee of the US Government."6 Kim et al. (2018) provide an in-depth look at the current

origination of FHA and VA mortgages, including the institutional details of this market and

the role of non-bank mortgage companies. The paper focuses on the implications of the

limited amount of capital of those companies on the stability of the financial sector and the

potential need for a government bailout in an adverse event.

      Securities backed by FHA loans are guaranteed by the U.S. government through the

Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae), while the VA provides partial

guarantees and servicers provide the rest. Ginnie Mae provides additional residual protec-

tion in case servicers default. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (other government-sponsored

entities) purchase loans from the issuing lenders and then securitize mortgages they pur-

chase. Ginnie Mae, in contrast, gives lenders approval to make FHA- or VA-loans. The

lenders themselves then package their government-guaranteed loans into mortgage-backed

securities. These securities are then explicitly guaranteed by Ginnie Mae. Any losses are

first covered by the insurance premiums the FHA requires borrowers of its guaranteed loans

to purchase. Further losses are covered by the U.S. government.

      The underlying argument for the existence of the FHA/VA programs is that they grant

qualifying borrowers access to mortgage credit that they would not normally have access to

in a world where mortgages are provided only by private markets. This paper shows that

the share of high-CLTV loans made by the private market was highly pro-cyclical during the

last two decades. Importantly, highly leveraged loans were made before the boom, as well

as after the financial crisis, but only by government programs that had an explicit mission

to encourage homeownership.



2.1      Data sources

We require a data set that satisfies three requirements. First, it must include every loan

(including second and third mortgages) that the borrower used to finance the purchase of
  6
      https://www.hud.gov/hudprograms/Ginnie_Mae_I, accessed August 1, 2019.



                                                    8
their home. Figure A1 shows the incidence of second and third liens over time in the data

and their changing importance over the time series. Second, the data must include a value

of the home at the time the mortgage was originated. Third, the data set must include

the universe of mortgages, and not just those packaged in private-label securities or origi-

nated by one bank. The deeds data, kept in county recorder's offices and then collected and

published by data company CoreLogic, meet all three of these criteria.

   In this project we focus on purchase transactions. An important limitation of the deeds

data--and indeed almost every data set on mortgages---is that measures of value are only

reliable at the time of purchase. By using the actual sale value of the home, we assuage

concerns about bias in appraisal values (which would affect measured CLTVs for refinance

loans (Agarwal et al., 2015), (Kruger and Maturana, ming)). One potential solution is to use

data from a lender as in Bernstein (2018), but then we no longer observe the universe of

loans.

   In the deeds data, we cannot observe the income or credit scores of the borrowers. To

answer questions that require credit scores and income, we use data from the Credit Risk

Insight Servicing McDash (CRISM) data set, developed by Equifax using a proprietary algo-

rithm to match McDash's mortgage servicing records to individual-level Equifax credit data.

This data set covers approximately two thirds of first mortgages originated in the market

from the second half of 2005 to the end of 2015. McDash contains mortgage characteris-

tics such as mortgage type (FHA, VA, or private), origination month, original loan amount,

original property value, credit score at origination, front-end debt-to-income (DTI), and also

mortgage performance over time. Furthermore, Equifax keeps track of consumer's liabilities

and we can observe the number of both closed-end seconds (CESs) and home equity lines

of credit (HELOCs) taken by the individual, as well as the date and the amount of the two

largest loans of each type that are active at each month. This allows us to capture all second

liens for over 90% of consumers. We then estimate original CLTV by matching McDash's

first mortgages to Equifax's second mortgages taken by the same person at the same month.


                                              9
    As a final source of data on mortgage debt, house value and borrower income, the paper

uses the 1998 through 2016 waves of the Federal Reserve Board Survey of Consumer Fi-

nances (SCF). The SCF is a household survey that asks consumers for detailed information

about their finances and savings behavior and is conducted every three years as a repeated

cross-section. We use these data to construct a debt-to-income (DTI) measure that includes

all payments for all mortgage-related debt, as well as questions about personal beliefs that

allow us to extract a measure of individual optimism.



3     Distribution of CLTV over the credit cycle

Using the deeds data for all U.S. counties covered by CoreLogic, we calculate the CLTV of

every purchase loan and whether that loan was an FHA- or VA-guaranteed loan. The CLTV

is defined as follows: we sum the loan amounts for each loan, up to three loans, used to

finance the purchase and then divide that sum by the sale price. Cash purchases, those that

did not use any leverage, are not included in any of the results presented below (the share

of cash-only transactions is presented in Figure A2).



3.1   Stability of the aggregate CLTV distribution

Figure 1 shows the cumulative distribution function of CLTVs at purchase for all purchase

mortgages originated in 1999 (dashed line) and 2006 (solid line). The distributions in 1999

and 2006 are remarkably similar. In 1999, 68% of all mortgages had CLTVs strictly less

than 95%, and this share hardly moves in 2006 when 66% of loans had CLTVs under 95%.

If anything, the distribution of CLTVs shifts to the left in 2006, meaning that CLTVs became

less aggressive. For example, the share of people putting at least 20% down increases from

41% of borrowers to 48% in 2006.

In order to show the evolution of CLTVs for all years in the sample, we calculate the mean

CLTV of purchase mortgages made in a given year along with the 5th, 25th, 75th, and 95th


                                             10
percentile CLTV. Figure 2 plots these five statistics every year between 1996 and 2015 and

illustrates the same steady distribution of CLTVs shown in the Figure 1 over the entire

time series. During this same period, house prices experienced a large run-up (up to 2005)

and subsequent collapse and recovery. Even while "V" and the frequency of new purchases

originations were changing dramatically over the time series (see Figure A3), the dollars

of mortgage debt per dollar of housing collateral being used to finance purchases was very

steady. Importantly, it is not the case that the mean stayed the same while the tails of

the distribution moved around. Specifically, what we do not see is a distribution where

the 75th and 95th percentiles of the distribution increased during the bubble. We obtain

a very similar picture when we value-weight each loan (Figure A4). There is an increase

in the 75th percentile in 2006 to 100% CLTV that is a reflection of the "discreteness" of

percentiles. Figure 1 shows that the CLTV distributions do not move in any significant way.



3.2   Government-guaranteed vs. private high-CLTV loans

The steadiness of CLTV ratios is perhaps unexpected given the documented increase in orig-

ination of private-sector mortgages with very low down payments during the housing boom.

This increase can be clearly seen in Panel A of Figure 3. The share of private-sector loans

with CLTVs  95% increases from less than ten percent of all origination to nearly thirty

percent of all purchase loans at the height of the housing boom in 2006. How can the share

of such high CLTV mortgages have increased so dramatically with no contemporaneous in-

crease in the distribution of CLTVs? The answer becomes clear in Panel B of the same

Figure.

   Panel B plots the share of all purchase loans guaranteed by the FHA and the VA that also

had CLTVs  95%. What this figure shows is that the share of all loans (both government

guaranteed and private-sector) with CLTVs  95% hardly budged during the housing boom.

And the steadiness of the CLTVs documented in Figure 2 becomes clear in light of this fact.

   Figure A5 provides another look at the role of government guaranteed loans in the mort-


                                            11
gage market. To create this figure we classified loans into one of five types. FHA- and

VA-guaranteed loans with CLTV either below 95% or not, and then all other loans. The key

takeaways from this figure are twofold. First, as seen in Panel B of Figure 3, the share of

loans guaranteed by FHA or VA dropped from 25% before the boom to about 5% during the

boom and then up to nearly 50% of all purchase loans in 2010. The second takeaway is that

almost all of the loans guaranteed by these two programs are very high CLTV loans. In no

year are fewer than 90% of FHA- and VA- insured loans mortgages with CLTVs of at least

95%.



4      Geographic Distribution of High-CLTV Loans

Section 3.1 shows that the share of purchase loans with high CLTV ratios did not change

over the time series, nor did the overall distribution of CLTVs. Despite wildly changing

house prices and dramatic shifts in purchase and mortgage origination activity, the debt

capacity of housing did not change. What did change was the share of high-CLTV loans

explicitly guaranteed by the government through the FHA and VA programs. This section

of the paper asks an important follow-up question: were the high-CLTV loans guaranteed

by the government before the boom and displaced by the private-sector in the boom going to

the same types of borrowers? Or does the steadiness of the CLTV distribution mask shifts

in where and to whom the high-CLTV loans were going?



4.1    Steady high-CLTV utilization within geographies

Panel A of Figure 4 plots ZIP codes with at least five purchase transactions with mortgages

in both 1999 and 2006. The figure shows a positive relationship between the share of loans

that were in 1999 guaranteed by either the FHA or the VA and the increase between 2006

and 1999 of the share of private-sector high-CLTV loans. The correlation between these two

variables is .464 and demonstrates that, within 5-digit ZIP codes, knowing the importance of


                                            12
government-guaranteed loans in the mortgage market is strongly predictive of the share of

the 2006 cohort of purchase loans that will be private-sector high-CLTV loans. This result

helps to rule out the possibility that the steadiness of the CLTV distribution is masking

shifts in the geographic distribution of high-CLTV loans. For example, it could have been

that high-CLTV, government-guaranteed loans were going to some parts of the country in

1999 (ZIP codes not in the sand states of AZ, CA, FL, and NV) and then, during the boom,

the private-sector's high-CLTV loans were all made to borrowers buying homes in the sand

states. But this is not consistent with the results in Panel A of Figure 4.

   Panel B of the figure moves along the time series and plots an analogous scatter plot

comparing the increase in share of purchase loans insured by the FHA or the VA during

the recovery to the share of loans that were in 2006 high-CLTV, private-sector mortgages.

As before, we document a strong correlation consistent with the idea that ZIP codes are

switching their source of high-CLTV loans from the government, to the private sector, and

then back to the government.

   We next use publicly available IRS data from 1998 to divide ZIP codes into ten population-

weighted deciles of adjusted gross income.

   To create Figure 5, we compute the share of purchase loans in each income decile that

are FHA/VA and private, high-CLTV. We compute these shares at three different points in

time: pre-boom (1999), boom (2006), and post-boom (2013). There are three key takeaways

from this figure. First, there is a downward trend in the use of high-CLTV mortgages as

income increase. Second, this downward trend stays roughly the same over the whole time

series. That is, within each income decile over time, the share of purchase loans that are

high-CLTV remains similar. Third, in contrast to the smoothness of the first two takeaways,

within each income decile over time the share of high-CLTV loans that are government

guaranteed goes from almost all of them, to almost none of them, and then back to almost

all of them.

   Rather than dividing ZIP codes by income, we next split the country's ZIP codes into


                                              13
ten deciles based on house price growth between June of 2002 and June of 2006. In Figure

A6, we use the same methodology used to create Figure 2 for the bottom two HP-growth

deciles and again for the top top deciles. If CLTVs were steady overall, but higher in high-

HP growth areas and lower in low-HP growth areas, this figure would reveal this pattern.

We find this is not the case. In both cases, the distributions are very steady.

   Finally, we split the United States into recourse states and non-recourse states. Figure

A7 again shows a steady-CLTV picture within both recourse and non-recourse states. This

suggests that the dynamics of collateral rates were not very affected by creditors' ability to

pursue legal action against defaulting borrowers.



4.2   Property characteristics by loan type

Despite the results above, it is possible that the quality of the collateral backing FHA and

private loans could be very different, so that different loans were used to purchase different

types of properties. In this section, we look at two characteristics ­ home age and home

size ­ of all properties traded over the time series. For two samples, the sample of homes

purchased using FHA-guaranteed loans and the sample of homes purchased using private,

high-CLTV loans, we calculate the distribution of age and square footage. We plot these dis-

tributions in Figure 6 demeaned at the ZIP-by-year level. We find that the characteristics of

homes financed using high-CLTV loans was similar over the time series, inconsistent with

a world where the provision of CLTV-credit changed dramatically during the boom. One ex-

ception is that homes financed with FHA-guaranteed loans became relatively larger during

the recovery. This makes sense since the private, high-CLTV market all but disappeared

and the FHA became the only source of high-LTV loans for all homes, not just small ones.



4.3   Within-property analysis

In order to rule out the possibility that unobservable geography-related characteristics

might be changing despite the stable CLTVs, we consider a sample of properties that traded

                                              14
both pre-boom and during the boom or both during the boom and the recovery period.

   Figure A8 shows a repeat-sales index of LTVs constructed using the same methodology

employed for measuring house prices over time (see, for example, Case and Shiller (1989)).

The figure shows that, within the same properties, changes in LTVs over time vary within a

band of 4 percentage points and are, if anything, inversely related to house price movements.

We obtain a very similar picture when we include bank-by-county fixed effects rather than

property fixed effects, suggesting that even within lenders the patterns are the same (Figure

A9).

   Next, we employ a different repeat-sales methodology to answer the question of whether

switching between private and public sources of high-CLTV loans occurred within proper-

ties. Our specification asks what the relationship is between the likelihood a property is

purchased with a high-CLTV private-sector loan during the boom if it was financed with a

government-guaranteed loan (FHA or VA) when purchased pre-boom. We run regressions

of the following form for each property i :



         High-CLTV i,2004-2007 = Govt Guarantee i,1996-2003 +  t +  t+1 +  County +  i ,   (1)


where  County represents county fixed effects to absorb differences across the country in av-

erage use of government-guaranteed mortgages, and  t and  t+1 represent year fixed effects

for the first and second transactions to absorb overall changes in the rate that borrowers

used different types of loans over time.

   We present some simple summary statistics in Table 1. We show that, among loans

taken out in the period 2004-2007 for this sample, 24% ((379,697 + 193,464) / (2,362,748))

were private, high-CLTV loans. Of properties financed with FHA/VA loans during the pre-

boom, 33.1% of them are financed with high-CLTV private loans during the boom, compared

to just 21.4% of properties that were not financed with government-guaranteed loans pre-

boom.

   The first column of Table 2 estimates the model in Equation 1 on the more than two


                                               15
million properties across the United States that were purchased by one household at some

point between 1996 and 2003 (pre-boom) and by a different household between 2004 and

2007 (boom). We restrict the sample to properties where both trades were at arm's length

and the buyer financed the purchase with a mortgage.

   We find a statistically significant and economically meaningful relationship. A property

is 11.4 percentage points more likely to be purchased with a high-CLTV private mortgage if

the property was purchased pre-boom with a government-guaranteed loan (comparable to

the unconditional results in Table 1.

   We run an analogous regression for the crisis and recovery period, focusing on those

properties traded first during the boom and then again during the recovery (2008-2015).



         Govt Guarantee i,2008-2015 = High-CLTV i,2004-2007 +  t +  t+1 +  County +  i     (2)


   The results are presented in the second column of Table 2 and are qualitatively very

similar to the pre-boom to boom test. In short, even at the property level, we document a

striking switching between government-guaranteed, high-CLTV mortgages and high-CLTV

mortgages provided by the private-sector. While it can be argued that the ZIP code corre-

lations might not be evidence of switching if the types of houses trading are dramatically

different pre- and post-boom compared to during the boom, that same argument struggles to

explain the results just presented, where the homes are not different, but, in fact, preciesly

the same.



4.4   High-CLTV loan choice by borrower types

We next turn to the characteristics of borrowers, including within-household analysis, debt-

to-income choice and loan delinquency. We start with a subsample of the deeds data within

which we can track households as they move. To build this data set, we merge the North

Carolina deeds data with the North Carolina voter registration records. The voter rolls data



                                              16
includes the address of the registered voter, and, if that voter moves within county, their

address is updated in their voter registration record. The results, presented in Table 3 and

Table 4, are analogous to those in Table 1 and Table 2 except instead of focusing on proper-

ties that transact twice, we use borrowing households that borrowed twice to purchase two

different properties.

      As with the property switching results, the unconditional results for borrower switch-

ing presented in Table 3 tell the same story. Borrowing households that use government-

guarantees for access to high-CLTV loans pre-boom switch to private, high-CLTV loans dur-

ing the boom. And those households that first purchase during the boom and use high-CLTV,

private mortgages switch to government-guaranteed mortgages post-boom. In North Car-

olina, 15.5% of households who did not use FHA or VA loans for their pre-boom mortgage

used a high-CLTV, private mortgage during the boom compared to 27% of households who

did. Similarly, the rate of use FHA or VA loans during the post-boom was 24.7% for those

borrowers that used high-CLTV, private mortgages for the boom purchase, compared to a

smaller 18% of borrowers that did not.

      The sample used to estimate the regressions is small but still produces magnitudes that

are both statistically and economically significant. Looking at the first specification in Table

4 we see that borrowers are 11.3 percentage points more likely to use a private-sector loan

with a high CLTV if their pre-boom loan was FHA- or VA-guaranteed. 17.1% ((1,026 + 282)

/ (7660)) of in-sample purchase mortgages originated in NC during the boom were private,

high-CLTV mortgages. So an 11.3 percentage point increase amounts to a 66% increase

from the mean. The model estimating switching in the second half of the time series finds a

6.74 percentage point increase or 34.7%7 increase from the mean.

      In Figure 7 we consider how the debt-to-income ratio (DTI) of FHA loans compares to

private high-CLTV loans of similar and higher credit scores at the peak of the housing

boom (2005-2007). DTI is computed as the share of a household's income that goes toward
  7
      .0674/[(1,686 + 613) / (11,858)]




                                              17
mortgage and mortgage-related expenses (like insurance). Panel A shows that FHA loans

have a DTI of around 37%, measured as payments relative to the mortgage (including FHA

insurance premia) as a share of monthly income. Panel B considers borrowers with a credit

score below 660 and shows that those borrowers carry higher DTIs of around 39% to 40%.

This is consistent with more aggressive lending standards by subprime lenders, particularly

those who specialized in these types of loans. Middle and high credit score borrowers have

either equal or lower debt-to-income as FHA loans.

   We obtain similar results when we consider the Survey of Consumer Finances data. We

focus on recent movers (those who moved in the previous 2 years) and all mortgage-related

payments. The results are in Table 5. We find that, on average, FHA loans are associated

with lower debt-to-income (measured as mortgage-related payments divided by income),

but that this difference becomes smaller and insignificant in the boom. The interest rate

between FHA and private, high-CLTV loans is also small and insignificant during the boom.

Finally, FHA borrowers are more likely to state that the reason for choosing their loan was

that this was the only loan they were able to qualify for although, again, this difference

decreases during the boom.



4.5   Performance of Government-Guaranteed and Private, High-CLTV

      Loans

In this section, we investigate the ex-post performance of high-CLTV loans guaranteed by

the government versus those provided by the private-sector. If the two two types of mort-

gages were not being used interchangeably by the same types of borrowers in the same types

of places, we would expect to see differential delinquency rates. This is not what we find.

   Figure 8 plots the share of loans of each type by origination-year cohort that are at some

point 90+ days delinquent within three years of origination. As expected, private-sector

loans with CLTVs < 95% have significantly lower delinquency rates than any loan with a

CLTV  95%. Strikingly, though, is the finding that within cohort the rates of delinquency

                                             18
for FHA/VA loans is the same as for private loans with CLTVs  95%. This remains true

when we control for county-by-year fixed effects (Panel B) and county-be-year fixed effects,

FICO, interest rate, loan type, and DTI (Panel C). This means that, when we do a compari-

son of loans made in the same areas and to similar borrowers, the delinquency rates of the

two types of loans are very similar.



5        Loan and Leverage Choice by Optimists and Pessimists

In this section we consider whether there was a change in how optimists and pessimists sort

into high-CLTV loans over the credit cycle. This analysis addresses one of the important

mechanisms in Geanakoplos (2010), whereby buyers that value assets more bid up prices

when they have access to more leverage. We follow the approach developed by Puri and

Robinson (2007) to measure optimism based on self-assessed life expectancy from the Survey

of Consumer Finances. After controlling for observable characteristics like age, education,

and income, the size and sign of the residual allows us to sort people cross-sectionally into

optimistic versus pessimistic types (see also Heimer et al. (2019)). It is important to note

that this measure of optimism cannot capture longitudinal variation, i.e., we cannot ask

whether the population overall becomes more or less optimistic over time. But the measure

does pick up information about an individual's outlook in life, and it correlates with whether

people think the economy will do well in the next year, which is something people do not have

any control over (Figure A11).

        We use this data for two purposes. First, we are interested in whether optimists were

significantly more likely to take on high LTV loans during the boom.8 Second, we look

at changes in LTV, debt-to-income inclusive of all mortgage payments (including mortgage

insurance), current interest rate and reason for choosing a loan.

        We start by showing that the percentage of optimists taking on high LTV loans in the
    8
   Our focus is on the time series of LTV choice by pessimists and optimists. (Bailey et al., 2019) consider
LTV choice in the cross-section by these two groups using social network data from Facebook.



                                                    19
pre-period versus the boom did not change significantly (Figure A12). The highest two quin-

tiles of optimism together make 45% of the high LTV loan prior to the boom and stay at

47% during the height of the boom. A similar picture emerges when looking at low LTV

loans, again we do not see a strong dislocation of high-CLTV credit towards more optimistic

borrowers.

    In Figure 9 we break out the presence of optimists versus pessimists among FHA and

private high-CLTV loans. Interestingly, we find that optimists maintained stable propor-

tions among these two types of loans. In Figure A13 of the Online Appendix we show that

the choice of high-LTV loans is more frequent for optimists across all income quintiles when

we do a two-way split by optimism and income quintiles both in the pre period and in the

boom.



6    Changes in the Share of Private, High-CLTV Loans

     and House Price Increases

One question that our results raise is whether the changes in the source of high-CLTV loans

are merely correlated with the house price cycle, or if there is a causal link between the two.

While we cannot provide a definitive answer to this question, one natural approach is to ask

which comes first ­ the change in house prices or the switch from FHA/VA to private sources

for high-CLTV loans. We show the results of this analysis in Figure 10 and Table 6. In both

cases we find that the increase in house prices during the housing boom precedes the large

increase in private high leverage lending rather than the reverse.

    Figure 10 sorts ZIP codes into deciles based on the house price growth between 2002 and

2006 and plots both house price growth and the change in private high-CLTV share at the

ZIP code level. The three panels split the time period of 1999-2006 into three subperiods

(the first four years and then 2003-2004 and 2005-2006). The figure shows clearly that

changes in house prices were higher for the top deciles both in the beginning of the period


                                              20
and in the middle, whereas the changes in private high-CLTV share only sort on house

prices strongly at the end of the period. While it is, of course, possible that prices rose in

anticipation of looser credit, this simple analysis suggests that it is more likely that higher

prices were, instead, the reason behind the reduction in FHA-VA share and the increase

in the private high-CLTV segment (possibly because these allowed borrowers to participate

in "hotter" markets). These results are consistent with Ferreira and Gyourko (2011) who

show that increases in subprime lending happen after prices start rising more significantly

in most neighborhoods in the U.S.

    In Table 6 we use the same instrument developed in Palmer (2015) and Guren et al.

(2018) to generate a cross-section of commuting zones (CZ) in the U.S. by their propensity to

exhibit large house price movements. Panel A shows that the instrument is highly predictive

of house prices. In Panels B and C we look at how the instrument sorts CZs based on changes

in the FHA-VA share and changes in private high-CLTV loans. As in the previous analysis,

we see that the increase in private high-leverage loans is only related to the places with

larger price movements at the peak of the boom and not before. This suggests that it is

unlikely that the switch to high CLTV-private loans was causally responsible for the higher

prices. Instead it appears that they were the results of increasing house prices.



7    Changes in the Distribution of Lenders

We also ask whether the types of lenders that provide either FHA/VA loans or private high-

CLTV loans were previously not available in certain neighborhoods and thus the choice of

which type of mortgage to take was constrained across borrowers. We therefore investigate

if the composition of mortgage lenders that were available changed within neighborhoods.

For this purposes we use data on the loans made by individual lenders from Corelogic. The

sample is restricted to the largest lenders in the CoreLogic database, those that originated at

least 1000 purchase mortgages during our time period. These leaves us with approximately



                                              21
3,000 lenders that made just over 90% of all loans.

    In Panel A of Table 7, we calculate, for each lender-year, the share of their mortgage

originations that were FHA- or VA- insured. We then tabulate the share of FHA/VA loans

over time, made by lenders that were high or low intensity provides of high-LTV loans.

We see that across the board mortgage lenders significantly reduced their reliance on FHA

loans, which is in line with our prior findings. For example the median lender went from

9.1% FHA loans to under 2%. This is even more dramatic for lenders that were more focused

on FHA lending before. For example, lenders at the 75th percentage went from 37% FHA

loans to under 15%. In Panel B we then calculate the share of loans provided by these

lenders that were high-CLTV. Say the median lender's new high-CLTV originations were

25% in 2001 and 30.7%. The time series is similarly stable for other levels of high-CLTV

lenders. The results suggest that a majority of the switch from FHA to private high-CLTV

mortgages happened within existing lenders. In other words, private high-CLTV loans were

not a function of new lenders entering different markets. Instead borrowers had a choice

between these loans from the same banks all along.



8    Conclusion

This paper shows that the distribution of CLTVs ratios for purchase mortgages has been un-

changed in the U.S. for the last two decades. Even during the height of the housing boom of

the 2000s the CLTV distribution in the U.S. did not become more skewed towards highly lev-

ered loans. The reason for this stability is that a significant fraction of households already

had access to loans with very high CLTV levels prior to the boom via directly government

guaranteed mortgages such as FHA and VA programs. We show that the increase in private-

sector high-CLTV loans almost one for one replaced the share of FHA and VA loans. After

the 2008 crisis, when privately securitized credit dried up again, we see FHA/VA loans go

back up and become a significant share of the market. In addition, this shift from directly



                                             22
government backed high-CLTV loans to privately securitized loans follows house price in-

creases at the ZIP code level but does not lead them. These findings fit the predictions of

the collateral channel that empirical models of the housing market will be broadly accurate

in assuming relatively stable collateral ratios, as is the case in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997)).

In contrast, the leverage channel--Geanakoplos (2010)--is muted in the US since borrow-

ers can access very high CLTV loans through directly government guaranteed mortgage

programs.

   However the exact nature in which loans are guaranteed may be important in under-

standing how the slow down in house prices affected financial markets and ultimately the

economy. On the one hand, double trigger models of default explicitly consider separately

the roles of debt overhang and ability to pay as triggers of mortgage defaults (see Foote and

Willen (2018) for a review of this literature and Mayer et al. (2009) for a more real-time

analysis). In addition, the fact that high-CLTV loans went from being explicitly guaranteed

by the government during some periods (through FHA/VA insurance) and then became pri-

vately securitized may have implications for the types of risks that the mortgage markets

originates and the overall financial stability. Private securitization might create misaligned

incentives to underwrite risky mortgages, especially if participants expect implicit govern-

ment guarantees through too-big-to-fail or other government backstops.




                                             23
References
A DELINO, M., S CHOAR , A., AND S EVERINO, F. 2016. Loan originations and defaults in the
  mortgage crisis: The role of the middle class. The Review of Financial Studies 29(7):1635­
  1670.

A DELINO, M., S CHOAR , A., AND S EVERINO, F. 2017. Dynamics of housing debt in the
  recent boom and bust. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 32:261­311.

A DELINO, M., S CHOAR , A., AND S EVERINO, F. 2018. The role of housing and mortgage
  markets in the financial crisis. Annual Review of Financial Economics 10:25­41.

A GARWAL , S., B EN -D AVID, I., AND YAO, V. 2015. Collateral valuation and borrower finan-
  cial constraints: Evidence from the residential real estate market. Management Science
  61:2220­2240.

A LBANESI , S., D E G IORGI , G., AND N OSAL , J. 2019. Credit growth and the financial crisis:
  A new narrative. Working paper.

A RAGON, D., C APLIN, A., C HOPRA , S., L EAHY, J. V., L E C UN, Y., S COFFIER , M., AND
  T RACY, J. 2010. Reassessing FHA risk. Nber working paper.

B AILEY, M., D ÁVILA , E., K UCHLER , T., AND S TROEBEL , J. 2019. House price beliefs and
  mortgage leverage choice. The Review of Economic Studies 86:2403­2452.

B ERNANKE , B. AND G ERTLER , M. 1989. Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations.
  The American Economic Review 79:14­31.

B ERNANKE , B., G ERTLER , M., AND G ILCHRIST, S. 1999. The financial accelerator in a
  quantitative business cycle framework. Handbook of Macroeconomics 1:1341­1393.

B ERNSTEIN, A. 2018. Negative equity, household debt overhang, and labor supply. Working
  paper.

C AMPBELL , J. Y. AND C OCCO, J. F. 2007. How do house prices affect consumption? evidence
  from micro data. Journal of monetary Economics 54:591­621.

C ASE , K. E. AND S HILLER , R. J. 1989. The efficiency of the market for single-family homes.
  The American Economic Review pp. 125­137.

C ORBAE , D. AND Q UINTIN, E. 2015. Leverage and the foreclosure crisis. Journal of Political
  Economy 123:1­65.

D EMYANYK , Y. AND VAN H EMERT, O. 2009. Understanding the subprime mortgage crisis.
  The Review of Financial Studies 24:1848­1880.

FAVILUKIS, J., L UDVIGSON, S. C., AND VAN N IEUWERBURGH , S. 2017. The macroeco-
  nomic effects of housing wealth, housing finance, and limited risk sharing in general
  equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy 125:140­223.


                                              24
F ERREIRA , F. AND G YOURKO, J. 2011. Anatomy of the beginning of the housing boom: Us
  neighborhoods and metropolitan areas, 1993-2009. Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

F ERREIRA , F. AND G YOURKO, J. 2015. A new look at the us foreclosure crisis: Panel data
  evidence of prime and subprime borrowers from 1997 to 2012. Working paper.

F OOTE , C. L. AND W ILLEN, P. S. 2018. Mortgage-default research and the recent foreclo-
  sure crisis. Annual Review of Financial Economics 10:59­100.

G EANAKOPLOS, J. 1997. Promises, promises. The economy as an evolving complex system
  II 27:285.

G EANAKOPLOS, J. 2010. The leverage cycle. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 24:1­66.

G ERARDI , K., L EHNERT, A., S HERLUND, S. M., AND W ILLEN, P. 2008. Making sense of
  the subprime crisis. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2008:69­159.

G LAESER , E. L., G OTTLIEB, J. D., AND G YOURKO, J. 2012. Can cheap credit explain the
  housing boom?, pp. 301­359. In Housing and the financial crisis. University of Chicago
  Press.

G REENWALD, D. 2018. The mortgage credit channel of macroeconomic transmission. Work-
  ing paper.

G REENWOOD, R., H ANSON, S. G., S HLEIFER , A., AND S ØRENSEN, J. A. 2020. Predictable
  financial crises. Technical report, Harvard Business School Working Paper.

G UERRIERI , V. AND U HLIG, H. 2016. Housing and credit markets: booms and busts, pp.
  1427­1496. In Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 2. Elsevier.

G UREN, A. M., M C K AY, A., N AKAMURA , E., AND S TEINSSON, J. 2018. Housing wealth
  effects: The long view. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

H EIMER , R. Z., M YRSETH , K. O. R., AND S CHOENLE , R. S. 2019. Yolo: Mortality beliefs
  and household finance puzzles. The Journal of Finance 74:2957­2996.

J USTINIANO, A., P RIMICERI , G. E., AND T AMBALOTTI , A. 2015. Household leveraging and
   deleveraging. Review of Economic Dynamics 18:3­20.

J USTINIANO, A., P RIMICERI , G. E., AND T AMBALOTTI , A. 2019. Credit supply and the
   housing boom. Journal of Political Economy 127:1317­1350.

K EYS, B. J., P ISKORSKI , T., S ERU, A., AND V IG, V. 2012. Mortgage financing in the housing
  boom and bust, pp. 143­204. In Housing and the Financial Crisis. University of Chicago
  Press.

K IM , Y. S., L AUFER , S. M., S TANTON, R., WALLACE , N., AND P ENCE , K. 2018. Liquidity
   crises in the mortgage market. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2018:347­428.


                                             25
K IYOTAKI , N. AND M OORE , J. 1997. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy 105:211­
   248.

K RISHNAMURTHY, A. AND M UIR , T. 2017. How credit cycles across a financial crisis. Tech-
  nical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

K RUGER , S. AND M ATURANA , G. Forthcoming. Collateral misreporting in the rmbs market.
  Management Science .

L A C OUR -L ITTLE , M. 2007. The home purchase mortgage preferences of low-and moderate-
   income households. Real Estate Economics 35:265­290.

L ANDVOIGT, T., P IAZZESI , M., AND S CHNEIDER , M. 2015. The housing market(s) of san
  diego. American Economic Review 105:1371­1407.

M AYER , C., P ENCE , K., AND S HERLUND, S. M. 2009. The rise in mortgage defaults. Jour-
  nal of Economic perspectives 23:27­50.

M IAN, A., R AO, K., AND S UFI , A. 2013. Household balance sheets, consumption, and the
  economic slump. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128:1687­1726.

M IAN, A. AND S UFI , A. 2011. House prices, home equity-based borrowing, and the us
  household leverage crisis. American Economic Review 101:2132­56.

M IAN, A., S UFI , A., AND V ERNER , E. 2017. Household debt and business cycles worldwide.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132:1755­1817.

PALMER , C. 2015. Why did so many subprime borrowers default during the crisis: Loose
  credit or plummeting prices? Available at SSRN 2665762 .

P INTO, E. J. 2010. Government housing policies in the lead-up to the financial crisis: A
   forensic study. Discussion Draft. Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute.

P URI , M. AND R OBINSON, D. T. 2007. Optimism and economic choice. Journal of financial
  economics 86:71­99.




                                            26
               Figure 1: Cumulative Distribution Functions of CLTVs

This figure shows cumulative distribution of combined loan-to-value ratios in CoreLogic for
all loans (Panel A) and for those that are not classified as either FHA or VA (Panel B). This
includes Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, any privately securitized loans, or loans held on the
portfolios of private financial institutions.




                                             27
                          Figure 2: A Steady Distribution of Purchase Loan CLTV Ratios Over Time

     This figure plots the combined loan-to-value ratios (CLTVs) of the universe of purchase transactions financed with at least
     some debt covered in the CoreLogic deeds data between 1996 and 2015. Each purchase transaction includes data on up to
     three mortgages, one primary mortgage and up to two piggyback mortgages. The percentiles and mean are calculated using all
     purchase loans originated in the calendar year.
28
                   Figure 3: Share of all Purchase Loans by Year

In this figure purchase loans are grouped into one of four types: FHA- with CLTV  95%,
VA-guaranteed with CLTV  95%, and all other loans with CLTV  95%. The top figure plots
the share of all purchase loans were not explicitly government guaranteed and had CLTV
ratios  95%. The second plot adds the share of high-CLTV loans explicitly guaranteed by
the government.




                                          29
             Figure 4: Change in ZIP Code Level Share of Loan Types

This first panel of this figure plots ZIP codes based on the share of 1999 purchase loans in
that ZIP code that were FHA- or VA-guaranteed (on the x-axis) and the difference between
the share 2006 purchase loans in that ZIP code that were not FHA or VA and had CLTVs
 95% and the share of such loans in 1999 (on the y-axis). The second panel of this figure
plots ZIP codes based on the share of 2006 purchase loans in that ZIP code that were not
FHA or VA and had CLTVs  95% (on the x-axis) and the difference in the share of 2013
purchase loans guaranteed by either the FHA or VA and the share of such loans in 2006.
(on the y-axis).




                                            30
              Figure 5: Share Government-Guaranteed and Private Sector across Incomes Deciles over Time

     To produce this graph we created ten deciles of 1998-ZIP code income. Deciles are population weighted such that each decile
     contains ten percent of the population of the United States. For each year, we calculate the share of purchase loans that are
     guaranteed by the government and the share that private-sector with CLTVs  95%. The ZIP-code level income data is from
     the IRS, https://www.irs.gov/statistics/soi-tax-stats-individual-income-tax-statistics-zip-code-data-soi.
31
        Figure 6: Age and Square Footage of Homes Purchased Each Year

The first figure plots the distribution of home age of homes purchased year by year, the
second figure plots square footage. Both variables are de-meaned by the average home age
and square footage of homes sold in the same ZIP code-by-year. Included are purchases
financed with FHA loans (blue) and homes purchased with non-FHA/VA loans and CLTVs
 95% (red).




                                          32
                              Figure 7: Debt-to-Income by Loan-to-Value, 2005-2007 Originations

     Figure shows point estimates and standard errors for debt-to-income levels regressed on loan-to-value bin indicators. Figure
     only includes full documentation loans and loans with a combined loan-to-value ratio above 90%. Data comes from First
     American LoanPerformance, McDash Analytics.


                                 Panel A: FHA loans                     Panel B: Non-FHA loans, Credit score  660
33




                 Panel C: Non-FHA loans, 660 < Credit score  720        Panel D: Non-FHA loans, Credit score > 720
         Figure 8: Share 90+ Days Delinquent Within 3 Years of Origination

These figure uses McDash data starting in the second half of 2005 to plot the delinquency rates
of private mortgages relative to those guaranteed by the government. The first figure calculates,
year by year, the share of loans originated within each category that were 90+ days delinquent
at some point in the three years after origination. The second figure includes county-by-year fixed
effects and plots private-sector mortgage delinquency rates relative to government guaranteed loans'
delinquency rates. The third panel further adds controls for credit score, interest rate, loan type, and
DTI. Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.


                           Panel A: Unconditional Delinquency Share




                                   Panel B: Within Zip-by-Year




                                Panel C: Full Credit Scoring Model




                                                  34
        Figure 9: Are Optimists Switching Within High-LTV Loan Types?

Data is from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Optimism is measured using as in
Puri and Robinson (2007). The pre-period uses SCF waves 1995, 1998, and 2001. The boom
period uses SCF waves 2004 and 2007; Bust 2010 wave, and Post 2013 and 2016 waves.
High-LTV borrowers are those who report outstanding mortgage balances valued at more
than 80% of the value of their home.




                                         35
    Figure 10: Changes in Private, High-CLTV Share by House Price Change

Figure shows averages of house price changes and the change of high-CLTV purchase loans
at the ZIP code level. ZIP codes are grouped into deciles by the change in house prices
between 2002 and 2006.


                             Panel A: 1999-2002 (4 years)




                             Panel B: 2003-2004 (2 years)




                             Panel C: 2005-2006 (2 years)




                                          36
                                 Table 1: Summary Statistics of Properties Transacting Twice

     This table uses CoreLogic data and presents counts and shares by type of mortgage originated in the 1996-2003, 2004-2007, and
     2008-2015 periods for those properties that saw exactly one transaction during the boom and exactly one transaction pre-boom
     (panel A) or post-boom (panel B).


                 Sample:                      Properties with 1 purchase in 96-03 and 1 purchase in 04-07
                                                                           04-07 Loan
                                                        NOT Private, CLTV  95%      IS Private, CLTV  95%


                                                                1,398,185                      379,697       1,777,882
                                   NOT FHA/VA
                                                                  78.6%                         21.4%          100%
                 96-03 Loan
                                                                 391,460                       193,464        584,924
                                    IS FHA/VA
                                                                  66.9%                         33.1%          100%
37




                 Sample:                      Properties with 1 purchase in 04-07 and 1 purchase in 08-15
                                                                              08-15 Loan
                                                               Not FHA/VA                     IS FHA/VA


                                                                 286,135                       164,593        450,728
                              NOT Private, CLTV  95%
                                                                  63.5%                         36.5%          100%
                 04-07 Loan
                                                                  95,383                        88,417        183,800
                               IS Private, CLTV  95%
                                                                  51.9%                         48.1%          100%
                           Table 2: Switching between Loan Types (Properties Transacting Twice)

     This table uses CoreLogic data. The first sample includes all those properties we observe trade at arms-length exactly one
     time in the period 1996-2003 and exactly one time in the period 2004-2007. The second sample is analogous for the periods
     2004-2007 and 2008-2015. Standard errors clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients significant
     at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are marked with a *, **, and ***, respectively.


            Sample:                               Properties with 1 purchase in 96-03    Properties with 1 purchase in 04-07
                                                       and 1 purchase in 04-07                and 1 purchase in 08-15


            Dependent Variable:                 04-07 Loan is Private with CLTV  95%           08-15 Loan is FHA/VA


            96-03 Loan FHA or VA                               0.114***
                                                                (0.007)
            04-07 Loan Private with CLTV  95%                                                        0.0941***
38




                                                                                                      (0.006)
            Fixed Effects
            County                                                Y                                      Y
            Year of First Loan                                    Y                                      Y
            Year of Second Loan                                   Y                                      Y

            N                                                 2,362,748                               634,495
            R-squared                                           0.098                                  0.088
                    Table 3: Summary Statistics for Households in North Carolina with Two Transactions

     This table uses CoreLogic data and voter registration data from North Carolina. The table presents counts and shares of certain
     types of mortgages originated in the 1996-2003, 2004-2007, and 2008-2015 periods for those households that made exactly one
     purchase transaction during the boom and exactly one purchase transaction pre-boom (panel A) or post-boom (panel B).


                  Sample:                   NC Households with 1 purchase in 96-03 and 1 purchase in 04-07
                                                                             04-07 Loan
                                                          NOT Private, CLTV  95%      IS Private, CLTV  95%


                                                                    5,593                        1,026          6,619
                                     NOT FHA/VA
                                                                    84.5%                        15.5%          100%
                  96-03 Loan
                                                                     763                          282           1,045
                                      IS FHA/VA
                                                                    73.0%                        27.0%          100%
39




                  Sample:                   NC Households with 1 purchase in 04-07 and 1 purchase in 08-15
                                                                               08-15 Loan
                                                                 Not FHA/VA                    IS FHA/VA


                                                                    7,690                        1,686          9,376
                               NOT Private, CLTV  95%
                                                                    82.0%                        18.0%          100%
                  04-07 Loan
                                                                    1,874                         613           2,487
                                IS Private, CLTV  95%
                                                                    75.4%                        24.7%          100%
                     Table 4: Switching Loan Types (Households in North Carolina with Two Transactions)

     This table uses CoreLogic and voter registration data from North Carolina. The first sample includes all those households
     we observe take out exactly one loan in the period 1996-2003 at one property and exactly one loan in the period 2004-2007 at
     another property in North Carolina. The second sample is analogous for the periods 2004-2007 and 2008-2015. Standard errors
     clustered at the county level are reported in parentheses. Coefficients significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are marked
     with a *, **, and ***, respectively.


         Sample:                              NC Households with 1 purchase in 96-03   NC Households with 1 purchase in 04-07
                                                    and 1 purchase in 04-07                  and 1 purchase in 08-15


         Dependent Variable:                  04-07 Loan is Private with CLTV  95%             08-15 Loan is FHA/VA


         96-03 Loan FHA or VA                               0.113***
                                                             (0.014)
40




         04-07 Loan Private with CLTV  95%                                                           0.0674***
                                                                                                      (0.011)
         Fixed Effects
         County                                                 Y                                        Y
         Year of First Loan                                     Y                                        Y
         Year of Second Loan                                    Y                                        Y

         N                                                    7,660                                   11,858
         R-squared                                            0.031                                    0.054
Table 5: Characteristics of FHA and private, high-CLTV loans in the Survey of
Consumer Finances

Data is from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Optimism is measured using as in Puri and
Robinson (2007). The pre-period uses SCF waves 1995, 1998, and 2001. The boom period uses
SCF waves 2004 and 2007; Bust: 2010 wave, and Post: 2013 and 2016 waves. Sample is restricted to
borrowers who purchased a home in the previous two years with non-missing LTV and have reported
mortgage balances of more than 80% of the value of their home. Age, race, education level and
gender fixed effects included in all regressions. DTI represents all mortgage-related payments by
the household scaled by annual income, and "Only qualify" is an indicator variable for whether the
household reports choosing the loan or the lender because it was "easier to qualify" or was the only
option they qualified for. Standard errors clustered at the age and year level. Coefficients significant
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels are marked with a *, **, and ***, respectively.

                                    LTV          DTI       Interest rate   Only qualify
              FHA                 0.027***    -0.010***      -40.6***        0.105**
                                   (0.001)     (0.002)        (12.4)         (0.046)

              Boom period         0.016***      0.046*      -170.0***         -0.014
                                   (0.002)      (0.025)       (18.7)         (0.036)

              Crisis period       0.030***     0.029***     -270.0***        -0.064**
                                   (0.004)      (0.006)       (7.2)           (0.032)

              Recovery period      0.018*        0.008      -400.0***         -0.011
                                   (0.010)      (0.016)       (13.5)         (0.039)

              FHA#Boom            -0.019**       0.007       30.1***         -0.083*
                                   (0.008)      (0.012)       (8.3)          (0.050)

              FHA#Crisis          -0.009***    0.027***      42.8***          -0.023
                                   (0.003)      (0.007)       (7.2)          (0.053)

              FHA#Recovery        -0.032***    0.019***      39.9***          -0.074
                                   (0.010)      (0.003)       (12.6)         (0.053)

              DTI                                              44.9           0.137
                                                              (30.8)         (0.118)

              LTV                                             64.6*          0.204**
                                                              (33.8)         (0.083)
              Fixed effects                   Age, Race, Education, Gender
              N                     5,130       5,081         5,070           5,081
              r2                     0.10       0.19          0.64            0.10




                                                  41
    Table 6: Changes in HP and Private, High-CLTV Loans on HP Instrument

Table shows regressions by sub-periods (in 2-year intervals) of changes in three outcome
variables (shown in panel titles) at the commuting zone level on the gamma instrument in
Guren et al. (2018). Heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors and t-statistics shown.

                                Panel A: Change in HP



                  Period:     00-02    02-04    04-06    06-08    08-10
                  Gamma       0.054    0.185    0.111    -0.124   -0.141
                              0.016    0.030    0.013     0.019    0.012
                               3.45     6.10     8.84     -6.37   -11.52
                  N            150      175      229       285      305
                  R-squared    0.11     0.43     0.21      0.32     0.44

                              Panel B: Change in FHA/VA



                  Period:     00-02    02-04    04-06    06-08    08-10
                  Gamma       -0.147   -0.152   -0.169   12.508   -0.173
                               0.024    0.032   0.042    3.387     0.022
                               -6.10    -4.78    -4.00    3.69     -7.77
                  N             149      168      223     281       301
                  R-squared     0.23     0.00     0.03    0.03      0.14

                      Panel C: Change in Private, high CLTV loans

                  Period:     00-02    02-04    04-06    06-08    08-10
                  Gamma       0.026    0.101    0.433    -2.302   0.029
                              0.049    0.065    0.076     0.714   0.045
                               0.53     1.54     5.72     -3.23    0.65
                  N            149      173      220       270     302
                  R-squared    0.00     0.00     0.16      0.03    0.00




                                           42
           Table 7: Distributions in the Share of Loan Types by Lenders

This table describes distributions of the fraction of loans that each lender makes in a given
year that are of a given type. The sample is restricted to the largest lenders in the CoreLogic
database, those that originated at least 1000 purchase mortgages during the time series.
These approximately 3,000 lenders made just over 90% of all loans. To create Panel A,
we calculate, for each lender-year, the share of their originations that were FHA- or VA-
insured. We then list some important statisitics of that distribution. For example, of the
loans originated in 2001 by the median lender, 9.1% were FHA- or VA-insured. Panel B
calculates the share of loans that were high-CLTV. That is, in 2007, the median lender's
new originations were 30.7% high-CLTV.

      Panel A: Distributions of the Fraction of Loans Each Lender Makes that are FHA or VA

    Year   5th Percentile   25th Percentile   50th Percentile   75th Percentile   95th Percentile
    2001       0.0%              0.0%              9.1%             36.8%             78.7%
    2002       0.0%              0.0%              6.5%             30.9%             68.9%
    2003       0.0%              0.0%              3.8%             25.0%             62.3%
    2004       0.0%              0.0%              2.3%             17.8%             53.9%
    2005       0.0%              0.0%              1.4%             12.0%             44.7%
    2006       0.0%              0.0%              1.0%             11.9%             45.2%
    2007       0.0%              0.0%              1.8%             14.7%             50.0%


    Panel B: Distributions of the Fraction of Loans Each Lender Makes that have CLTVs > 95%

    Year   5th Percentile   25th Percentile   50th Percentile   75th Percentile   95th Percentile
    2001       0.0%             7.5%              25.0%             45.7%             83.6%
    2002       0.0%             7.9%              24.1%             42.9%             76.0%
    2003       0.0%             7.5%              22.8%             41.3%             75.0%
    2004       0.0%             7.8%              22.1%             38.2%             70.0%
    2005       0.0%             9.5%              22.8%             38.3%             69.8%
    2006       0.0%             13.6%             29.2%             45.3%             75.0%
    2007       0.0%             14.7%             30.7%             46.2%             75.0%




                                                 43
A    Online Appendix ­ Supplemental Tables

                     Figure A1: Use of Junior Liens Over Time

This figure plots the share of all home purchases financed, as per the deeds records, with
more than one mortgage among home purchases financed with at least one mortgage. These
second and third mortgages are often called "piggyback" mortgages.




                                           44
                       Figure A2: Cash Purchases Over Time

This figure plots the share of all home purchases financed, as per the deeds records, with
100% cash.




                                           45
    Figure A3: Frequency of New Purchase Mortgage Originations over Time

This figure plots the frequency of all home purchases financed with mortgages between 1996
and 2015.




                                           46
                     Figure A4: Value-Weighted Distributions of Purchase Loan CLTV Ratios Over Time

     This figure plots the combined loan-to-value ratios (CLTVs) of the universe of purchase transactions financed with at least
     some debt covered in the CoreLogic deeds data between 1996 and 2015. Loans are weighted by loan amount. Each purchase
     transaction includes data on up to three mortgages, one primary mortgage and up to two piggyback mortgages. The percentiles
     and mean are calculated using all purchase loans originated in the calendar year.
47
                              Figure A5: A Changing Share of Government-Guaranteed Mortgages

     To produce this figure, purchase loans are grouped into one of five types, the four explicitly plotted below and everything else.
     The figure plots the share of each type totaling up to 100% of all purchase loans. Data is from CoreLogic.
48
                                   Figure A6: Comparing Low- and High-HP Growth Regions

     These figures plot the combined loan-to-value ratios (CLTVs) of the universe of purchase transactions financed with at least
     some debt covered in the CoreLogic deeds data between 1996 and 2015. Each purchase transaction includes data on up to
     three mortgages, one primary mortgage and up to two piggyback mortgages. The percentiles and mean are calculated using all
     purchase loans originated in the calendar year. States are classified as low-HP growth regions corresponding to the bottom two
     deciles of house price growth between June of 2002 and June of 2006 (left panel), or high-HP growth regions, corresponding to
     the top two deciles (right panel).


                  Panel A: Bottom 2 HP Growth Deciles                           Panel B: Top 2 HP Growth Deciles
49
                                    Figure A7: Comparing Recourse and Non-Recourse States

     These figures plot the combined loan-to-value ratios (CLTVs) of the universe of purchase transactions financed with at least
     some debt covered in the CoreLogic deeds data between 1996 and 2015. Each purchase transaction includes data on up to
     three mortgages, one primary mortgage and up to two piggyback mortgages. The percentiles and mean are calculated using
     all purchase loans originated in the calendar year. States are classified as either recourse (left panel) or non-recourse (right
     panel).
50
                                Figure A8: CLTV Repeat Sales Index (Relative to 2001 Baseline)

     This figure plots a CLTV repeat sales index relative to a 2001 baseline. The construction is analogous to the standard house
     price index. CLTVs of purchase loans are regressed on year fixed effects and, importantly, property fixed effects. In this way,
     CLTV differences are calculated using only within-property variation over time. The estimates and standard errors of each
     year's effect are graphed below.
51
                             Figure A9: CLTV Lender-by-County Index (Relative to 2001 Baseline)

     This figure plots a CLTV index relative to a 2001 baseline. Instead of property fixed effects as used in Figure A8, this figure
     includes lender-by-county fixed effects. In this way, CLTV differences are calculated using only variation with lender-by-county
     loans over time. The estimates and standard errors of each year's effect are graphed below.
52
                            Figure A10: Debt-to-Income by Loan-to-Value, 2011-2015 Originations

     Figure shows point estimates and standard errors for debt-to-income levels regressed on loan-to-value bin indicators. Figure
     only includes full documentation loans and loans with a combined loan-to-value ratio above 90%. Data comes from First
     American LoanPerformance, McDash Analytics.


                                 Panel A: FHA loans                     Panel B: Non-FHA loans, Credit score  660
53




                 Panel C: Non-FHA loans, 660 < Credit score  720        Panel D: Non-FHA loans, Credit score > 720
                 Figure A11: Optimism and outlook on the economy

Figure shows the percentage of individuals who believe the economy will improve over the
subsequent 12 months. Optimism is measured using a residual of life expectancy after
controlling for year fixed effects, as well as observable individual characteristics like age,
income, education, gender, smoker status and perceived health status. Deciles are formed
using survey weights. Data is from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) waves between
1998 and 2016.




                                             54
               Figure A12: Do Optimists Choose Higher LTV Loans

Data is from the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). Optimism is measured using as in
Puri and Robinson (2007). The pre-period uses SCF waves 1995, 1998, and 2001. The boom
period uses SCF waves 2004 and 2007; Bust 2010 wave, and Post 2013 and 2016 waves.
High-LTV borrowers are those who report outstanding mortgage balances valued at more
than 80% of the value of their home, low-LTV otherwise.




                                         55
             Figure A13: Income-by-optimism choice of High-LTV Loans

Table shows the share of households purchasing a home in the last two years with a high-
LTV loan (FHA or private) in each period. High-LTV borrowers are those who report out-
standing mortgage balances valued at more than 80% of the value of their home. Shares
sum to one by income quintile. Optimism is measured using a residual of life expectancy
after controlling for year fixed effects, as well as observable individual characteristics like
age, income, education, gender, smoker status and perceived health status. The pre-period
uses SCF waves 1995, 1998, and 2001. The boom period uses SCF waves 2004 and 2007.
Quintiles of income and optimism are formed using survey weights.




                                              56
