                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    WHAT DO VOTERS LEARN FROM FOREIGN NEWS? EMULATION, BACKLASH,
              AND PUBLIC SUPPORT FOR TRADE AGREEMENTS

                                       Chun-Fang Chiang
                                         Jason M. Kuo
                                         Megumi Naoi
                                          Jin-Tan Liu

                                       Working Paper 27497
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27497


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Chun-Fang Chiang, Jason M. Kuo, Megumi Naoi, and Jin-Tan Liu. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Do Voters Learn from Foreign News? Emulation, Backlash, and Public Support for
Trade Agreements
Chun-Fang Chiang, Jason M. Kuo, Megumi Naoi, and Jin-Tan Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 27497
July 2020
JEL No. D7,F13,L82

                                          ABSTRACT

The paper demonstrates voter-based mechanisms underlying policy emulation across countries.
We argue that exposure to news about foreign government policies and their effect can change
policy preferences of citizens through emulation and backlash against it. These heterogeneous
responses arise due to citizens' divergent predispositions about a foreign country being their peer.
We test this argument with coordinated survey experiments in Japan and Taiwan, which
randomly assigned news reporting on the South Korea-China trade agreement and solicited
support for their government signing an agreement with China. The results suggest that exposure
to the news decreases opposition to a trade agreement with China by 6 percentage points in
Taiwan ("emulation") and increases opposition around 8 percentage points in Japan ("backlash").
The results further suggest respondents' predispositions about peer countries account for the
heterogeneity. Our findings caution the optimism about policy convergence across countries as
technology lowers the cost of acquiring information.

Chun-Fang Chiang                                 Megumi Naoi
Department of Economics                          Department of Political Science,
National Taiwan University                       University of California, San Diego
No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd. Taipei              9500 Gilman D SSB 373
Taipei 10617                                     La Jolla, CA 92093
Taiwan                                           mnaoi@ucsd.edu
chunfang@ntu.edu.tw
                                                 Jin-Tan Liu
Jason M. Kuo                                     Department of Economics National
Department of Political Science,                 Taiwan University
National Taiwan University                       No. 1, Section 4, Roosevelt Road
No. 1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd. Taipei              Taipei (10617), TAIWAN
Taipei 10617                                     and NBER
Taiwan                                           liujt@ntu.edu.tw
jasonkuo@g.ntu.edu.tw
Introduction


       How does increasing exposure to news reports about foreign government policies

affect the policy preferences of citizens? As technological advancement lowers the

barriers to information, voters are exposed to an increasing volume of information about

foreign government actions. Scholars have argued that this cross-border flow of

information should lead to convergence of ideas and policies across countries through

mechanisms such as emulative learning and market competition (Rydgren 2005;

Simmons et al. 2006; Quinn and Toyoda 2007; Jensen and Oster 2009; Kelley and

Simmons 2014). Despite this prediction, we have recently witnessed voter backlash

against convergence, evidenced by Brexit referenda in United Kingdom (Colatone and

Stanig 2018), Grexit referenda in Greece (Walter et al. 2018), the rise of protectionist

rhetoric and policies in the United States and Western Europe (Rydgren 2005) and

backlash against emulating the successful COVID-19 measures adopted in South Korea

in Japan (Suzuki 2020).1


       Our paper is one of the first to experimentally identify conditions under which

information about foreign government policies and their effects (hereafter "foreign

news") may trigger either emulation or backlash among voters against their own




1
    Although this paper tests emulative learning on trade liberalization and cooperative

agreement, our theory can be applied to emulative learning toward protectionist policy

and non-cooperative arrangement as well. We return to this point later in the

Conclusion, where we discuss the generalizability of our findings beyond the empirical

scope of this paper.

                                            2
government adopting a similar policy. Voluminous literature on policy emulation2 has

observed that "peer" countries (measured by geographic proximity, ideological

similarity, shared colonial history and trade dependence) are more likely to adopt

similar policies in issue areas such as privatization reforms, electoral systems and

political regime choices, and labor and environmental rights (Brooks 2005; Rogowski

1987; Simmons and Elkins 2004; Simmons et al. 2006; Lee and Strang 2006; Greenhill,

Mosley and Prakash 2009). However, these studies either demonstrate such emulation

exists among policy-making elites or they neglect domestic politics altogether by

modeling state responses to common shocks, such as globalization, recession, import

shock from China and technological advancement (Autor et al. 2013; Colatone and

Stanig 2018; Mansfield and Mutz 2013). With the exception of Quinn and Toyoda

(2007), no study, to our knowledge, has tested if such emulation exists among voters

and through what mechanisms. Indeed, Graham et al. (2013) reviews 781 articles



2
    In political science, the terms policy "convergence", "diffusion" and "emulation" are

often used interchangeably to refer to the process in which policies adopted by different

administrative units (countries, states, cities, etc.) become similar over time. This paper

defines "policy emulation" as a goal-oriented mimicking of a policy in an effort to

produce a similar outcome (e.g., economic growth, reduction in poverty, etc.). The

definition is consistent with the psychology literature, which differentiates the concepts

of "emulation" and "imitation" by defining the former as more goal-oriented ("cause-

effect"), purposeful mimicking, and the latter as less purposeful, process-centered

mimicking. Policy "convergence" differs from policy emulation in that the former can

occur without any learning of the foreign government actions (e.g., due to market

pressures) and policy "diffusion" can also occur through imitation.

                                             3
published in top-50 political science journals on policy diffusion and find very scant

attention to voter-driven policy diffusion. The omission is critical as much of the

backlash against globalization today seems to have originated from voters.


     We designed and conducted coordinated survey experiments in Japan and Taiwan

in 2015 and 2016 to test the "emulation-among-peer" hypothesis among voters: when

citizens perceive a foreign government to be their socio-economic or cultural peer, they

are more likely to increase support for their own government adopting a similar policy.

We chose trade policy as our issue because observational studies have identified trade

between countries as one of the key channels in which policy emulation occurs

(Greenhill, Mosley and Prakash 2009; Lee and Strang 2006). We devised a novel survey

instrument to measure citizens' perceived "peer-ness" across a range of countries before

the treatments and randomly assigned respondents to read fact-based news articles

about their neighboring countries (South Korea and China) signing trade agreements.

We then solicited their opinion on their own government signing a trade agreement with

China.


     In the study, foreign news treatments are two-by-two factorial design, which

randomly flip the main subject of the news between South Korea (relatively perceived

as "peer" by Japanese and Taiwanese citizens) and China (relatively perceived as "non-

peer"), and change the contents of the news between an estimated 2% GDP boost

("Economic Growth Treatment") and which sector benefits and loses domestically in

the county of the main subject consistent with the sector-based, Ricardo-Viner

predictions ("Winner and Loser Treatment"). The fifth group is a placebo group in

which reports a factual news about the annual meeting of United Nations Educational,

Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) held in Nagoya City, Japan, on the

                                           4
exact same day that South Korea and China concluded the negotiation for the trade

agreement on November 10, 2014.


     The results suggest that the effect of foreign news exposure can be polarizing.

Foreign news exposure encourages emulative preference formation for those who

perceive a foreign country to be their peer, but can provoke backlash reactions if the

foreign country is not perceived as a peer. Our Korea Economic Growth treatment

("peer success") decreases opposition to the respondents' own government signing a

trade agreement with China around 6 percentage points in the Taiwan sample compared

to the placebo group. We find no such treatment effects for the news about China

Economic Growth ("non-peer success"), consistent with our hypothesis. The emulative

preference formation (i.e., increase in support for a trade agreement with China) is

concentrated among those who rated South Korea to be similar to Taiwan before the

treatment, although the interaction effects between the treatment and a dummy variable

indicating respondents who rated South Korea to be a peer are statistically insignificant.


     By contrast, foreign news exposure increases opposition to the respondents'

government entering an agreement with China around 8 percentage points in Japan,

compared to the placebo group. This backlashed preference formation (i.e., decrease in

support for a trade agreement with China) is concentrated among those who rated South

Korea to be dissimilar to Japan, recorded before the treatment, although the interaction

effects between the treatment and a dummy variable indicating respondents who rated

South Korea to be dissimilar are imprecisely estimated.


     We further validate emulation vs. backlash preference formation by leveraging

text analyses of 4,500 open-ended, post-treatment responses where respondents briefly

explained why they support or oppose their own government entering a trade agreement
                                            5
with China. Korea Economic Growth treatment was associated with 5 percentage points

and 3 percentage points increase in the probability that Taiwanese and Japanese

respondents, respectively, would cite "benefits to the national economy" as a reason to

support their governments entering a similar agreement. The effect of China Economic

Growth treatment (non-peer success) on the probability of respondents citing "benefits

to the national economy" is statistically insignificant, lending further support to the

emulation-among-peer hypothesis.


     Moreover, both Korean and Chinese Economic Growth treatments increased anti-

China sentiments expressed amongst Japanese respondents (e.g., "I don't like China",

"China hates us") by 4 percentage points. This effect is concentrated among those who

rated South Korea to be dissimilar to their own country, although the interaction effects

between each treatment and a dummy variable indicating those who rated South Korea

to be dissimilar, are not statistically significant at 5% level. In post-experiment analysis,

we further show that both historical animosity against South Korea and China and

economic insecurity are the two sources of backlash. Together, our findings question

the optimism about policy convergence across countries as technology lowers the cost

of acquiring information across borders.


     Our study advances the literature on policy emulation by providing some of the

first experimental evidence on emulative preference formation among citizens when

they are exposed to information about foreign government policy. Our research

contributes to the growing literature on sources and consequences of backlash against

policy emulation, convergence and globalization. We demonstrate, in the domain of

trade policy, it is not partisan or ideological identification of citizens but is instead, their

predispositions about other countries being their "peers" that facilitates or blocks

                                               6
emulative preference formation. Finally, the field of international political economy

has examined how educating citizens with information about well-established

economic models, such as the Stolper-Samuelson theorem of international trade, can

guide citizen preference formation along citizen self-economic interests (Hainmueller

and Hiscox 2006; Rho and Tomz 2017; Naoi 2020). We show that peer reference is a

critical component in learning and updating citizen briefs with the information about

foreign government policy. Information about well-established trade models do not

inform economic self-interests, but rather, shift public opinion through increasing

concerns for the national economy and economic rivalry.


What We Know (and Don't Know) about Policy Emulation


      What do citizens learn from information about foreign government policy and its

effect on foreign society? Voluminous literature exists on policy emulation, which we

define as: "actors model a policy on the examples provided by others, where one key

set of connections are peer-based reference groups" (Strang and Lee 2006: p.899).3 The

observational evidence abounds across fields of American Politics, Comparative

Politics and International Relations to support the "emulation-among-peer" argument.

Scholars have demonstrated policy emulation across U.S. states with similar ideological

make-ups and geographic proximity (Volden 2006), and among countries that are

geographically proximate, highly trade dependent or share colonial history (Simmons

and Elkins 2006; and Greenhill, Mosely and Prakash 2009).




3
    We replaced the word `behavior' in the original definition with `policy' to be

consistent with the focus of our paper.

                                          7
     Yet these studies on policy emulation or diffusion have often suffered from

observational equivalence between "myopic" policy diffusion (governments adopting

similar policy without learning from each other, e.g., responding to a common shock or

policy problem) and actual learning among policy-makers. Volden, Ting and Carpenter

(2008) formally demonstrate both game-theoretic (i.e., allow actors to learn from each

other) and decision-theoretic (i.e., individual governments make decisions without

strategic interactions) models can produce policy diffusions. As they contend, "scholars

must redirect our efforts toward providing evidence that distinguishes between policy

diffusion and myopic choice (p.327)." They advocate scholars demonstrate the

existence of success-based learning (the effectiveness of the policy adopted by others

increases the adoption of similar policies), because the success-based learning is only

predicted by the learning-based diffusion (i.e., game-theoretic diffusion model) and not

by the myopic version (p.328).


     The second issue with the policy emulation and diffusion literature is that scholars

have extensively studied learning among policy elites with scant attention to voters (see

Graham et al. 2013 for a comprehensive survey of the literature). The exception is

Quinn and Toyoda (2007), which demonstrates that voter ideology, measured by the

changes in vote shares of Communist Parties and pro-capitalist parties across 82

nations, accounts for cross-national variations in international capital account

regulation between 1955 to 1999. However, Quinn and Toyoda (2007) are interested in

voter preference as an explanatory variable, not the outcome to be explained. The

inclusion of country fixed effects in their specifications does not allow them to capture

the spread of ideas among voters across different countries (see Berry and Berry 1990)

either. In sum, we still lack evidence on whether the emulation-among-peer mechanism


                                           8
holds for citizens, beyond simple observed convergence of opinions and norms across

national borders.


      A growing set of public opinion studies has demonstrated exposure to information

about foreign elites or foreign governments can change public opinion. Duch and

Stevenson (2008) and Kayser and Peress (2012) have found "benchmarking" in

economic voting where citizens assess their government competence based on how

their economy is doing relative to their neighboring countries in Europe. Huang (2015),

with survey experiments in China, finds that respondents are more likely to lower their

evaluation of Chinese government competence when exposed to news about a foreign

governments' stellar economic performance.


      Other experimental studies find that a message from foreign elites or foreign

government can shift public opinion by functioning as a "cue" that fills an information

gap for voters. Chapman (2011), Hayes and Guardino (2010 and 2011) and Guardino

and Hayes (2017) find that messages from foreign elites and international institutions,

reported in American television news, lowered American public support for the Iraq

War and the U.S. President's use of force.4 Walter et al. (2018) show that a signal from

foreign actors, such as the European Central Bank, shifted Greek public opinion on

negotiating further on the bailout proposal during the Eurozone crisis in 2015.


      These emerging experimental studies have demonstrated that information about

foreign elites or foreign governments can have causal effects on public opinion through


4
    Communication literature has also shown that exposure to news about foreign

countries affects issue salience among citizens and how favorably they perceive foreign

countries. See Salwen and Matera 1989; Wanta, Golan and Lee 2004.

                                           9
cue and endorsement effects. Yet, the outcome of interest in these studies is not policy

emulation, i.e., whether exposure to information about foreign government policy and

its effects on foreign society ("foreign news") mobilizes citizen support for their own

government adopting a similar policy. Moreover, while some of the studies cited above

varied the nationality of foreign endorsers in treatments, their choice of nationalities

mentioned in the treatments are not guided by theories of policy diffusion and emulation.


The Emulation-among-Peer among Citizens


     We build our emulation-among-peer hypothesis on the following three premises

about the informational environment surrounding citizens in well-developed

democracies.


Premise 1: Low Information about Forthcoming Policies


     Our first premise is well-established: citizens rarely know how a forthcoming

policy will affect their welfare unless they have prior experience with it or rely on

accessible cues (Popkin 1994; Lupia 1994; Guisinger 2009). Guisinger (2009; 2017)

demonstrates that trade policy is a quintessential low-information issue area where

American voters have a low-level of knowledge and the issue is of low salience during

elections. Similarly, empirical tests of the pocket-book theory of economic voting have

shown that even when voters have actual personal experience with the economy (e.g.,

rise or decline of income or job losses etc.), they often have difficulty discerning who

and what policy is responsible for the changes in their personal finances (Gomez and

Wilson 2001; 2006). In this low-information environment, citizens often rely on elite

cues, coming from legislators, political parties and the media (Mansfield and Mutz

2009; Bullock, Hill and Huber 2016). Yet, media reporting of domestic government

                                           10
actions can be partisan or polarized. Foreign news -- media reporting on foreign

government actions ­ can fill the void caused by partisan and polarized media by

serving as a cue that guides the process of citizen preference formation.


Premise 2: High Predispositions about Foreign Countries that Function as "Cues"


     In contrast with low information about forthcoming policies, citizens have strong

predispositions about the world and other countries, such as whether a foreign country

is "successful" or whether the country is their country's "peer". Citizen predispositions,

defined here as relatively enduring political or cultural orientations, are shaped through

their interactions with family and friends, schools, communities and elites, including

the media (Zaller 1992; Jensen and Oster 2009). Long-standing literature has shown

that American attitudes toward other countries are determined by their perceived

similarity with the United States (Nincic and Russett 1979) and that media coverage of

a foreign country substantially shapes public attitudes toward a given country (Wanta

et al. 2004).


     The idea that citizens have high predispositions about other countries breaks away

from the conventional wisdom that foreign news­information about foreign

government actions­is generally of low salience unless it directly threatens the safety

or income of citizens (Entman 2004). Experimental studies that manipulate a country

name or country of origin of goods and immigrants have shown how a country name

serves as a powerful cue for citizens by signaling the type of a government (e.g. poor

or rich, trustworthy vs. untrustworthy), the character of an immigrant or asylum seeker

(e.g. high-skilled or low-skilled), and the quality of a product (e.g. high or low quality)

(see Hainmueller and Hiscox 2010; Hainmueller and Hopkins 2015; Bansak,

Hainmueller, and Hangartner 2016).
                                            11
       In the context of trade policy, studies have found that respondents express stronger

policy positions on trade policy when the survey asks their opinion on increasing trade

with a specific partner country, rather than asking their general opinion toward

increasing trade (Scheve and Slaughter 2001; Chiang, Liu and Wen 2013; Kuo and Naoi

2016). Empirical evidence on the effect of "country of origin" labels on consumer

choices, accumulated in the field of marketing studies, corroborate with this finding.

Consumers in both developed and developing economies infer product quality and

types of foreign products from the country of origin label (Laroche et al. 2005).5


       Taken together, we argue that when citizens have low information about a

forthcoming policy and high predispositions about other countries, citizens rely on

information about a peer country's policy and its effects on a foreign society (we call

this "foreign news" throughout the paper) as a cue that guides their policy preference.

This effect is akin to the "precedent effect" extensively studied in the literature on court

opinions and elite decision-making (Shaufer 1987; Lupu and Voeten 2012). Smithey

(2001), for instance, finds that high court judges in Canada and South Africa relied on

foreign case law for "cutting information costs, decreasing uncertainty and providing


5
    Our surveys conducted in Japan and Taiwan further lend support to the premise that

citizens have high predispositions about foreign countries. Our respondents have

stronger opinions about whether or not other countries are their peers than they have

about their positions on trade policy, both measured before our treatments. In 5-point

Likert scale, 32% of Japanese respondents took the most extreme position that South

Korea is either "very dissimilar" or "very similar" to Japan, while 18% of them took

the most extreme position on trade attitudes that increasing imports is either "very

good" or "very bad".

                                             12
justification" (p.1188) when the case was highly contentious domestically. Likewise,

Hayes and Guardino (2011) find that foreign elite endorsement is effective in

strengthening pre-existing briefs among the public when there is an informational void

in domestic politics.


Premise 3: Perceived Peer-ness as an Effective Cue


     Whether citizens learn from (i.e., update their preference) the information about a

foreign government's policy and its effects depends on perceived peer-ness of the

foreign government. This perceived peer-ness might originate from a variety of factors

such as a similar level of economic development, linguistic or cultural affinity,

ideological make-up and geographical proximity. By contrast, perceived non-peer-ness

can originate from two sources: perceived differences in the levels of economic,

political and social development or culture and status hierarchy (i.e., one country is

perceived as ranked higher or lower) (Lake 2009).


     Building on the three premises of informational environment discussed above, we

derive the following testable implication and its null counterpart:


     H1: Peer Success Hypothesis: Exposure to news reporting on a peer country's

     policy success is more likely to mobilize support among citizens for their own

     government adopting a similar policy.


     H1a: Non-peer Success Hypothesis: Exposure to news reporting about a non-peer

     country's policy success has a null effect on support among citizens for their own

     government adopting a similar policy.


     We then predict cross-country heterogeneity of citizen responses between the two

                                           13
otherwise similar economies with varying citizen perception about which country is

their peer.


       H2: Cross-country Heterogeneous Treatment Effects: Exposure to news

       reporting on a peer country's policy success is more likely to mobilize support for

       a similar policy in a country with a high proportion of citizens perceiving the

       foreign country to be their peer than in an otherwise similar country with a lower

       proportion of such citizens.


Finally, our theory predicts the same patterns hold for within-country subgroups:


       H3: Within-country Heterogeneous Treatment Effects: Citizens who perceive a

       foreign country, in news, to be their peer are more likely to support their own

       government adopting a similar policy than citizens who perceive the country to

       be non-peer.


Research Design


          To test our hypotheses, we designed and conducted coordinated survey

experiments on public support for a forthcoming free trade agreement with China in

Japan and Taiwan from December of 2015 to January of 2016. 6 Bilateral trade

agreements constitute an ideal empirical domain to test our hypotheses. Voters have

little information about potential impacts of a forthcoming trade agreement with a

foreign country because they have no first-hand experience with it, and the content of


6
    Due to space constraints, we do not report the results of the pilot survey conducted in

summer of 2015 here but rather offer them in supplementary documentation available

by request.

                                             14
a trade agreement is complex, spanning over 5,000 product lines with regulatory

provisions (Naoi and Urata 2013).


       The Sample Design. Our respondents were sampled from opt-in panelists

registered with online survey companies, Nikkei Research (Japan) and Pollster Online

Survey (Taiwan), and were aged between 20 and 60. For each country, our survey

sample approximates the national census in age,7 gender, and location of residence. The

sample size was 2,151 in Japan and 2,390 in Taiwan. The surveys were conducted in

tandem in two countries: from December 13, 2015, to January 5, 2016 in Japan and

from December 18, 2015 to January 8, 2016 in Taiwan.


          We chose citizens residing in Japan and Taiwan as our study sample for four

reasons. First, neither Japan nor Taiwan has signed a bilateral trade agreement with

China, making them appropriate subjects to test how news about foreign government

actions change voter attitudes toward a forthcoming policy. Second, the two countries

are similar in their levels of economic development, an export-oriented economic

structure with sizeable manufacturing sectors, and mixed electoral systems for

legislatures (single-member district and proportional representation systems). Third,

Japan and Taiwan compete against South Korea for electronic manufacturing export

and market shares, whereas they stand to lose heavily from the competition with China

in agriculture and labor-intensive manufacturing industries.


       Finally, during the time period we conducted our survey experiments, Japan,

Taiwan and South Korea all had conservative parties in governments (Japan's Liberal


7
    The age cutoff at sixty is due to technical difficulty ensuring high-age respondents in

on-line surveys, especially in Taiwan.

                                             15
Democratic Party, Taiwan's Kuomingtang and South Korea's Saenuri Party). The

similarity in the ruling party's ideology allows us to test an alternative mechanism of

emulation discussed in Quinn and Toyoda (2007) on how voter ideology, measured by

ideological leaning of the party in power, affects emulative preference formation.

These similarities make the results from our coordinated survey experiments more

comparable than any two randomly chosen countries.


       We note, however, Taiwanese citizens have been exposed to more information

about possible effects of trade agreements with China. Taiwan had signed the Economic

Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA) with China in 2011. While ECFA is a

framework agreement such that the two governments did not reach concrete agreements

on the majority of trade issues, it nonetheless lowered tariffs for more than 500 products

and Taiwanese citizens perceived it as a trade agreement.8 Taiwan had also signed a

service trade agreement with China in 2013, though it had been withheld since student

protests in March, 2014, known as the "Sunflower Movement" (see Ho 2015). We

address these issues by asking several outcome questions in Taiwan, such as attitudes

toward deeper economic integration with China as well as attitudes for a merchandise

or service trade agreement with China.


       The Experimental Design. Our respondents were randomly assigned to five groups

of approximately 440 respondents each. In each of the four treatment groups,

respondents were asked to read a fact-based news article about South Korea and China

concluding negotiations for a free trade agreement on November 10, 2014. The four



8
    ECFA is also referred to as "trade deal," "trade pact," "free-trade agreement" in news

reports from CNN, BBC, and The Economist.

                                             16
treatment groups follow a two-by-two factorial design and vary their contents of the

news in two dimensions: (i) whether the news reports the agreement's estimated effects

on the national economy or its effects on sectors that benefit and lose from the

agreement consistent with the sector-based, Ricardo-Viner predictions, and (ii) whether

the news refers to South Korea (relatively perceived to be "peer") as the main subject

or China (relatively perceived to be "non-peer") as the main subject. The key idea is to

hold the general welfare and distributional effects of the trade agreement constant,

while flipping the main subject of the news between a peer vs. non-peer country.


     We use the two well-established effects of trade in the field of International

Economics as descriptors of the estimated effect of the Korea-China trade agreement:

that trade liberalization increases national welfare (e.g., estimated 2% GDP growth) and

that it creates winners and losers along a sectoral line (export-oriented industries benefit,

and import-competing industries lose). We chose to use the prediction from a sectoral,

Ricardo-Viner model over skill-based prediction as a treatment content, because our

collection of newspaper articles reporting the conclusion of this trade agreement in

Japan and Taiwan reveals that estimates and predictions along export-oriented vs.

import-competing sectors dominate the reporting over the skill-based discussion (see

Rho and Tomz 2017; Naoi 2020).


     The fifth group serves as a placebo, where we randomly assign a fact-based news

article on the World Conference on Education for Sustainable Development held by the

United Nations Economic, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in the City

of Nagoya, Japan. We chose this news for a placebo for two reasons: (i) major Japanese

and Taiwanese newspapers reported this UNESCO meeting news on the exact same

day as the news on the trade agreement between Korea and China, and (ii) the content

                                             17
    of the news is global in nature but has little to do with trade policy or the world economy.

    We held the foreign news article layout and length constant and only varied the news

    content across our experimental conditions. 9 Table 1 summarizes our experimental

    design described above. Our experimental groups are well-balanced in key

    demographics co-variates. The balance table and the English translation of news articles

    for each country can be found in the appendix.



Table 1: A Summary of the Experimental Design

                                                      Subject of the Foreign News
 Frame of the Foreign News               South Korea                                China
                                           ("peer")                            ("non-peer")

 National Economic Growth               Group 1 (G1):                         Group 3 (G3):

    (2% bump in GDP)               Korea Economic Growth                 China Economic Growth

 Sectoral Winner and Loser              Group 2 (G2):                         Group 4 (G4):

(Electronics vs. Agriculture)   Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)       China Winner (A) and Loser (E)

                      Group 5 (G5): Placebo Group (UNESCO Annual Meeting)




    9
        The survey flow and visual look of our experimental design can be found in Appendix

    A2 and A3.

                                                18
       Our experiment involved minimal deception. The event reported in the news as well

as the information describing the welfare and distributional effects of this agreement for

citizens in Korea and China are factual, based on articles we collected from the major

newspapers in Japan and Taiwan. For instance, on July 5, 2014, Yomiuri Shimbun, a right-

leaning Japanese newspaper, reported that the trade agreement between China and Korea

would boost the Korean economy up to 3% of its GDP and benefit Korean manufacturers

of industrial goods.10 On the same day, China Times, a right-leaning Taiwanese newspaper,

reported estimates of 2.3% growth in GDP provided by the Korea Institute for International

Economic Policy (KIEP) and Korean manufacturing industries. 11 On November 11, 2014,

Liberty Times, a left-leaning Taiwanese newspaper, reported a backlash against the trade

agreement with China among South Korean farmers who expected that "the FTA would

make the Korean agriculture already in trouble much worse." 12 Note also that these

distributional implications of the trade agreement as reported in the news are consistent with

the well-known Ricardo-Viner model of international trade, which predicts that export-




10
     "China and South Korea close to conclude a trade agreement," Yomiuri Shimbun, 5

July 2014.
11
     "Hard to Secure the Minimal Wage of 22K," China Times, 5 July 2014.
12
     "Polarized Reactions to FTA in South Korea: A Backlash among Farmers," Liberty

Times, 11 November 2014. These estimates on the agreement's boost to South Korea's

GDP have been adjusted downward after the actual signing of the agreement. On June

2, 2015, United Daily, another right-leaning Taiwanese newspaper, reported that the

agreement will bring 0.96% bump in Korea's GDP. See "China-Korea FTA signed,"

United Daily, 2 June 2015.

                                           19
oriented sectors benefit further from trade liberalization and import-competing sectors lose

from it (Ricardo 1955).


       Pre-treatment Similarity Ratings. Before the foreign news treatment,

respondents were asked to rate the similarity between their home countries and the

following seven countries: United States, Germany, United Kingdom, South Korea,

China, Singapore and Taiwan (for Japanese respondents) or Japan (for Taiwanese

respondents). These countries were chosen by varying their regime types (China and

Singapore are authoritarian, the rest is democratic), their levels of economic

development (China is a developing economy, the rest is developed), ethnic make-ups

(China, Taiwan and Singapore have a large ethnic Chinese population, while South

Korea and Japan are ethnically Asian but not majority Chinese) and geography (Japan,

South Korea, Singapore, China and Taiwan are in Asia, while the rest are in Western

Europe and North America).


     The exact wording of this survey question is "We talk about whether Japan (or

Taiwan) and other countries are similar or dissimilar in politics, economy and culture

etc. What do you think of the following countries, are they similar or dissimilar to Japan

(or Taiwan)"? Respondents rate in a five-point Likert scale: "Similar," "Somewhat

similar," "Can't say one or the other," "Somewhat dissimilar," or "Dissimilar." We

dichotomize the responses to create dummy variables indicating if respondents chose

"somewhat similar" or "similar" and zero otherwise. These provide subjective

measures to proxy whether a foreign country is Japan's or Taiwan's peer.


     We also asked respondents' general attitudes toward free trade before the

treatment in each group: "We ask you about import liberalization, i.e., goods made in

foreign countries coming into Japan at a lower price. Which opinion is closer to yours?
                                           20
A: Good thing because low-income people can buy goods at lower price, B: Bad thing

because it threatens Japanese (or Taiwanese) workers' jobs and income," where

respondents choose from a five-point Likert scale, "Closer to A, somewhat closer to A,

can't say one or the other, somewhat closer to B, closer to B."


       Table 2 reports summary statistics of pre-treatment variables and demographic

variables. We note the major differences in Japan and Taiwan in their similarity ratings

of foreign countries. 47% of Taiwanese respondents think that Taiwan is similar or

somewhat similar to South Korea, and 27% think that Taiwan is similar or somewhat

similar to China. In the Japanese sample, however, only 15% of Japanese feel that Japan

is similar or somewhat similar to South Korea and 5% of them think that Japan is similar

or somewhat similar to China.13 Our Hypothesis 2 (Cross-country HTE) predicts Korea

Growth Treatment ("peer success") mobilizes respondents' support for a government




13
     The low-level of similarity rating among the Japanese respondents is a general pattern

across a diverse set of countries they were asked to rate. The top two countries Japanese

respondents perceived to be similar to their own were Taiwan and Germany, but even

then, only around one-quarter of respondents rated them similar to Japan (27% for

Taiwan and 26% for Germany). This stands in stark contrast to the Taiwanese sample

where the top two countries rated similar to Taiwan were South Korea and Japan (47%

for South Korea and 44% for Japan). We can speculate why Japan and Taiwan differ,

perhaps because Japanese language is only spoken in Japan, while Chinese language is

spoken by 20% of the world population, but exploring this difference is beyond the

scope of this paper.


                                             21
     adopting a similar policy in Taiwan and this effect to be smaller or null in the Japanese

     sample.


Table 2: Summary Statistics of Demographic Covariates
                                        Japan                                    Taiwan
                                       (n=2075)                                 (n= 2390)
Variable                       Mean Std. Min       Max               Mean         Std. Min.        Max
                                      Dev.                                       Dev.
Age                            42.40 10.2     20     60              38.99      10.68     20        60
                                          5
Female                          0.48 0.49        0     1               0.54       0.49       0       1
College                         0.58 0.49        0     1               0.64       0.48       0       1
Manufacture                     0.16 0.36        0     1               0.22       0.42       0       1
Service                         0.44 0.49        0     1               0.63       0.48       0       1
Protectionist                   0.25 0.43        0     1               0.21       0.40       0       1
Similar2Korea                   0.16 0.36        0     1               0.71       0.45       0       1
Similar2China                   0.50 0.22        0     1               0.47       0.49       0       1
LDP                             0.21 0.40        0     1                  --         --     --      --
KMT                                --    --     --    --               0.17       0.38       0       1
Opposing a FTA                  0.44 0.49        0     1                  --         --     --      --
Opposing deeper integration        --    --     --    --               0.23       0.42       0       1


          Post-treatment Open-ended Responses. We asked an open-ended question

     immediately after our main outcome question for respondents to write their reason(s)

     for supporting vs. opposing a trade agreement with China. We classified 4,500 written

     responses into topics by human-coding and unsupervised machine learning (clustering)

     and analyzed the effect of treatments on the proportion of responses.


     Foreign News and Emulative Preference Formation

          Our dependent variable is Opposition to a Trade Agreement with China. This

     variable is constructed from a survey question asking whether respondents agree or

     disagree with the statement that "Japan (or Taiwan) should also sign a trade agreement

     with China" after the foreign news treatments. Our Taiwan survey used identical

     phrasing of questions as the Japanese counter-part but solicit support for the three policy

     outcomes: deeper economic integration with China, a forthcoming merchandise trade

                                                 22
  agreement with China, and a service trade agreement with China.14 We recode original,

  five-point Likert scale responses ("Agree," "Somewhat Agree," "Can't say one or the

  other," "Somewhat disagree," "Disagree") to a dichotomous variable indicating the

  value of one for respondents who chose "oppose" or "somewhat oppose" the trade

  agreement or deeper economic integration with China and zero otherwise. We estimate

  the average treatment effect (hereafter "ATE") of each treatment indicator against the

  placebo group using a linear probability model.15


Table 3: Peer Emulation Effects in Japan and Taiwan, OLS Estimates
Sample                                    Japan                Taiwan
                                           (1)        (2)         (3)                      (4)
Dependent variable                      Opposing Opposin Opposing                      Opposing
                                         a trade  g deeper         a                       the
                                       agreement integrati Merchandi                    Service
                                           with    on with    se Trade                   Trade
                                          China     China    Agreemen                  Agreeme
                                                                t with                  nt with
                                                                China                    China
Group 1 (G1):                            -0.017   -0.068**     -0.013                   -0.063*
Korea Economic Growth                    (0.034)   (0.026)     (0.025)                  (0.026)
Group 2 (G2):                            -0.003      0.003      0.026                     0.024
Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)           (0.033)   (0.025)     (0.024)                  (0.025)
Group 3 (G3):                             0.021    -0.043+      0.010                    -0.015
China Economic Growth                    (0.034)   (0.026)     (0.025)                  (0.026)
Group 4 (G4):                            0.075*     -0.001      0.021                    -0.013
China Winner (A) and Loser (E)           (0.034)   (0.026)     (0.025)                  (0.026)
Control Variables                          Yes        Yes        Yes                       Yes
Observations                              2075       2390        2390                     2390
Note: Group 5 (placebo group) is excluded as our base category. Our control variables include pre-
treatment protectionist attitude, age, female, college education, income categories, and
manufacturing and service sectors of employment. These OLS estimates are in line with alternative
logit estimates reported in Appendix Table A7.1. *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1

  14
       This aims to accommodate the country-specific context in Taiwan. When we

  conducted our survey experiment in December of 2015, the service trade agreement

  with China remained withheld in Taiwan.
  15
       We also provide coefficient estimates from the alternative logit specification in the

  online supplementary materials, Appendix Tables A7.

                                               23
          Table 3, column 1 reports the OLS estimate of the ATE for each treatment in

the Japanese sample. The results suggest that, contrary to H1, Korea Growth Treatment

("peer success") does not mobilize additional support for Japanese government entering

a trade agreement with China. We explore below whether this is due to a much smaller

proportion of respondents who perceive South Korea to be their peer (H2) and whether

foreign news is polarizing (i.e., mobilizes support among some, and opposition among

others, and in aggregate, these effects offset each other to produce null results). We find

support for both interpretations. Consistent with H1a, China Growth Treatment ("non-

peer success") has null effects on their support for the trade agreement.


       Contrary to our expectation, China Winner and Loser Treatment (G4, i.e., Chinese

agriculture wins, electronic industry loses from the trade agreement) increases the

Japanese opposition to a trade agreement with China by 8 percentage points compared

to the placebo group (UNESCO annual meeting news).


       The results from the Taiwanese sample are reported in Table 3, column 2 to

column 4.       Consistent with the H1, Korea Economic Growth Treatment reduces

Taiwanese respondents' opposition to a deeper economic integration and the service

trade agreement with China by 6 percentage points. China Economic Growth Treatment

("non-peer success") has no statistically significant effects on respondents' support for

a trade agreement, lending support to H1a. 16




16
     These results are robust under the alternative logit specification. For logit estimates

of these results, see Appendix Tables A7.1-3.

                                              24
     Together, we find strong and robust support for H1, H1a, and H2. Foreign news

that reports a peer country's success mobilizes support for a government adopting a

similar policy (H1) but news about a non-peer country's success produces null effects

(H1a). Furthermore, Korea Growth Treatment mobilizes support among the Taiwanese

sample, in which a higher proportion of respondents (45%) perceive South Korea to be

their peer, but not among the Japanese sample in which a much lower proportion of

respondents perceive South Korea as their peer country (H2).


     We conduct two sets of statistical tests on Hypothesis 3 (within-country HTE):

one with a split sample of subgroups that rate South Korea to be similar vs. dissimilar,

and another estimating the interaction effects between the treatments and this subgroup

dummy. Table 4 reports the results of our subgroup analyses. Column 1 reports

treatment effects among Japanese who rated South Korea as "similar" or "somewhat

similar." Column 2 reports treatment effects among Japanese who rated South Korea

as "somewhat dissimilar" or "dissimilar." Likewise, Column 3 reports treatment effects

among Taiwanese who rated South Korea as "similar" or "somewhat similar" and

Column 4, "somewhat dissimilar" or "dissimilar."


     The results suggest peer-success treatment increases support for a trade agreement

around 7 percentage points among respondents who rated South Korea to be similar in

the Taiwan sample. The backlash effects we observe in the Japanese sample are also

concentrated among those who rated South Korea to be dissimilar to Japan (column 1).

Yet, when we interact the treatment dummies with the subgroup dummies, the

coefficients of interactions are imprecisely estimated as shown in columns 3 and 6 of

Table 4. The results lend suggestive but not robust evidence to support H3.




                                          25
Table 4: Emulation Effects in Japan and Taiwan by Similarity Ratings, OLS Estimates

Sample                                     Japan                           Taiwan
Subsample:                       Yes         No        Full      Yes        No         Full
Similar to Korea
Model                             (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
Dependent variable             Opposing a trade agreement       Opposing deeper economic
                                       with China                  integration with China
Group 1 (G1):                  -0.090+    0.015     -0.012     -0.073*     -0.033     -0.039
Korea Economic Growth          (0.051) (0.044) (0.036)         (0.029) (0.052)       (0.049)
Group 2 (G2):                   -0.033    0.013     - 0.011     0.001       0.008      0.044
Korea Winner (E) and           (0.050) (0.044) (0.036)         (0.029) (0.049)       (0.045)
Loser (A)
Group 3 (G3):                   -0.003      0.036     0.012      -0.028   -0.084+     -0.048
China Economic Growth           (0.050)    (0.044)   (0.036)    (0.030)   (0.050)     (0.047)
Group 4 (G4):                    0.007     0.104*    0.086*      0.001     -0.022      0.003
China Winner (A) and            (0.052)    (0.043)   (0.037)    (0.029)   (0.052)     (0.048)
Loser (E)
Sim2Korea                                            -0.118+                          -0.010
                                                     (0.067)                          (0.039)
Sim2Korea*G1                                          -0.025                          -0.032
                                                     (0.094)                          (0.057)
Sim2Korea*G2                                          -0.071                          -0.028
                                                     (0.092)                          (0.054)
Sim2Korea*G3                                           0.062                           0.044
                                                     (0.093)                          (0.056)
Sim2Korea*G4                                          -0.034                          -0.022
                                                     (0.091)                          (0.057)
Control Variables                Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes        Yes         Yes
Observations                     810        1265       2075      1708       682        2390

Note: This table summarizes the heterogeneous treatment effects by pre-treatment measure of
respondents' perceived similarity between South Korea and their home country (Japan or
Taiwan). Models (1) and (4) were the OLS estimates for the respondents who rated South
Korea "somewhat similar" or "similar" to their home country, and Models (2) and (5) were
the OLS estimates for the respondents who rated South Korea "somewhat dissimilar" or
"dissimilar" to their home country. For the respondents who rated South Korea "neither similar
nor dissimilar" to their home country (474 in the Japanese sample and 587 in the Taiwanese),
we grouped them into subsamples of being rated as similar to Korea. We did so in order to
split the full sample as evenly as possible. Group 5 (placebo group; UNESCO annual meeting
news) is excluded as our base category. Models (3) and (6) were OLS estimates from
interaction term specification. Our control variables include pre-treatment protectionist
attitude, age, female, college education, income categories, and (manufacturing and service)
sectors of employment. The summary statistics for each control variable is reported in Table
2. These OLS estimates are in line with alternative logit estimates reported in Appendix Table
A7.2. ***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05




                                             26
       Overall, we find robust and strong evidence to support peer-success and non-peer

success hypotheses (H1a and H1b) in the Taiwan sample and heterogeneous peer-ness

perceptions accounting for cross-country differences between Taiwanese and Japanese

samples (H2). However, we did not expect foreign news treatment mobilizing

opposition against a trade agreement with China in the Japan sample. The next section

further analyzes the mechanism underlying this backlash by leveraging text analyses of

4,500 open-end responses.


Letting Respondents Explain Trade Preferences: Evidence from Open-Ended

Responses


       We further conduct analyses of post-treatment open-ended responses where

respondents explain why they support or oppose a trade agreement with China

immediately after answering our outcome question (five-point Likert scale supporting

or opposing its own government entering a trade agreement with China). We received

2,151 responses for Japan and 2,390 for Taiwan.


       We categorize these open-end responses into 12 categories for Japan and 16

categories for Taiwan, based on human-coding by a five-person team with native

fluency in Japanese and Taiwanese. Categorization is done by key words used in

responses which are not mutually-exclusive. The top three reasons Japanese

respondents cite for their support or opposition to a trade agreement with China are: (i)

Not sufficient information or don't know enough (22.7%), (ii) Lack of trust in China

(13.6%), and (iii) Questionable product quality (11%).17 In the Taiwanese sample, the


17
     We exclude the residual category of "other" (13.57%) from the list of top three

reasons.

                                           27
top three reasons respondents cite for their support or opposition to a trade agreement

with China are: (i) Benefits Taiwanese economy (18.5%), (ii) Insufficient information

or don't know enough (13.4%), and (iii) Pro-cooperation (10%). The proportion of each

human-coded topic categories is reported in Table 5.


 Table 5: Human-Coded Categories of Open-Ended Responses, Japanese and
 Taiwanese Sample
             Panel (A): Japan               Panel (B): Taiwan
                  (n= 2052)                      (n=2390)
 Topic category                    % Topic category                   %
 Not enough info/don't know    23.4% Benefit TW Economy           18.5%
 Others                        13.7% Not enough info/don't know 12.2%
 Trust                         12.8% Pro-Cooperation              10 %
                                       Concerns for losing        9.5%
 Product quality               12.4%
                                       independence
 Mention of merits or demerits 6.9%    Big market in China        8.6%
 Anti-China                    6.8% No Benefit to TW/Economy 6.5%
 Chinese communism, system,            Others (including          6.9%
                               3.9%
 govt                                  comments)
 No rule or enforcement        3.8%    Uncodable                  5.7%
 No benefits to JP/JP economy  3.7%    Pro-trade, globalization   5.6%
 Uncodable                     3.6%    Anti-China                 4.9%
 Benefit JP economy            3.3% Peace, destiny, trend         4.6%
 Threats to JP                         For every plus there is a  3.7%
                               2.4%
 economy/industry/workers              minus
 Big market                    2.2%    Pro-China                  1.4%
                                       Benefit industry, labor,   1.1%
 JP exports                    1.1%
                                       consumer
                                       Product quality            0.9%
                                               Competition with Korea         0.5%

 Note: Table summarizes the results of our human-coding of open-ended responses to
 why Japanese respondents would support vs. oppose a free trade agreement with
 China and why Taiwanese respondents would oppose deeper economic integration
 with China. Two coders for each sample, for a total of four coders, read and
 categorized these texts by tagging key words, leading to 14 topic categories in the
 Japanese sample (A) and 16 topic categories in the Taiwanese sample (B). Online
 supplementary materials will provide the examples of key words for each topical
 category.




                                          28
     As Table 5 shows, what is striking about these open-end responses is how little

statements about distributional implications of trade (e.g., manufacturing or agricultural

sector, their own job security or consumer price benefits) have appeared in both surveys,

especially in the Japanese survey. The results from Japanese and Taiwanese samples

suggest that the Heckscher-Ohlin, Ricardo-Viner or Melitz theories of trade perform

rather poorly in predicting how citizens explain their positions on trade agreements.


     This is surprising given that our treatments solely focused on economic costs and

benefits of a trade agreement, consistent with what has long been taught in economics

textbooks (Hainmueller and Hiscox 2006; Rho and Tomz 2017). Only 3% of Japanese

responses cited the trade agreement's benefit to Japanese exports and only 2.5% of

respondents cited China's threat to the Japanese economy, industries or workers as a

reason to oppose a trade agreement. Only eight respondents (0.3%) cited the effect of a

trade agreement with China on lowering consumer price and only one respondent cited

its effects on his/her job.


     In the Taiwanese sample, while 18.5% of respondents mentioned the trade

agreement's benefits to the Taiwanese economy, few people mentioned its effects on

economic interests at industry or personal levels. Only around 5% of respondents

consider the benefits to or loss of Taiwanese industries, employment or consumer

welfare.


     To further validate our emulation-among-peer hypothesis, we generate a dummy

variable indicating one if respondents mention "benefit Japanese (or Taiwanese)

economy" and zero otherwise. We then regress this binary dependent variable on our

treatment indicators. Table 6, columns 1 and 2, show that Korea Economic Growth

Treatment (G1: "peer success") increases those who cited "benefit to national economy"
                                           29
as a reason to support a trade agreement with China by 4 percent points in Japan and 5

percent points Taiwan. These results are in line with our hypothesis H1.




Table 6: "Peer Success" and Emulative Learning, OLS Estimates
Sample                                   Japan                  Taiwan
Model                                     (1)                     (2)
Dependent variable
                                           Benefit JP or TW economy

Group 1 (G1):                                   0.036**                  0.052*
Korea Economic Growth                           (0.012)                  (0.025)
Group 2 (G2):                                   0.021+                    0.001
Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)                  (0.012)                  (0.024)
Group 3 (G3):                                    0.015                   0.056*
China Economic Growth                           (0.012)                  (0.025)
Group 4 (G4):                                    0.011                    -0.020
China Winner (A) and Loser (E)                  (0.012)                  (0.025)
Top-frequency Topic category                       No                      Yes
% Total Responses                                3.3%                     18.5%
Control Variables                                 Yes                      Yes
Observations                                     2075                      2390
Note: The table summarizes results of regressing two dependent variables on a set of
dummy variables for our experimental treatment groups, respectively, for the Japanese
and Taiwanese sample. The two dependent variables are drawn from human-coded
responses to the open-ended question on why a respondent would support or oppose a
trade agreement with China in the Japanese sample, and why a respondent would
support or oppose deeper economic integration with China in the Taiwanese sample.
For each column, the dependent variable is a binary outcome variable, with the value
of one for statements related to "benefit Japan's economy" or "benefit Taiwan's
economy" in responses to the open-ended question, respectively, in Japan and Taiwan,
and otherwise zero. The reported marginal effects of experimental treatments and
standard errors (in parentheses) are drawn from OLS estimates. Group 5 (placebo
group; UNESCO annual meeting news) is excluded as our base category. Our control
variables include pre-treatment protectionist attitude, age, female, college education,
income categories, and (manufacturing and service) sectors of employment. The
summary of statistics for each control variable is reported in Table 2. These OLS
estimates are in line with alternative logit estimates reported in Appendix Table A7.3.
*** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1




                                          30
Sources of Anti-China Sentiments Expressed in the Japanese Sample


     The results from the open-ended survey responses in Japan and Taiwan lend strong

support to the H1. These results differ from the null results in the Likert-scale responses

from the Japanese sample, where Korea Economic Growth Treatment (G1) produces

null effects on respondents' opposition to a trade agreement in China. We suspect from

the inconsistent results that foreign news treatment might be polarizing ­i.e., it

mobilizes support for a similar policy among some, while it fuels opposition among

others, and these two effects in aggregate might have offset each other to produce the

null results in a Likert scale responses.


     To sort out this polarization effect, we leverage open-ended responses expressing

anti-China sentiments. Anti-China responses are coded one and zero otherwise. We

regress this binary dependent variable on our treatment indicators for the respective

country sample. Table 7, column 1 shows that both Korea Economic Growth Treatment

(G1) and China Economic Growth Treatment (G3) increase anti-China sentiments

among Japanese respondents around 4 percentage points; and yet we find no parallel

effect among Taiwanese respondents in column 2. Note that the size of backlash effects

(4 percentage points) is roughly equal to the size of emulation-among-peer effects (3.6

percentage points increase in "benefits Japanese economy," see Table 6, Model 1),

leading to the null results in the Japanese sample. These results provide evidence that

news reporting of policy success of Korea and China can be polarizing in Japan.




                                            31
Table 7: Foreign News Treatments and Anti-China Statements in Open-Ended
Responses, OLS Estimates
Sample                                    Japan                Taiwan
Model                                      (1)                   (2)
Dependent variable
                                                  Anti-China

Group 1 (G1):                                    0.040*                    -0.004
Korea Economic Growth                            (0.017)                  (0.014)
Group 2 (G2):                                     0.021                    -0.001
Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)                   (0.017)                  (0.014)
Group 3 (G3):                                    0.044*                    -0.003
China Economic Growth                            (0.017)                  (0.014)
Group 4 (G4):                                     0.015                     0.005
China Winner (A) and Loser (E)                   (0.017)                  (0.014)
Top-frequency Topic category                        No                       Yes
Percent of Open-Ended Responses                    6.77                      4.85
Control Variables                                  Yes                       Yes
Observations                                      2075                      2390
Note: The table summarizes results of regressing two dependent variables on a set of
dummy variables for our experimental treatment groups, respectively, for the Japanese
and Taiwanese sample. The two dependent variables are drawn from human-coded
responses to the open-ended question on why a respondent would support or oppose a
trade agreement with China in the Japanese sample, and why a respondent would
support or oppose deeper economic integration with China in the Taiwanese sample.
For each column, the dependent variable is a binary outcome variable, with the value
of one for statements that are "anti-China" in responses to the open-ended question,
respectively in Japan and Taiwan, and otherwise zero. The reported marginal effects of
experimental treatments and standard errors (in parentheses) are drawn from OLS
estimates. Group 5 (placebo group; UNESCO annual meeting news) is excluded as our
base category. Our control variables include pre-treatment protectionist attitude, age,
female, college education, income categories, and (manufacturing and service) sectors
of employment. The summary of statistics for each control variable is reported in Table
2. These OLS estimates are in line with alternative logit estimates reported in Appendix
Table A7.4. *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1




                                        32
     In post-experiment analysis, we further disentangle four potential sources of the

observed backlash against trade policy emulation in Japan: patriotism (coded as one

when respondents express support for an opinion that education should foster a love for

the country, and zero otherwise), job insecurity (coded as one when respondents think

it is difficult to get a comparable job if s/he loses current one, and zero otherwise), the

lack of information (coded as one when respondents express "Don't know" or "Not

enough information" in open-ended responses, and zero otherwise), and historical

animosity (coded as one when respondents expressed support for legislators' visit to

Yasukuni Shrine where Rank-A War criminals are commemorated, and zero otherwise)

(see Davis and Meunier 2011 on the significance of Yasukuni visits on trade). We

regress Anti-China on each of these potential sources of observed backlash against trade

policy emulation in Japan and their interactions with each treatment dummy.


     Table 8 summarizes the results. We find that patriotism, measured by whether

respondents support an opinion that education should foster a love for the country, and

the lack of knowledge about trade, are not the sources of backlash (i.e., patriotic and

low-knowledge respondents do not systematically differ from other respondents in their

propensity to express anti-China sentiments with the treatments). We further find that

respondents' historical animosity against China, measured by the respondent's support

for legislator's visit to Yasukuni Shrine, and self-reported job insecurity are significant

sources of backlash. China Economic Growth Treatment (G3) increases anti-China

statements expressed in open-ended responses by 15 percentage points among Japanese

respondents who support the legislator's visit to Yasukuni Shrine.


     Exposure to the Korea Winner and Loser Treatment (G2), which reports that

Korean manufacturing industries benefit and agriculture loses from the trade agreement

                                            33
with China, increases respondents' propensity to express anti-China sentiments by 14

percentage points among economically insecure respondents. Our additional analysis,

summarized in Appendix Table A5, suggests that the results are not due to the treatment

increasing perceived labor market threats among the respondents employed in

manufacturing sector. Appendix Table A6 also demonstrates, contrary to Quinn and

Toyoda (2007), that conservative party identification is not the source of backlash.

Rather, the information about winners and losers in South Korea (electronic industry

wins, agriculture loses) has raised labor market concerns among economically insecure

respondents regardless of their sector of employment, thus leading to opposition of a

trade agreement, akin to "coalition of losers" discussed in Naoi and Kume (2011).


     Importantly, Historical Animosity (support for legislators' Yasukuni Shrine visit)

and Job Insecurity are weakly correlated at 0.14, suggesting that the two are relatively

independent sources of backlash. The finding dispels the conventional wisdom that

economic insecurities can feed into out group anxiety and ethnocentrism and vice-versa

(Mansfield and Mutz 2013; Margalit 2012; Mutz and Kim 2017). Overall, these

findings challenge the established wisdom about policy convergence across countries

as technology lowers the cost of acquiring information across borders.




                                          34
Table 8: Explaining Backlash Against Emulation in Japan, Interaction Specifications
Sample                                                     Japan
                                           (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
Dependent variable                                      Anti-China
G1: Korea Economic Growth               0.053**      0.036+       0.049*       0.032
                                        (0.019)      (0.019)     (0.020)      (0.023)
G2: Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)        0.028       0.009       0.031        0.003
                                         (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.020)      (0.023)
G3: China Economic Growth               0.053**      0.041*       0.058**     -0.019
                                        (0.019)      (0.019)     (0.020)      (0.023)
G4: China Winner (A) and Loser (E)        0.020       0.007       0.016       -0.011
                                        (0.019)      (0.018)     (0.020)      (0.024)

X: Nationalism (dummy)                         0.032
                                              (0.037)
X: Difficult to Find a Job (dummy)                          -0.044
                                                            (0.042)
X: Lack of Info (dummy)                                                 -0.053+
                                                                        (0.029)
X: Historical Animosity (dummy)                                                         0.002
                                                                                       (0.025)
G1*X                                          -0.102+          0.048       -0.053       0.019
                                               (0.053)        (0.060)     (0.042)      (0.035)
G2*X                                            -0.057        0.137*       -0.038       0.041
                                               (0.054)        (0.062)     (0.040)      (0.035)
G3*X                                            -0.074         0.039       -0.062     0.148**
                                               (0.058)        (0.061)     (0.040)      (0.035)
G4*X                                            -0.040         0.085       -0.025       0.053
                                               (0.057)        (0.063)     (0.042)      (0.035)
Control Variables                                Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes
Observations                                     2052          2052         2052        2052
Note: Group 5 (placebo group; UNESCO annual meeting news) is excluded as our base
category. For each column, the dependent variable is a binary outcome variable, with the value
of one for statements that are "anti-China" in responses to the open-ended question in Japan.
Our control variables include pre-treatment protectionist attitude, age, female, college
education, income categories, and (manufacturing and service) sectors of employment. Each
cell reports a point estimate from the OLS model and its standard error (in parentheses). The
summary of statistics for each control variable is reported in Table 2. *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01,
* p<0.05, + p<0.1




                                              35
Conclusion


       This paper has demonstrated causal effects of foreign news--news reporting

about foreign government policy and its effect on foreign society--on citizen policy

preferences. We documented emulative preference formation among voters when the

main subject of the news is perceived to be a peer country and, in the Japanese sample,

unexpected backlash effects when news report peer and non-peer success. In post-

experiment analysis, we have shown two sources of backlash that blocked emulative

preference formation among the Japanese respondents: historical animosity and

economic insecurity. Information about economic growth of rival economies or sectoral

beneficiaries and losers in a foreign country can cause those who have historical

animosities and job insecurity to oppose emulation, regardless of their sector of

employment.


     In conclusion, we speculate the generatability of our findings beyond the empirical

scope of this paper. First, do our findings still hold if the treatment is about "peer

success" of protectionist policy (e.g., raising tariffs to protect domestic jobs), or is

information about positive effects of globalization more conducive to emulative

preference formation? While this is a topic for future research, we suspect information

about the "peer success" of protectionist policy might be as effective as, or more

effective than, information about the "peer success" of liberalization policy through a

well-known human tendency for loss aversion (Tversky and Kahneman 1979).

Experimental studies on framing effects in the field of international political economy

suggest protectionist framing is more effective than pro-trade framing in shifting public

opinion (Hiscox 2006; Ardanaz et al. 2013).




                                           36
     Consistent with our speculation, Rydgren (2005) demonstrates right-wing parties

in Europe emulated a successful frame of their platform that combines anti-

establishment rhetoric with ethnocentrism across borders, giving rise to a "family of

extreme right-wing parties" that share similar policy platforms especially since 1984,

when French Front National had its first electoral success (p.416). Our findings on

cross-border emulation among voters echo Rydgren's work on emulation among parties

and challenge the emerging consensus on backlash against globalization that has

emphasized common economic shocks and structural changes in the economy as an

underlying cause. What is underlying the emergence of extreme right parties and

protectionist rhetoric might not be the common economic shocks, but rather

information acquisition and emulative learning among voters and elites across national

borders.


     Second, what is distinct about trade policy emulation and is our finding

generalizable beyond the issue of trade policy? We speculate that domestic policy

issues, such as taxation, redistribution, education and climate change, might be of

higher salience among voters and more divisive along the partisan lines than trade

(Gilens 2001). Citizens' higher predispositions about these domestic policy issues

might hinder emulation among the peer, compared to the issue of trade where salience

is low and uncertainty about its effect is high.


     Finally, how generalizable are our findings beyond the case of Japan and Taiwan?

Regions in East Asia differ from Western Europe and Latin America in the post-WWII

division between communism (e.g., China, Vietnam and North Korea) and capitalism

(e.g. Japan, Taiwan and South Korea) and resulting heterogeneous paths of political

and economic development. Indeed, conservative parties in power at the time of our

                                            37
survey experiments (Japan's Liberal Democratic Party, Taiwan's Kuomingtang and

South Korea's Saenuri party) shared pro-free trade platforms but differed on their

positions on China (the LDP was relatively anti-China compared with the Kuomingtang

and Saenuri parties). Determining how much our results travel to other continents with

more homogeneous development paths is a fruitful line of future research.




                                         38
References



Ardanaz, Martin, M. Victoria Murillo, and Pablo M. Pinto. 2013. "Sensitivity to Issue

Framing on Trade Policy Preferences: Evidence from a Survey Experiment."

International Organization 67(2): 411-437.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818313000076.



Suzuki, Takuya. 2020, "Why Japan Does Not Adopt `The World Standard' Korean

Corona Testing System" [`Sekai hyojun' no kankoku-shiki corona kensa: Nihon ga

saiyo shinai riyuu], Asahi Shimbun, 25 April, 2020.



Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2013. "The China Syndrome:

Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States." American

Economic Review 103(6): 2121-2168.

https://doi.org/10.3386/w18054.



Bansak, Kirk, Jens Hainmueller, and Dominik Hangartner. 2016. "How Economic,

Humanitarian, and Religious Concerns Shape European Attitudes Toward Asylum

Seekers." Science 354(6309): 217-222.

10.1126/science.aag2147.



Berry, Frances Stokes, and William D. Berry. 1990. "State Lottery Adoptions as

Policy Innovations: An Event History Analysis." American Political Science Review

84 (2): 395­415. https://doi.org/10.2307/1963526.



                                         39
Brooks, Sarah M. 2005. "Interdependent and Domestic Foundations of Policy

Change: The Diffusion of Pension Privatization around the World." International

Studies Quarterly 49(2): 273-294.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0020-8833.2005.00345.x.



Bullock, John G., Alan S. Gerber, Seth J. Hill, and Gregory A. Huber. 2015. "Partisan

Bias in Factual Beliefs about Politics." Quarterly Journal of Political Science 10(4):

519­578.

https://doi.org/10.3386/w19080.



Campbell, Angus, Philip E. Converse, Warren E. Miller, and Donald E. Stokes.

1960. The American Voter. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.



Chang, Tsan-Kuo. 1998. "All Countries Not Created Equal to Be News World System

and International Communication." Communication Research 25(5): 528-563.

https://doi.org/10.1177/009365098025005004.



Chapman, Terrence L. 2011. Securing Approval: Domestic Politics and Multilateral

Authorization for War. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



Chiang, Chun-Fang, Jin-Tan Liu, and Tsai-Wei Wen. 2013. "Individual Preferences

for Trade Partners in Taiwan." Economics and Politics 25(1): 91-109.

https://doi.org/10.1111/ecpo.12000.




                                           40
Cohen, Bernard C. 1963. Press and Foreign policy. Princeton: Princeton University

Press.



Colantone, Italo, and Piero Stanig. 2018. "Global Competition and Brexit." American

Political Science Review 112(2): 201­218.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055417000685.



Duch, Raymond M., and Randolph T. Stevenson. 2008. The Economic Vote: How

Political and Economic Institutions Condition Election Results. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.



Egan, Patrick J., and Megan Mullin. 2012. "Turning Personal Experience into

Political Attitudes: The Effect of Local Weather on Americans' Perceptions about

Global Warming." Journal of Politics 74(3): 796-809.

https:///doi.org/10.1017/S0022381612000448.



Entman, Robert M. 2004. Projections of Power: Framing News, Public Opinion, and

U.S. Foreign Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



Fiorina, Morris P. 1981. Retrospective Voting in American Elections. New Haven:

Yale University Press.



Gilens, M. 2001. "Political Ignorance and Collective Policy Preferences." American

Political Science Review 95(2): 379-396.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055401002222.

                                           41
Gomez, Brad T., and J. Matthew Wilson. 2001. "Political Sophistication and

Economic Voting in the American Electorate: A Theory of Heterogeneous

Attribution." American Journal of Political Science 45(4): 899-914.

https://doi.org/10.2307/2669331.



Gomez, Brad T., and J. Matthew Wilson. 2006. "Cognitive Heterogeneity and

Economic Voting: A Comparative Analysis of Four Democratic Electorates."

American Journal of Political Science 50(1): 127-145.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2006.00174.x.



Graham, Erin R., Charles R. Shipan, and Craig Volden. 2013. "The Diffusion of

Policy Diffusion Research in Political Science." British Journal of Political Science

43(3): 673-701.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123412000415



Greenhill, Brain, Layna Mosley, and Aseem Prakash. 2009. "Trade-Based Diffusion

of Labor Rights: A Panel Study, 1986­2002." American Political Science Review

103(4): 669-690.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055409990116.



Guardino, Matt, and Denny Hayes. 2017. "Foreign Voices, Party Cues, and U.S.

Public Opinion about Military Action." International Journal of Public Opinion

Research 30(3): 504-516.

https://doi.org/10.1093/ijpor/edx009.

                                          42
Guisinger, Alexandra. 2009. "Determining Trade Policy: Do Voters Hold Politicians

Accountable?" International Organization 63(3): 533-557.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818309090183.



Guisinger, Alexandra. 2017. American Opinion on Trade: Preferences without

Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.



Hainmueller, Jens, and Daniel J. Hopkins. 2015. "The Hidden American Immigration

Consensus: A Conjoint Analysis of Attitudes toward Immigrants." American Journal

of Political Science 59(3): 529-548. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12138.



Hainmueller, Jens, and Michael J. Hiscox. 2006. "Learning to Love Globalization:

Education and Individual Attitudes toward International Trade." International

Organization 60(2), 469-498. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818306060140.



Hainmueller, Jens, and Michael J. Hiscox. 2010. "Attitudes toward Highly Skilled and

Low-skilled Immigration: Evidence from a Survey Experiment." American Political

Science Review 104(1): 61-84. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055409990372.



Hayes, Denny and Matt Guardino. 2010. "Whose Views Made the News? Media

Coverage and the March to War in Iraq." Political Communication 27(1): 59-87.

https://doi.org/10.1080/10584600903502615.




                                          43
Hayes, Denny and Matt Guardino. 2011. "The Influence of Foreign Voices on U.S.

Public Opinion." American Journal of Political Science 55(4): 830-850.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2011.00523.x.



Hiscox, Michael J. 2006. "Through a Glass and Darkly: Attitudes Toward

International Trade and the Curious Effects of Issue Framing." International

Organization 60(3): 755-780. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818306060255.



Ho, Ming-sho. 2015. "Occupy Congress in Taiwan: Political Opportunity, Threat and

the Sunflower Movement," Journal of East Asian Studies 15(1): 69-97.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S1598240800004173.



Hobbs, William R., Nicholas A. Christakis, and James H. Fowler. 2014. "Widowhood

Effects in Voter Participation." American Journal of Political Science 58(1): 1-16.

https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12040.



Huang, Haifeng. 2015. "International Knowledge and Domestic Evaluations in a

Changing Society: The Case of China." American Political Science Review 109(3):

613-634. https://doi.org/10.1017/S000305541500026X.



Jensen, Robert, and Emily Oster. 2009. "The Power of TV: Cable Television and

Women's Status in India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(3): 1057­1094.

https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2009.124.3.1057.




                                          44
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of

Decision under Risk." Econometrica 47(2): 263-91.

https://doi.org/10.2307/1914185.



Kayser, Mark A., and Michael Peress. 2012. "Benchmarking Across Borders:

Electoral Accountability and the Necessity of Comparison." American Political

Science Review 106(3): 661-684.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055412000275.



Kelley, Judith, and Beth A. Simmons. 2015. "Policy by Number: Indicators as Social

Pressure in International Relations." American Journal of Political Science 59(1): 55-

70.

https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12119.



Kern, Holger, and Jens Hainmueller. 2009. "Opium for the Masses: How Foreign Free

Media Can Stabilize Authoritarian Regimes." Political Analysis 17(3): 377-399.

https://doi.org/10.1093/pan/mpp017.



Kinder, Donald R., and Roderick D. Kiewiet. 1981. "Sociotropic politics: The

American case." British Journal of Political Science 11(2): 129-161.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123400002544.



Kinder, Donald R., and Roderick D. Kiewiet. 1979. "Economic Discontent and

Political Behavior: The Role of Personal Grievances and Collective Economic




                                          45
Judgments in Congressional Voting." American Journal of Political Science 23(3):

495­527.

http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2111027.



Kuo, Jason, and Megumi Naoi. 2015. "Individual Attitudes." In The Oxford

Handbook of the Political Economy of International Trade, ed. Lisa L. Martin.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.



Lake, David A. 2009. "Regional Hierarchy: Authority and Local International Order."

Review of International Studies 35(S1): 35­58.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0260210509008420.



Laroche, Michel, Jasmin Bergeron, and Guido Barbaro-Forleo. 2001. "Targeting

Consumers Who Are Willing to Pay More for Environmentally Friendly Products."

Journal of Consumer Marketing 18(6): 503-520.

https://doi.org/10.1108/EUM0000000006155.



Lee, Chang Kil, and David Strange. 2006. "The International Diffusion of Public-

Sector Downsizing." International Organization 60(4): 883-909.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818306060292.



Lu, Jie, John Aldrich, and Tianjian Shi. 2014. "Revisiting Media Effects in

Authoritarian Societies: Democratic Conceptions, Collectivistic Norms, and Media

Access in Urban China." Politics & Society 42(2): 1-31.

https://doi.org/10.1177/0032329213519423.

                                          46
Lü, Xiaobo, Kenneth Scheve, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2012. "Inequity Aversion

and the International Distribution of Trade Protection." American Journal of Political

Science 56(3): 638-654.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2012.00589.x.



Lupu, Yonatan., and Erik Voeten. 2012. "Precedent in International Courts: A

Network Analysis of Case Citations by the European Court of Human Rights." British

Journal of Political Science 42(2): 413-439.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123411000433.



Lupia, Arthur. 1994. "Shortcuts Versus Encyclopedias: Information and Voting

Behavior in California Insurance Reform Elections." American Political Science

Review 88(1): 63­76. https://doi.org/10.2307/2944882.



MacKuen, Michael B., and Steven L. Coombs. 1981. More than News: Media Power

in Public Affair. Beverly Hills: Sage.



MacKuen, Michael B., Robert S. Erikson, and James A. Stimson. 1992. "Peasants or

Bankers? The American Electorate and the U.S. Economy." American Political

Science Review 86(3): 597-611.

https://doi.org/10.2307/1964124.




                                          47
Manheim, Jarol B., and Robert B. Albritton. 1983. "Changing National Images:

International Public Relations and Media Agenda Setting." American Political

Science Review 78(3): 641-657.

https://doi.org/10.2307/1961834.



Mansfield, Edward D., and Diana C. Mutz. 2009. "Support for Free Trade: Self-

Interest, Sociotropic Politics, and Out-Group Anxiety." International

Organization 63(3): 425-457.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818309090158.



Mutz, Diana C., and Edward D. Mansfield. 2013. Public Understanding of Economic

Globalization. Issues in Governance Studies 56. Washington, DC: Brookings

Institution.



Mansfield, Edward D., and Diana C. Mutz. 2013. "US versus Them: Mass Attitudes

toward Offshore Outsourcing." World Politics 65 (4): 571­608.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0043887113000191.



Margalit, Yotam. 2012. "Lost in Globalization: International Economic Integration

and the Sources of Popular Discontent." International Studies Quarterly 56(3): 484-

500. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2478.2012.00747.x.



McNelly, John T., and Fausto Izcaray. 1986. "International News Exposure and

Images of Nations." Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly 63(3): 546-553.

https://doi.org/10.1177/107769908606300315.

                                          48
Mutz, Diana C. 1992. "Impersonal Influence: Effects of Representations of Public

Opinion on Political Attitudes." Political Behavior 14(2): 89-122.

https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00992237.



Naoi, Megumi. 2020. "Survey Experiments in International Political Economy: What

We (Don't) Know About the Backlash Against Globalization." Annual Review of

Political Science 23: 333-356.

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-050317-063806



Naoi, Megumi, and Ikuo Kume. 2011. "Explaining Mass Support for Agricultural

Protectionism: Evidence from a Survey Experiment During the Global

Recession." International Organization 65(4): 771-795.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818311000221.



Naoi, Megumi and Shujiro Urata. 2013. "Domestic Politics in Japan." Asian

Economic Policy Review 8(2): 326-349. https://doi.org/10.1111/aepr.12035.



Naoi, Megumi, and Ikuo Kume. 2015. "Workers or Consumers? A Survey

Experiment on the Duality of Citizens' Interests in the Politics of

Trade." Comparative Political Studies 48(l0): 1293-1317.

https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414015574879.




                                           49
Nincic, Miroslav, and Bruce Russett. 1979. "The Effect of Similarity and Interest on

Attitudes Toward Foreign Countries." Public Opinion Quarterly 43(1): 68­78.

https://doi.org/10.1086/268492.



Popkin, Samuel L. 1994. The Reasoning Voter: Communication and Persuasion in

Presidential Campaigns. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



Quinn, Dennis, and Maria A. Toyota. 2007. "Ideology and Voter Preferences as

Determinants of Financial Globalization." American Journal of Political Science

51(2): 344-363.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2007.00255.x.



Rho, Sungmin, and Michael Tomz. 2017. "Why Don't Trade Preferences Reflect

Economic Self-Interest?" International Organization 71(S1): S85­S108.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818316000394.



Ricardo, David. 1955. The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo: Volume 10,

Biographical Miscellany. Vol. 10. Cambridge University Press.



Rydgren, Jens. 2005. "Is Extreme Right-wing Populism Contagious? Explaining the

Emergence of a New Party Family." European Journal of Political Research 44(3):

413­437.

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-6765.2005.00233.x.




                                         50
Simmons, Beth A., Frank Dobbin, and Geoffrey Garrett. 2006. "Introduction: The

International Diffusion of Liberalism." International Organization 60(4): 781­810.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818306060267.



Simmons, Beth A., and Zachary Elkins. 2004. "The Globalization of Liberalization:

Policy Diffusion in the International Political Economy." American Political Science

Review 98(1): 171-189.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055404001078.



Smithey, Shannon I. 2001. "A Tool, Not a Master: The Use of Foreign Case Law in

Canada and South Africa." Comparative Political Studies 34(10): 1188-1211.

https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414001034010004.



Suzuki, Motoshi. 1991. "The Rationality of Economic Voting and the

Macroeconomic Regime." American Journal of Political Science 35(3): 624-642.

http://doi.org/10.2307/2111558.



Salwen, Michael B., and Frances R. Matera. 1992. "Public Salience of Foreign

Nations." Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 69(3): 623-632.

https://doi.org/10.1177/107769909206900310.



Scheve, Kenneth F., and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001. "What Determines Individual

Trade-Policy Preferences?" Journal of International Economics 54(2): 267­292.

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-1996(00)00094-5.




                                         51
Semetko, Holli A., Joanne B. Brzinski, David Weaver, and Lars Willnat. 1992. "TV

News and U.S. Public Opinion About Foreign Countries: The Impact of Exposure and

Attention." International Journal of Public Opinion Research 4(1): 18-36.

https://doi.org/10.1093/ijpor/4.1.18.



Simon, Herbert A. 1957. Models of Man; Social and Rational. Oxford: Wiley.



Snyder, James M., and David Strömberg. 2010. "Press Coverage and Political

Accountability." Journal of Political Economy 118(2): 355­408.

http://doi.org/10.1086/652903.



Volden, Craig. 2006. "States as Policy Laboratories: Emulating Success in the

Children's Health Insurance Program." American Journal of Political Science 50(2):

294­312. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2006.00185.x.



Volden, Craig, Michael M. Ting, and Daniel P. Carpenter. 2008. "A Formal Model of

Learning and Policy Diffusion." The American Political Science Review 102 (3):

319­332. https://doi.org/ 10.1017/S0003055408080271.



Walter, Stefanie, Elias Dinas, Ignacio Jurado, and Nikitas Konstantinidis. 2018.

"Noncooperation by Popular Vote: Expectations, Foreign Intervention, and the Vote

in the 2015 Greek Bailout Referendum." International Organization 72(4): 969­94.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818318000255.




                                          52
Wanta, Wayne, Guy Golan, and Cheolhan Lee. 2004. "Agenda Setting and

International News: Media Influence on Public Perceptions of Foreign

Nations." Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly 81(2): 364-377.

https://doi.org/10.1177/107769900408100209.



Weaver, James B., Christopher J. Porter, and Margaret E. Evans. 1984. "Patterns in

Foreign News Coverage on U.S. Network Television: A 10-Year

Analysis." Journalism and Mass Communication Quarterly 61(2): 356-363.

https://doi.org/10.1177/107769908406100217.



White, Theodore H. 1973. The Making of the President 1972. New York:

Atheneum House, Incr Educational Corporation.



Zaller, John R. 1992. The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion. Cambridge Studies in

Public Opinion and Political Psychology Cambridge University Press.




                                         53
     Appendix for "What Do Voters Learn from Foreign News?"


A1. Balance Tables
       A1.1. The Japanese Sample
       A1.2. The Taiwanese Sample
A2. The Survey Flow
A3. The English Translation of the Treatment
A4. Whose Minds Did Treatment 4 (China Winner and Loser) Change?
A5. Testing the Labor Market Competition Explanation (High vs. Low Skilled)
A6. Testing the Voter Ideology Explanation (Quinn and Toyoda 2007)
A7. Logit Estimates for Tables 3,4, 6 and 7




                             Appendix 1
A1. Balance Tables

A1.1. The Japanese Sample

                                                     Difference in Means                   Mean
 Variable                  # of Obs.                       (Std. Err.)
                                           G1-G5      G2-G5          G3-G5      G4-G5           G5
 Age                       2075              -0.07        0.30          -0.32    -0.27        42.47
                                            (0.71)      (0.71)         (0.71)   (0.71)
 Female                    2075               0.02        0.02           0.04     0.01          0.46
                                            (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)   (0.03)
 College                   2075               0.01       -0.04           0.01    -0.01          0.59
                                            (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)   (0.03)
 Manufacturing             2075              -0.03     -0.06*           -0.03    -0.05          0.19
                                            (0.02)      (0.03)         (0.02)   (0.03)
 Service                   2075               0.03        0.01           0.01     0.01          0.42
                                            (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)   (0.03)
 Protectionist             2075               0.02        0.03          -0.01    -0.01          0.24
                                            (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)   (0.03)
 Sim2Korea                 2075               0.01        0.01           0.01     0.01          0.14
                                            (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.02)   (0.02)
 Sim2China                 2075              -0.02       -0.03          -0.03    -0.02          0.07
                                            (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.02)   (0.02)
 Income: Category 1        2075               0.01        0.01           0.01     0.01          0.03
                                            (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)   (0.01)
 Income: Category 2        2075              -0.01        0.01          -0.01    -0.01          0.05
                                            (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)   (0.01)
 Income: Category 3        2075              -0.03       -0.03          -0.01    -0.01          0.08
                                            (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.02)   (0.01)
 Income: Category 4        2075              -0.02       -0.01          -0.02    -0.03          0.10
                                            (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.02)   (0.02)
 Income: Category 5        2075              -0.01        0.01           0.01     0.01          0.10
                                            (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.02)   (0.02)
 Income: Category 6        2075               0.03       -0.03           0.01    -0.02          0.11
                                            (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.02)   (0.02)
 Income: Category 7        2075               0.02        0.01           0.03     0.01          0.24
                                            (0.03)      (0.03)         (0.03)   (0.03)
 Income: Category 8        2075               0.01        0.02          -0.01     0.03          0.06
                                            (0.01)      (0.02)         (0.02)   (0.02)
 Income: Category 9        2075              -0.01        0.01         0.03*      0.01          0.03
                                            (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)    (0.01
 Income: Category 10       2075              -0.01        0.01          -0.01    -0.01          0.03
                                            (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)   (0.01)
 Income: Category 11       2075               0.01       -0.01           0.01     0.01          0.01
                                            (0.01)      (0.01)         (0.01)   (0.01)
 Income: Category 12       2075              -0.01       -0.01          -0.01     0.01          0.15
                                            (0.02)      (0.02)         (0.02)   (0.02)
Note: Except for the mean estimates for the placebo group (G5), each cell reports difference-in-means
estimate and its standard error in parentheses. G1, G2, G3, and G4 are binary indicators for the
experimental condition of Korea Economic Growth, Korea Winner and Loser, China Economic Growth ,
China Winner and Loser, respectively. G5 is the placebo group, in which respondents are randomly
assigned to read news about UNESCO meeting.      ***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05


                                            Appendix 2
A1.2. The Taiwanese Sample


                                                     Difference in Means                   Mean
 Variable                 # of Obs.                        (Std. Err.)
                                           G1-G5      G2-G5          G3-G5      G4-G5          G5
 Age                      2390             -0.100         0.77          -0.35     -0.78      39.07
                                            (0.70)     (0.67)          (0.69)    (0.69)
 Female                   2390                0.01        0.02          -0.01      0.02        0.53
                                            (0.03)     (0.03)          (0.03)    (0.03)
 College                  2390               -0.02       -0.05          -0.02     -0.01        0.65
                                            (0.03)     (0.03)          (0.03)    (0.03)
 Manufacture              2390                0.03       -0.01           0.04      0.01        0.21
                                            (0.03)     (0.03)          (0.03)    (0.03)
 Service                  2390                0.01        0.01          -0.01      0.01        0.62
                                            (0.03)     (0.03)          (0.03)    (0.03)
 Protectionist            2390               -0.01       -0.02          -0.01     -0.01        0.21
                                            (0.03)     (0.03)          (0.03)    (0.03)
 Sim2Korea                2390                0.05        0.01           0.01      0.04        0.70
                                            (0.03)     (0.03)          (0.03)    (0.03)
 Sim2China                2390               -0.05       -0.05          -0.02     -0.05        0.51
                                            (0.03)     (0.03)          (0.03)    (0.03)
 Income: Category 1       2390                0.01       -0.01           0.01     -0.01        0.02
                                            (0.01)     (0.01)          (0.01)    (0.01)
 Income: Category 2       2390                0.01       -0.01          -0.01      0.01        0.01
                                            (0.01)     (0.01)          (0.01)    (0.01)
 Income: Category 3       2390               -0.01        0.01           0.01     -0.01        0.02
                                            (0.01)     (0.01)          (0.01)    (0.01)
 Income: Category 4       2390               -0.01        0.01          -0.01      0.01        0.05
                                            (0.01)     (0.01)          (0.01)    (0.01)
 Income: Category 5       2390               -0.01       -0.03          -0.03   -0.04*         0.10
                                            (0.02)     (0.02)          (0.02)    (0.02)
 Income: Category 6       2390                0.01        0.01           0.01      0.01        0.14
                                            (0.02)     (0.02)          (0.02)    (0.02)
 Income: Category 7       2390                0.01        0.01           0.03     -0.01        0.17
                                            (0.02)     (0.02)          (0.02)    (0.02)
 Income: Category 8       2390               -0.01       -0.01          -0.01     -0.01        0.19
                                            (0.03)     (0.02)          (0.03)    (0.03)
 Income: Category 9       2390               -0.02        0.01          -0.01      0.02        0.21
                                            (0.03)     (0.03)          (0.03)     (0.03
 Income: Category 10      2390                0.01        0.01          -0.02     -0.01        0.06
                                            (0.02)     (0.01)          (0.02)    (0.02)
 Income: Category 11      2390                0.01        0.01           0.01      0.01        0.02
                                            (0.01)     (0.01)          (0.01)    (0.01)
 Income: Category 12      2390                0.01        0.01           0.02    0.02*         0.01
                                            (0.01)     (0.01)          (0.01)    (0.01)
Note: Except for the mean estimate for the placebo group (G5), each cell reports difference-in-means
estimate and its standard error in parentheses. G1, G2, G3, and G4 are binary indicators for the
experimental condition of Korea Economic Growth, Korea Winner and Loser, China Economic Growth,
China Winner and Loser, respectively. G5 is the placebo group, in which respondents are randomly
assigned to read news about UNESCO meeting.     ***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05


                                            Appendix 3
  A2. The Survey Flow

                                      Pre-treatment Questions
                   trade attitudes, subjective similarity ratings of foreign countries



                      Random Assignment to Five Treatment Conditions
               G1: Korea Economic Growth
               G2: Korea Winner (Electronics) and Loser (Agriculture)
               G3: China Economic Growth
               G4: China Winner (Electronics) and Loser (Agriculture)
               G5:P lacebo: UNESCO Meeting



                                   Enforcement Question (Quiz)
                  "Q: What is the main issue covered in this news?"
                     1. Arms races
                     2. Economic cooperation
                     3. Cultural and educational exchange
                      4. Territorial dispute


                                        Outcome Questions



                                  Show the Same Treatment Again



                            Enforcement Question (a longer quiz)
"Q: What is the main idea of the news article you just read?"
1. The Korea-China free trade agreement remains under negotiation.
2. Neither Korean nor Chinese government is willing to enter a free trade agreement.
3. [Options are randomly assigned by pre-assigned groups]
    3.1. The Korea-China free trade agreement will boost Korean economy.
    3.2. The Korea-China free trade agreement will benefit Korean electronics industries, but hurt
    its agriculture.
     3.3 The Korea-China free trade agreement will boost Chinese economy.
     3.4. The Korea-China free trade agreement will benefit Chinese electronics at the expense of
     its domestic agriculture.
     3.5. One thousand foreigners visited Nagoya city for the UNESCO annual meeting.
                                           Appendix 4
A3. The English Translation of Treatments

Treatment Group 1: Korea Economic Growth
English Translation: Korea-China FTA Negotiation Concluded
[Reporter, Beijing] On November 10, 2014, South Korea concluded the negotiation
with China to enter a free trade agreement. Major newspapers in Korea report that this
agreement will boost Korean economy by about 2% of its current GDP.




Note: Above image is a newspaper treatment for the Group 1 (Korea Economic
Growth) in Japanese language.




Note: Above image is a newspaper treatment for the Group 1 (Korea Economic
Growth) in Chinese language.




                                     Appendix 5
Treatment Group 2: Korea Winner and Loser


English Translation: Korea-China FTA Negotiation Concluded
[Reporter, Beijing] On November 10, 2014, South Korea concluded the negotiation
with China to enter a free trade agreement. Major newspapers in Korea report that this
agreement will benefit Korean electronics; by contrast, it will harm Korean agriculture.




Note: Above image is a newspaper treatment for the Group 2 (Korea Winner and
Loser) in Japanese language.




Note: Above image is a newspaper treatment for the Group 2 (Korea Winner and
Loser) in Chinese language.




                                      Appendix 6
Placebo Group 5: UNESCO Annual Meeting
English Translation: UNESCO Meeting Held in Japan
[Reporter, Beijing] On November 10, 2014, an annual meeting of UNESCO's
Education for Sustainable Development was held in Nagoya City, Japan. Around a
thousand representatives from the member states, NGOs and companies met to discuss
worldwide issues.




Note: Above image is a newspaper treatment for the Group 5 (placebo; UNESCO
annual meeting) in Japanese language.




Note: Above image is a newspaper treatment for the Group 5 (placebo; UNESCO
annual meeting) in Chinese language.




                                       Appendix 7
A4. Whose Minds Did Treatment 4 (China Winner and Loser) Change?

Does Treatment 4 (China Winner and Loser) increase opposition to a trade agreement
in Japan by changing the minds of pro-trade respondents or strengthening the belief of
protectionist respondents, measured before the treatment? As Model (2) of Table A4
shows, the backlash effects (higher opposition to a trade agreement than a placebo
group) are concentrated among free-trading respondents, measured before the treatment.
A news report about the expected losses for Chinese electronic industries and benefits
for the Chinese agriculture increased opposition to a trade agreement with China by 8.6
percentage points among free-trading Japanese respondents; though when we interact
each of the treatment dummies with the pre-treatment attitudes toward trade, Model (3)
shows the effect is imprecisely estimated (or not statistically significant).

 Table A4: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Pre-treatment Trade Attitudes
 Sample                                                    Japan
 Model                                    (1)                    (2)                   (3)
 Dependent variable                 Opposing a Trade     Opposing a Trade         Opposing a
                                  Agreement with China   Agreement with        Trade Agreement
                                                              China               with China
                                  Coef. / (Std. Err.)    Coef. / (Std. Err.)   Coef. / (Std. Err.)
 Group 1 (G1):                             -0.038             -0.010                -0.010
 Korea Economic Growth                     (0.068)           (0.039)               (0.039)
 Group 2 (G2):                              0.080             -0.031                -0.033
 Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)            (0.067)           (0.039)               (0.039)
 Group 3 (G3):                              0.081              0.008                 0.005
 China Economic Growth                     (0.070)           (0.038)               (0.038)
 Group 4 (G4):                              0.037             0.086*                0.084*
 China Winner (A) and Loser (E)            (0.069)           (0.038)               (0.038)
 Protectionist Predisposition                                                      0.236**
                                                                                   (0.055)
 Protectionist*G1                                                                   -0.023
                                                                                   (0.077)
 Protectionist *G2                                                                   0.115
                                                                                   (0.077)
 Protectionist *G3                                                                   0.067
                                                                                   (0.079)
 Protectionist *G4                                                                  -0.039
                                                                                   (0.078)
 Subsample: Protectionist                    Yes                No                    Full
 N                                           519               1556                  2075
***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, +p<0.1




                                           Appendix 8
A5. Testing the Labor Market Competition Explanation (High vs. Low Skilled)

Does Treatment 4 (China Winner and Loser) increase opposition to a trade agreement
in Japan due to the heightened sense of labor market competition? Table A5, Model (1)
shows Treatment 4 increased opposition to a trade agreement with China only among
Japanese respondents who had a college degree or above, who are expected to benefit
from increasing trade with China. This finding disconfirms the labor market
competition explanation for the opposition we observe with Treatment 4.

 Table A5: Does G4 Increase Opposition to Trade in Japan Due to Labor Market Competition?
 Sample                                                    Japan
 Model                                    (1)                    (2)                   (3)
 Dependent variable                 Opposing a Trade     Opposing a Trade      Opposing a Trade
                                  Agreement with China   Agreement with        Agreement with
                                                              China                  China
                                  Coef. / (Std. Err.)    Coef. / (Std. Err.)   Coef. / (Std. Err.)
 Group 1 (G1):                              0.019             -0.084                -0.084
 Korea Economic Growth                     (0.044)           (0.053)               (0.053)
 Group 2 (G2):                              0.043             -0.064                -0.067
 Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)            (0.044)           (0.051)               (0.051)
 Group 3 (G3):                              0.055             -0.042                -0.042
 China Economic Growth                     (0.043)           (0.053)               (0.053)
 Group 4 (G4):                             0.100*              0.030                 0.031
 China Winner (A) and Loser (E)            (0.044)           (0.053)               (0.052)
 College                                                                           -0.084+
                                                                                   (0.049)
 College *G1                                                                         0.112
                                                                                   (0.069)
 College *G2                                                                         0.111
                                                                                   (0.068)
 College *G3                                                                         0.106
                                                                                   (0.068)
 College *G4                                                                         0.074
                                                                                   (0.068)
 Subsample: College                          Yes                No                    Full
 N                                          1221                854                  2075
***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, +p<0.1




                                           Appendix 9
A6. Testing the Voter Ideology Explanation (Quinn and Toyoda 2007)
According to Quinn and Toyoda (2007), conservative party identification could be an
ideational or partisan source of backlash against emulation. Our experiments did not
lend support to the voter ideology-diffusion argument. We interacted each of our
treatment indicators with the conservative party identification (Japan's LDP and
Taiwan's KMT) and estimate the effects on our main dependent variables, opposing a
trade agreement with China in Japan and opposing deeper integration with China in
Taiwan, respectively.

 Table A6: Testing the Voter Ideology/Partisan ID Explanations in Japan and Taiwan
 Sample                                               Japan                   Taiwan
                                              Opposing a trade          Opposing deeper
 Dependent Variable                            agreement with           integration with
                                                   China                     China
                                            Coef. / (Std. Err.)          Coef. / (Std. Err.)

 G1: Korea Economic Growth                            -0.014                 -0.097**
                                                      (0.037)                 (0.030)
 G2: Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)                   0.008                   -0.021
                                                      (0.037)                 (0.029)
 G3: China Economic Growth                            0.035                   -0.071*
                                                      (0.037)                 (0.030)
 G4: China Winner (A) and Loser (E)                   0.079*                  -0.025
                                                      (0.038)                 (0.030)
 LDP (Ruling Party in Japan)                         0.165**
                                                      (0.059)
 KMT (Ruling Party in Taiwan)                                                -0.268**
                                                                              (0.047)
 G1*LDP (or KMT)                                      0.006                    0.125
                                                      (0.086)                 (0.068)
 G2* LDP (or KMT)                                     -0.054                   0.019
                                                      (0.083)                 (0.069)
 G3* LDP (or KMT)                                     -0.062                   0.104
                                                      (0.085)                 (0.069)
 G4* LDP (or KMT)                                     -0.054                   0.035
                                                      (0.080)                 (0.075)
 Control Variables                                      Yes                     Yes
 N                                                     2075                    2390
***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, +p<0.1

                                        Appendix 10
A7. Average Marginal Effects from Logit Estimates for Tables 3, 4, 6 and 7.

 Table A7.1: Peer Emulation Effects in Japan and Taiwan, Average Marginal Effects from
 Logit Estimates
Sample                                           Japan                     Taiwan
                                            (1)           (2)        (3)             (4)
Dependent variable                      Opposing a     Opposing   Opposing a Opposing the
                                           trade        deeper    Merchandise Service Trade
                                        agreement     integration   Trade       Agreement
                                        with China   with China   Agreement     with China
                                                                  with China

Group 1 (G1):                                  -0.017       -0.069**       -0.015       -0.065**
Korea Economic Growth                         (0.033)        (0.025)       (0.024)       (0.025)
Group 2 (G2):                                  -0.002         0.004         0.026         0.024
Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)                (0.033)        (0.026)       (0.024)       (0.026)
Group 3 (G3):                                   0.021        -0.043+        0.009         -0.018
China Economic Growth                         (0.033)        (0.025)       (0.024)       (0.026)
Group 4 (G4):                                 0.075*          -0.001        0.020         -0.014
China Winner (A) and Loser (E)                (0.034)        (0.026)       (0.024)       (0.026)

Control Variables                               Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
Observations                                   2075           2390          2390          2390
Note: Group 5 (placebo group; UNESCO annual meeting news) is excluded as our base category. Our
control variables include pre-treatment protectionist attitude, age, female, college education, income
categories, and (manufacturing and service) sectors of employment. The summary of statistics for each
control variable is reported in Table 2.   *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1




                                              Appendix 11
Table A7.2: Emulation Effects in Japan and Taiwan by Similarity Ratings, Average Marginal
Effects from Logit Estimates
Sample                                       Japan                         Taiwan
Subsample: Similar to Korea         Yes       No         Full     Yes         No       Full
Model                                (1)        2         (3)     (4)         (5)       (6)
Dependent variable
                                   Opposing a trade agreement    Opposing deeper economic
                                          with China               integration with China
Group 1 (G1):                         -0.090+     0.014       0.017     -0.074**     -0.036      -0.036
Korea Economic Growth                 (0.050)    (0.044)    (0.041)      (0.028)    (0.052)     (0.045)
Group 2 (G2):                          -0.032     0.013       0.013        0.003     0.010        0.011
Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)        (0.050)    (0.044)    (0.041)      (0.030)    (0.050)     (0.044)
Group 3 (G3):                          -0.002     0.037       0.032       -0.029    -0.084+      -0.067
China Economic Growth                 (0.051)    (0.044)    (0.041)      (0.029)    (0.048)     (0.042)
Group 4 (G4):                           0.010    0.104*      0.100*        0.011     -0.023      -0.019
China Winner (A) and Loser (E)        (0.053)    (0.043)    (0.041)      (0.030)    (0.051)     (0.045)
Sim2Korea                                                   -0.121*                              -0.052
                                                            (0.047)                             (0.036)
Sim2Korea*G1                                                -0.121+                              -0.051
                                                            (0.070)                             (0.055)
Sim2Korea*G2                                                 -0.042                              -0.009
                                                            (0.067)                             (0.050)
Sim2Korea*G3                                                 -0.038                              0.040
                                                            (0.067)                             (0.054)
Sim2Korea*G4                                                 -0.094                               0028
                                                            (0.068)                             (0.053)
Control Variables                       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes
Observations                            801        1265       2075        1708        682        2390
Note: This table summarizes the heterogeneous treatment effects by pre-treatment measure of
respondents' perceived similarity between South Korea and their home country (Japan or Taiwan).
Models (1) and (4) were the average marginal effects from logit estimates for the respondents who
rated South Korea "somewhat similar" or "similar" to their home country, and Models (2) and (5)
were the average marginal effects from the logit estimates for the respondents who rated South Korea
"somewhat dissimilar" or "dissimilar" to their home country. For the respondents who rated South
Korea "neither similar nor dissimilar" to their home country (474 in the Japanese sample and 587 in
the Taiwanese), we grouped them into subsamples of being rated as similar to Korea. We did so in
order to split the full sample as equitably as possible. Group 5 (placebo group; UNESCO annual
meeting news) is excluded as our base category. Models (3) and (6) were logit estimates from
interaction term specification. Our control variables include pre-treatment protectionist attitude, age,
female, college education, income categories, and (manufacturing and service) sectors of employment.
The summary of statistics for each control variable is reported in Table 2.      ***p<0.001, **p<0.01,
*p<0.05




                                              Appendix 12
Table A7.3: Foreign News Treatments Informed Respondents in Japan and Taiwan, Average
Marginal Effects from Logit Estimates
Sample                                             Japan                    Taiwan
Model                                               (1)                        (2)

Dependent variable                                              Benefit JP or TW economy

Group 1 (G1):                                            0.036**                       0.052*
Korea Economic Growth                                    (0.013)                       (0.025)
Group 2 (G2):                                            0.021+                         0.001
Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)                           (0.011)                       (0.023)
Group 3 (G3):                                             0.015                        0.056*
China Economic Growth                                    (0.010)                       (0.025)
Group 4 (G4):                                             0.012                        -0.019
China Winner (A) and Loser (E)                           (0.010)                      (0.0253)
Top-frequency Topic category                                No                           Yes
Percent of Open-ended Responses                            3.31                         18.45
Control Variables                                           Yes                          Yes
Observations                                               2075                         2390
Note: The table summarizes results of regressing two dependent variables on a set of dummy variables for
our experimental treatment groups, respectively, for the Japanese and Taiwanese sample. The two dependent
variables are drawn from human-coded responses to the open-ended question on why a respondent would
support or oppose a trade agreement with China in the Japanese sample, and why a respondent would
support or oppose deeper economic integration with China in the Taiwanese sample. For each column, the
dependent variable is a binary outcome variable, with the value of one for statements related to "benefit
Japan's economy" or "benefit Taiwan's economy" in responses to the open-ended question, respectively, in
Japan and Taiwan, and otherwise zero. The reported marginal effects of experimental treatments and
standard errors (in parentheses) are drawn from logit estimates. Group 5 (placebo group; UNESCO annual
meeting news) is excluded as our base category. Our control variables include pre-treatment protectionist
attitude, age, female, college education, income categories, and (manufacturing and service) sectors of
employment. The summary of statistics for each control variable is reported in Table 2.   *** p<0.001, **
p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1




                                              Appendix 13
Table A7.4: Foreign News Treatments and Anti-China Statements in Open-End Responses, Average
Marginal Effects from Logit Estimates
Sample                                                Japan                Taiwan
Model                                                  (1)                   (2)

Dependent variable                                                      Anti-China

Group 1 (G1):                                               0.040*                      -0.004
Korea Economic Growth                                       (0.017)                     (0.014)
Group 2 (G2):                                                0.021                      -0.001
Korea Winner (E) and Loser (A)                              (0.017)                     (0.014)
Group 3 (G3):                                               0.044**                     -0.004
China Economic Growth                                       (0.017)                     (0.014)
Group 4 (G4):                                                0.015                       0.005
China Winner (A) and Loser (E)                              (0.015)                     (0.014)
Top-frequency Topic category                                   No                         Yes
Percent of Open-ended Responses                               6.77                        4.85
Control Variables                                              Yes                        Yes
Observations                                                  2075                       2390
Note: The table summarizes results of regressing two dependent variables on a set of dummy variables
for our experimental treatment groups, respectively, for the Japanese and Taiwanese sample. The two
dependent variables are drawn from human-coded responses to the open-ended question on why a
respondent would support or oppose a trade agreement with China in the Japanese sample, and why a
respondent would support or oppose deeper economic integration with China in the Taiwanese sample.
For each column, the dependent variable is a binary outcome variable, with the value of one for
statements that are "anti-China" in responses to the open-ended question, respectively in Japan and
Taiwan, and otherwise zero. The reported marginal effects of experimental treatments and standard
errors (in parentheses) are drawn from logit estimates. Group 5 (placebo group; UNESCO annual
meeting news) is excluded as our base category. Our control variables include pre-treatment protectionist
attitude, age, female, college education, income categories, and (manufacturing and service) sectors of
employment. The summary of statistics for each control variable is reported in Table 2.    *** p<0.001,
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1




                                           Appendix 14
