                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     COMPETITION LAWS, NORMS AND CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY

                                          Wenzhi Ding
                                          Ross Levine
                                           Chen Lin
                                           Wensi Xie

                                       Working Paper 27493
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27493


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Wenzhi Ding, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Competition Laws, Norms and Corporate Social Responsibility
Wenzhi Ding, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 27493
July 2020
JEL No. K21,L4,M14,Z13

                                          ABSTRACT

Theory offers differing perspectives and predictions about the impact of product market
competition on corporate social responsibility (CSR). Using firm-level data on CSR from 2002
through 2015 and panel data on competition laws in 48 countries, we discover that intensifying
competition induces firms to increase CSR activities. Analyses indicate that (a) intensifying
competition spurs firms to invest more in CSR as a strategy for strengthening relationships with
workers, suppliers, and customers and (b) the competition-CSR effect is stronger in economies
where social norms prioritize CSR-type activities, e.g., treating others fairly, satisfying implicit
agreements, protecting the environment, etc.

Wenzhi Ding                                              Chen Lin
K.K. Leung Building                                      Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Hong Kong                                  The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR                                            Hong Kong
wenzhi.ding@connect.hku.hk                               chenlin1@hku.hk

Ross Levine                                              Wensi Xie
Haas School of Business                                  Department of Finance
University of California at Berkeley                     Chinese University of Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)              Hong Kong
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                                  wensixie@cuhk.edu.hk
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
                                                                                                             1

I. Introduction

        Investors and companies increasingly focus on corporate social responsibility (CSR).
For example, on January 14, 2020, Larry Fink, the CEO of BlackRock, the world's largest
asset manager, argued that, "... a company cannot achieve long-term profits without

embracing ... the needs of a broad range of stakeholders," such as customers, employees,
suppliers, and the communities where the company operates. In August of 2019, the Business
Roundtable, a group of CEOs from major U.S. corporations, committed to investing in their
employees, dealing fairly and ethically with suppliers, and protecting the environment. As
noted by Jamie Dimon, CEO of JP Morgan, "Major employers are investing in their workers
and communities because they know it is the only way to be successful over the long term."
The growing focus on CSR is global. As of 2018, about 1500 companies from around the
world with almost $90 trillion of assets were signatories to the United Nations-supported
Principles for Responsible Investing. 1 While many investors and CEOs highlight the
importance of CSR, the actual implementation of CSR actions varies markedly across firms
and countries, raising questions about its determinants.
        In this paper, we focus on one potential determinant of CSR activities--product
market competition--and evaluate differing views about the impact of product market

competition on CSR. The stakeholder value maximization view holds that intensifying
product market competition induces firms to (1) strengthen relationships with customers,
workers, suppliers, and local communities as other firms increasingly compete for those
stakeholders and (2) CSR activities are one strategy for strengthening those bonds (e.g.,
Porter and Kramer 2006; Deng, Kang, and Low 2013; Flammer 2015a). The stakeholder view
is based on the conception of the firm as a nexus of explicit and implicit contracts between
shareholders and other stakeholders (e.g., Coase 1937; Alchian and Demsetz 1972; Jensen
and Meckling 1976). To the extent that CSR activities signal a firm's commitment to honor
implicit agreements to ensure worker well-being, provide safe products and continuing


1
 For the Business Roundtable announcement and the statement by Jamie Dimon, see:
http://nbr.com/2019/08/19/the-ceos-of-nearly-200-companies-just-said-shareholder-value-is-no-longer-their-
main-objective/. For data from the UN-supported Principles for Responsible Investing, see:
https://www.unpri.org/annual-report-2018/how-we-work/the-pri-in-numbers.
                                                                                              2


service to customers, fulfill informal agreements with suppliers, and protect the environment,

CSR activities will help build loyalty and trust among stakeholders. The strengthening of
relationships with stakeholders will, in turn, foster the retention of high-quality workers,
stable supply chains, and customer loyalty (e.g., Flammer 2015b). In this regard, Flammer
(2015a) explains that the stakeholder view offers a testable prediction about competition and

CSR: intensifying product market competition creates stronger incentives for firms to bolster
relationships with stakeholders by conducting more CSR activities. As a corollary, we argue
that this view further implies that the CSR-boosting effect of competition will be greater in
economies with social norms that place a higher priority on treating others fairly and

mitigating environmental degradation, because in these economies, CSR activities are more
likely to generate greater loyalty and trust with stakeholders.
       The product differentiation view also stresses the positive effect of competition on
CSR. As argued by Flammer (2015a) intensification of product market competition can spur
firms to differentiate their products and CSR activities are one strategy for accomplishing that
goal, as research suggests that CSR activities represent positive signals about firms and their
products (e.g., Baron 2001; McWilliams and Siegel 2001; Bagnoli and Watts 2003; Siegel
and Vitaliano 2007). Prior research also shows that firms engaging in more CSR activities
increase customer loyalty and pricing power (e.g. Luo and Bhattacharya, 2009; Elfenbein and
McManus 2010; Hilger et al., 2019). Thus, the product differentiation view of CSR predicts
that greater competition induces firms to invest more in CSR to differentiate their products
and create more pricing power, cushioning the adverse ramifications of intensifying
competition on profits.
       Other theories of corporate behavior, however, suggest that intensifying product
market competition can reduce long-run value maximizing investments, including those in
CSR activities. In a textbook model with liquidity constraints, competition can compel firms
to focus on short-term survival and therefore forgo expenditures with payoff in the long-run,
such as CSR activities that increase stakeholders' welfare. For example, investing in
workplace safety could build loyalty over the long-run, but the combination of large fixed
costs to improving workplace safety, binding liquidity constraints, and shrinking profit
                                                                                                               3


margins due to intensifying competition could limit investments in workplace safety and

other CSR activities. Focusing on ethical behavior, Shleifer (2004) argues that competitive
pressures can lead firms to engage in unethical conduct to survive. For example, Shleifer
(2004) notes that an increase in competition could induce some firms to hire child labor to
reduce costs, other firms would face pressures to follow or be forced out of business. From

this perspective, intensifying product market competition encourages firms to focus less on
ethical considerations--and associated CSR activities--and more on short-run survival.2
        To evaluate these views, we assess the impact of competition laws on CSR activities
using a cross-firm, cross-country panel dataset on CSR activities (firm-level) and competition

laws (country-level) that covers the 2002-2015 period for about 1,800 firms across 47
countries. By competition laws, we refer to the rules regulating competition among firms,
such as the laws concerning mergers and acquisitions, anticompetitive agreements, the ability
of firms to exploit dominant positions in markets. To measures these laws, we use a new,
comprehensive dataset developed by Bradford and Chilton (2018) and Bradford et al. (2019).
They codified data on the competition laws for 123 countries going back to the 19th century.
From the individual laws, they create an overall index, Competition Law Index, such that
higher values indicate laws that more stringently foster competition. We examine the
relationship between the Competition Law Index and CSR activities. By CSR, we refer to (1)
corporate treatment of non-shareholder stakeholders, including employees (e.g., occupational
safety, worker training, flexible work hours, etc.), customers, suppliers, and the communities
in which firms operate, (2) corporate efforts to mitigate environmental degradation, including
by reducing emissions, fostering sustainable resource use, and engaging in green innovation,
and (3) governance over socially responsible actions. We use time-series data on firms' CSR
activities, which Thomson Reuters compiles from annual reports, stock exchange filings,


2
  Some agency models also suggest how intensifying product market competition can reduce CSR. In particular,
some argue that corporate executives receive private benefits from CSR activities, such as enhancing their
reputations with politicians, foundations, charitable organizations, and other associations (e.g., Tirole 2001;
Pagano and Volpin 2005; Benabou and Tirole 2010; Krüger 2015; and Masulis and Reza 2015). From this
perspective, executives seek to invest more than the shareholder value-maximizing amount in CSR. Thus, to the
extent that intensifying product market competition compels firms to more effectively maximize shareholder
value (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny 1997), competition will reduce the private benefits of control and expenditures
on CSR activities.
                                                                                                 4


CSR reports, the news media, etc. We test (1) whether more stringent competition laws

increase or decrease CSR activities, (2) the corollary that the CSR-boosting effect of
competition depends on social norms, and (3) and predictions from the stakeholder value and
product differentiation views of how firm financial constraints and market power shape the
impact of competition on CSR.
       By focusing on competition laws across countries, our work both contributes to and is
distinct from Flammer's (2015a) research on international trade and CSR activities. Flammer
(2015a) uses import tariff reductions to proxy for shocks to competition and shows that U.S.
firms that were more exposed to imports boosted CSR activities more than otherwise similar
firms. Rather than using tariff shocks and examining U.S. firms, we exploit time-series
variations in competition laws across almost 50 countries and assess how competition shapes
CSR activities. We also evaluate (a) the prediction that the CSR-boosting effects of
competition will be greater in economies with social norms that place a higher priority on
treating others fairly and protecting the environment and (b) predictions concerning the
differential impact of competition on CSR activities across firms facing different financial
constraints and industries with different degrees of monopolistic power.

       We find that intensifying the stringency of competition laws is associated with an
increase in CSR activities. In our baseline analyses, we regress firm-year measures of CSR on

the Competition Law Index while controlling for firm fixed effects, industry-year fixed
effects, lagged time-varying firm characteristics (e.g., size, leverage, and profitability), and
time-varying country traits (e.g., Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita). By including
firm fixed effects, we condition out all time-invariant country factors. The estimates indicate
that a one standard deviation increase in the Competition Law Index is associated with one-
quarter of a standard deviation increase in CSR activity. We then expand the control variables
to include measures of stock market development, credit market development, institutional
quality (e.g., political voice and accountability, regulatory quality, political stability, rule of
law, government effectiveness, and control of corruption), and the degree of economic
freedom. The estimated relationship between the intensity of competition law stringency and
CSR changes varies little when conditioning on these additional variables. Given these
                                                                                              5


controls and our findings that changes in CSR activities do not predict changes in competition
laws, we interpret these firm-level analyses as providing initial, suggestive evidence that
more stringent competition laws spur increases in CSR.
       We next examine a corollary of the stakeholder view of how competition boosts CSR
activities. The stakeholder view suggests that by investing in the well-being of workers,

customers, suppliers, and local communities, CSR activities build loyalty and trust with those
stakeholders. Thus, when an intensification of competition induces firms to compete for
resources and markets, they respond by investing more in CSR activities. A natural corollary
is that competition will have a bigger effect on CSR when firms expect CSR activities to

generate greater loyalty and trust with stakeholders. To evaluate this corollary, we develop
and use a proxy measure of the likely impact of CSR on stakeholders. We use data from the
World Value Survey on the degree to which individuals in a country prioritize the types of
activities associated with CSR (e.g., social attitudes toward the environment, worker and
human rights, and individual voice and accountability) to construct a Social Norms index. We
posit that the CSR-enhancing effects of competition are stronger in societies with stronger
preferences for such norms. Furthermore, assessing this corollary enhances identification by
providing evidence on one potential mechanism linking competition and CSR.
       Consistent with this corollary, we find that the CSR-boosting effects of more stringent
competition laws are greater in societies with higher values of the Social Norms index. In
particular, we include the interaction between Competition Law Index and Social Norms in
our baseline regression and find a large, positive, and statistically significant coefficient on
this interaction term. We estimate that the impact of the Competition Law Index on CSR is
about twice as large among firms in countries with above the median levels of Social Norms
as the estimated impact among the full sample of firms and countries.
       We next evaluate two key premises of both the stakeholder value maximization and
product differentiation views of how competition laws shape CSR. First, these views stress
that more stringent competition laws intensify competition and it is this boost in competition
that triggers more CSR activities to strengthen ties with stakeholder and/or differentiate
products. Since competition laws are designed to combat monopolistic power, an increase
                                                                                              6


competition law stringency should spur competition more among firms and industries with

greater, pre-existing monopolistic power. Thus, if the mechanism highlighted by these views
holds, then we should observe a much bigger effect of making competition laws more
stringent on CSR activities among firms with greater market power.
       Consistent with this first premise, we find that firms with greater pre-existing market
power boost CSR more following the enactment of stronger competition laws. Following the
literature (e.g., Tirole, 1988; Giroud and Mueller 2010), we use measures of (a) a firm's
market share of industry-country sales or assets and (b) the Herfindahl-Hirschman indicators
of the concentration of sales or assets in an industry to gauge market power before the change
in competition laws. To our baseline regression, we then include the interaction between the
Competition Law Index and each of these four pre-existing market power indicators. In all
cases, we find that the interaction term and the linear term of Competition Law Index enter
positively and significantly. These results suggest that while more stringent competition laws
on average enhance CSR, the effects are stronger for firms with greater market power and
among firms in more concentrated industries, i.e., industries in which firms are more likely to
have monopolistic power. Furthermore, the estimated impact is high. The CSR-boosting
effects of competition laws are more than twice as large among high-market-power firms,
which are firms with above the media level of pre-existing market power.
       Turning to the second premise, both the stakeholder value and product differentiation
views assume that CSR is a costly investment. This suggests a potentially important role for
financing constraints in shaping the responsiveness of CSR activities to competition.
Specifically, if intensifying competition increases the expected benefits from investing in
CSR and there are sizeable upfront costs associated with CSR investments, then financing
constraints will shape the ability of firms to respond to legal and regulation reforms that
increase competition law stringency. To evaluate this prediction, we use three measures of
each firm's financing constraints that are based on (a) accounting measures such as cash-flow
to capita, Tobin's Q, debt to capital, dividend to capital, etc. (Kaplan and Zingales 1997); (b)
size-age measures that use information on corporate size and age (e.g., Hadlock and Pierce
2010), and (c) tangible assets since tangible assets can more readily be used as collateral to
                                                                                               7


access external finance.

       We find that the impact of competition laws on CSR is smaller among more

financially constrained firms. In particular, we include the interaction between the
Competition Law Index and each of the different measures of financing constraints. In all
cases, the results indicate that financing constraints limit the ability of firms to increase CSR
in response to more stringent competition laws.
       Our analyses contribute to several lines of research. Given the growing focus by
investors and companies on corporate social responsibility, researchers are increasingly
examining the factors shaping CSR. Researchers, for example, identify factors such as social
preferences (Benabou and Tirole 2006; 2010), corporate culture and politics (e.g., Di Giuli
and Kostovetsky 2014), corporate governance (e.g., Ferrell, Liang, and Renneboog 2016),
and institutional ownership (e.g., Chen, Dong, and Lin 2020). To our knowledge, ours is the
first paper to study how the laws regulating competition among firms influence firm-level
CSR performance in an international context, and how the CSR-competition nexus depends
on social norms.


2. Data, Variable, and Sample
In this section, we first describe the time-series data on CSR for a large, international sample
of publicly-listed firms. We then discuss the panel data on national competition laws. We
conclude this section by providing summary statistics.


2.1. CSR
       The Thomson Reuters ASSET4 ESG database provides information on the CSR
activities of publicly-traded firms in more than 60 countries since 2002. They obtain these
data from corporate annual reports, stock exchange filings, corporate socially responsible
(CSR) reports, non-profit organizations, the news media, and a variety of other sources.
       Based on over 100 individual indicators of firms' CSR activities (e.g., Appendix
Table A1), Thomson Reuters creates indexes of each firm's commitment to (1) the
environment, including resource use, emissions, and green innovation, (2) the treatment of
                                                                                            8


non-shareholder stakeholders, including employee welfare, human rights, and the ethical

treatment of customers, suppliers, and the communities in which the firm operates, and (3)

the implementation of CSR activities. We now discuss each of these three indexes. From
these three indexes, we also create an overall index of CSR performance that we define below.


2.1.1. Environmental
        The Environmental index is composed of information on Resource Use, Emission
Reduction, and Green Innovation, where Appendix Table A1 defines the individual indicators
composing each of these three components. Resource Use "reflects a company's performance
and capacity to reduce the use of materials, energy or water, and to find more eco-efficient
solutions by improving supply chain management" (Thomson Reuters, 2018, p. 15) and
consists of 19 individual indicators. Emission Reduction "measures a company's commitment
to and effectiveness in reducing environmental emission in the production and operational
processes" (Thomson Reuters, 2018, p. 15), and consists of 22 individual indicators. Green
Innovation consists of 20 indicators and measures "a company's capacity to reduce the
environmental costs and burdens for its customers, thereby creating new market opportunities
through new environmental technologies and processes or eco-designed products" (Thomson
Reuters, 2018, p. 15). Green Innovation measures the extent to which a company developed
products that are used to clean the environment, generate clean, renewable energy, treat water
or improve water use efficiency, enhance energy efficiency or sustainability, reduce noise
emissions, etc. Green Innovation also includes indicators of actual investments, such as the
ratio of environmental R&D expenditures to the revenues, the proportion of energy
distributed or produced from renewable energy sources, and average fuel consumption of the
firms' fleet of vehicles.


2.1.2. Social: Treatment of Stakeholders
        The Social index aggregates information on the extent to which firms enhance
employee welfare (Workforce), promote human rights (Human Rights), engage in community
development (Community), and fulfill their responsibilities to consumers (Product
                                                                                             9


Responsibility). Since Appendix Table A1 provides the individual indicators composing these

four components, we only provide a brief description here. Workforce consists of 29

indicators and captures "a company's effectiveness towards job satisfaction, a healthy and
safe workplace, maintaining diversity and equal opportunities, and development opportunities
for its workforce" (Thomson Reuters, 2018, p. 15). Human Rights consists of eight indicators
that measure the degree to which a company respects fundamental human rights, e.g.,
freedom of association, policies against child and forced labor, and proactive policies for
using human rights as a criterion in selecting suppliers. Product Responsibility consists of 12
indicators that measure "a company's capacity to produce quality goods and services
integrating the customer's health and safety, integrity and data privacy" (Thomson Reuters,
2018, p. 15). Community is based on 14 indicators and measures "a company's commitment
towards being a good citizen, protecting public health and respecting business ethics"
(Thomson Reuters, 2018 p. 15).


2.1.3. CSR Strategy: Implementation of CSR activities
       The CSR Strategy index aggregates eight indicators on the degree to which firms
integrate CSR strategies into their daily operations and decision-making process. As detailed
in Appendix Table A1, CSR Strategy includes, inter alia, information on whether the
company has a CSR committee, publishes a CSR-related report or a section in its annual
report on CSR activities, and whether such reports follow Global Report Initiative guidelines,
etc.


2.1.4. Overall CSR Score: Average Score and PCA Score
       We aggregate the Environmental, Social, and CSR Strategy indexes into two overall
measures of CSR performance. First, Average Score equals the equally weighted average of
the three scores of Environmental, Social, and CSR Strategy. Second, PCA Score is the first
principal component of these three subcomponents.


2.2. Competition Law Index
                                                                                               10


           We obtain data on competition laws from Bradford and Chilton (2018) and Bradford et

al. (2019).3 Their database includes longitudinal data on a multiplicity of antitrust and other

laws regulating competition among firms for 123 countries from 1888 to 2010. As they
explain, their data are more comprehensive than other datasets on competition laws with
respect to the coverage of laws, countries, and years.
           Bradford and Chilton (2018) and Bradford et al. (2019) collect all existing competition

laws for 123 countries dating back to the first competition law adopted by each country over
the period from 1888 through 2010. For example, the first U.S. federal law regulating market
competition is the Sherman Act of 1890 and the first relevant competition law in Germany dates

back to 1923. They coded more than 700 competition laws for 123 countries and organized

those laws into (1) substantive provisions related to anticompetitive agreements, mergers and
acquisitions, and abuse of dominant positions and (2) authority provisions related to addressing

and remedying violations of competition laws.

           Bradford and Chilton (2018) construct an overall Competition Law Index based on the

relevant laws of each country in each year. The overall index is the average of the Authority and

Substance indexes. The Authority index captures the breadth and depth of authority regarding the

enforcement of competition laws, such as who has standing to raise concerns about the violation

of competition laws and the remedies available for enforcing those laws. The Substance index

involves provisions concerning (1) agreements among firms that limit competition

(Anticompetitive Agreements), (2) mergers and acquisitions (Merger Control), and (3) strategies

used by firms to exploit their dominant positions (Abuse of Dominance).



2.2.1. Authority
           Authority includes information on (1) who has legal standing to bring a lawsuit
concerning violations of competition laws, (2) the remedies that authorities can impose on
those who violate competition laws, and (3) the scope of law with respect to which industries
and enterprises fall under the purview of competition laws.
           Authority is the summation of eight components. Private Right of Action equals one if

3
    Comparative Competition Law: http://comparativecompetitionlaw.org/
                                                                                           11


a country allows individuals and firms to bring suits against companies that breach

competition rules. While governments usually bring anti-competition lawsuits, allowing for

individuals and firms to sue increases the legal risk to a firm from engaging in anti-
competitive behaviors.
       The next five components capture the ability of authorities to impose penalties and
remedies--as well as their geographic reach. Fines equals one if authorities can impose
monetary fines on firms for violating competition laws. Imprisonment equals one if a country
can imprison those breaching competition laws. Divestitures equals one if authorities can
reverse, prevent, or modify the structure of mergers and acquisitions. Damages equals one if
the authorities can provide damages as compensation to injured private parties.
Extraterritoriality equals one if a country's authority can enforce its laws against
anticompetitive conduct emanating from abroad when that conduct adversely affects the
competitive climate in the domestic economy. Each of these components adds one to the
Authority sub-index.
       The next two components relate to the presence of industry and enterprise exemptions.
Industry Exemptions equals -0.5 when a country's competition law exempts certain industries
(e.g., agriculture or telecommunications) from adhering to competition laws. Enterprise
Exemptions equals -0.5 when there exist any exemptions for enterprises (e.g., state-owned).


2.2.2. Substance: Merger Control, Abuse of Dominance, and Anticompetitive Agreements
       Substance aggregates information on a country's laws concerning mergers and
acquisitions   (Merger   Control),   agreements    among    firms   that   limit   competition
(Anticompetitive Agreements), and strategies used by firms to exploit their dominant positions
(Abuse of Dominance).

       Merger Control is the summation of seven components regarding the extent to which
laws foster competition by regulating mergers and acquisitions. Pre-merger Notification
equals one if firms obtain approval before completing a merger voluntarily or mandatorily.
Mandatory Notification equals one if firms must obtain approval before completing a merger.
Economic Reason equals one if the authorities can restrict mergers that would weaken
                                                                                             12


competition or strengthen a firm's dominant position. Public Interest equals one if regulatory

authorities can restrict mergers because the merger would hurt the public interest. Merger
Control includes information on the arguments that firms can use to defend themselves
against accusations that a merger is anticompetitive. These components enter negatively into
the Merger Control index as legal defenses reduce regulatory control over mergers.

Efficiency Defense equals -0.5 if the law allows firms to defend anticompetitive mergers by
arguing that the merger will enhance economic efficiency enough to outweigh any adverse
anticompetitive effects. Failing Firm Defense equals -0.5 if firms can justify otherwise
anticompetitive mergers when target firms are failing, and bankruptcy would materially

reduce the value of their assets. Public Interest Defense equals -0.5 if firms can argue the
public interest benefits of a merger outweigh its anticompetitive costs.
       Abuse of Dominance is the summation of eleven components that gauge the degree to
which a country's competition laws regulate firms' exploitation of market power. General
Prohibition equals two if the law prohibits the abuse of a dominant position, either
generically or by specifying actions that would constitute an impermissible abuse of a
dominant position. If the law prohibits a firm from setting different prices for different
customers to maximize profits, Discriminatory Pricing equals 0.25. If the law prohibits a firm
from setting unfair prices by using its dominant positions, Unfair Pricing equals 0.25. If the
law prohibits a firm from setting an extremely low price to eliminate competitors' profits,
Predatory Pricing equals 0.25. If the law prohibits a firm from providing discounts to
incentivize consumers or downstream companies to trade exclusively with them, Discounts
equals 0.25. If the law prohibits a firm from requesting the retailer to sell a product at a set
price, Retail Price Maintenance equals 0.25. Abuse of Dominance also includes information
on non-price related abuses. If the law prohibits a firm from maliciously limiting their supply
or restricting their sales to certain customers, Market Access equals 0.25. If the law prohibits
a firm from setting conditions on the sales of one product to the sales of another product that
is not directly correlated, Tying equals 0.25. If the law prohibits a firm from conducting any
other impermissible abuse of a dominant position, Other Abuse Acts equals 0.25. The final
two components of Abuse of Dominance reflect how competition laws treat defenses of
                                                                                               13


"abusive" actions. Efficiency Defense (Dom.) equals -0.5 if firms can argue that the economic

efficiency benefits of otherwise impermissible abusive actions outweigh adverse costs

associated with those actions. Public Interest Defense (Dom.) equals -0.5 if firms can argue
that the public interest benefits of abusive actions outweigh the costs. These two components
enter negatively because such defenses reduce regulatory powers over behaviors by dominant
firms.
         Anticompetitive Agreements is the summation of ten components that measure the
degree to which a country's competition laws restrict firms from forming cartels and
colluding to set prices, divide-up markets, limit supply, rig bids, and engage in other activities
designed to limit competition. Four components involves restricting horizonal constraints, i.e.,
restrictions on cartels. Price Fixing, Market Sharing, Output Limitations, and Bid Rigging
each equals 0.5 if a country's competition laws limit firms from colluding to (1) set product
prices, (2) divide the market along geographic, demographic, price, etc., (3) limit supply, or
(4) when making bids, respectively. Four components involve the degree to which the law
limits vertical agreements. Exclusive Dealing, Resale Price Maintenance, Tying, and
Eliminate Competitors each equals 0.5 if a country's laws prohibit firms from colluding to (1)
restrict sales to specific companies, (2) set the price at which retailers sell products to
consumers, (3) condition a contract on buying other products that are not directly connected
to the product that is the subject of the contract, and (4) engage in coercive practices to
eliminate or restrict competitors. The final two components measure legal defenses against
accusations of participating in anticompetitive agreements. Efficiency Defense (Anti.) equals -
0.5 if firms can defend anticompetitive agreements by arguing that the economic efficiency
gains outweigh the anticompetitive costs. Public Interest Defense (Anti.) equals -0.5 if firms
can defend anticompetitive actions by arguing that the public interest benefits of those actions
outweigh the costs.


2.2.3. Overall Competition Law Index
         Our key measure, the Competition Law Index, gauges the overall stringency of a
country's competition laws. As defined by Bradford and Chilton (2018), the Competition Law
                                                                                                 14


Index is the average of the Authority and Substance sub-indexes, where Substance is the

average of Merger Control, Abuse of Dominance, and Anticompetitive Agreements.



2.3. Firm-level Controls
       We account for several firm-specific traits. These include the natural logarithm of one
plus the total book value of assets of the firm (Size), the firm's ratio of long-term debt to the
total book value of assets (Leverage), and profitability, i.e., the ratio of net income to the total
assets (ROA). The firm-level data come from Worldscope, which can be linked to the
Thomson Reuters ASSET4 ESG dataset by Datastream Company Code.


2.4. Country Controls: Economic, Financial, Institutional, and Institutional Development
       We condition on four sets of time-varying country-level characteristics in our
analyses. First, to control for economic development, we use the natural logarithm of gross
domestic product per capita (GDP per capita).
       Second, we use two measures of financial development, Stock Market Capitalization /
GDP and Private Credit / GDP. Stock Market Capitalization / GDP is the ratio of stock
market capitalization to GDP, and Private Credit / GDP equals credit provided to the private
sector by commercial banks and other financial institutions as a proportion of GDP.
       Third, we use a composite index of institutional quality developed by the World Bank
that is composed of six indicators. These indicators measure the degree to which (1) people
can select their government, have freedom of speech and association, have access to a free
media, and can hold government officials accountable; (2) the government is capable of
formulating and implementing policies and regulations to promote private sector
development; (3) there is an absence of political instability and violence related to political
issues; (4) people, firms, and governments are confident in and subject to the rule of society,
such as the quality of contract enforcement, the protection of property rights, the
effectiveness of the police and courts, etc.; (5) there are high-quality civil and public services;
and (6) there are limits on officials abusing public power to extract private benefits in the
form of corruption. Our indicator, Institutional Quality, is the first principal component of
                                                                                                               15


these six components.

         Fourth, we use a composite index of economic freedom from the Heritage Foundation

that is composed of ten indicators that measure the protection of private property rights,
government integrity, the size of the government, the extent to which regulations impede
efficient business operations, government interventions in labor markets, taxes, government
size, barrier to international trade, constraints on international capital flows and the operation
of domestic financial institutions (Miller, Kim, and Roberts 2020). The index of Economic
Freedom used in our analyses equals the average of these ten measures.4


2.5. Sample
         Our primary sample consists of 13,907 firm-year observations from 2002 to 2015,
which covers 1,789 manufacturing firms in 47 countries. Our sample period starts in 2002
because this is the first year Thomson Reuters ASSET4 contains information on CSR.5 To
enhance the comparability of CSR performance across firms, we focus on manufacturing
industries. Table 1 presents the summary statistics of the main variables used in this analysis.
As shown, each CSR indicator, including the categorical score has a mean value of around 50.
This is due to the ranking-based scoring rule used by ASSET4, which generates a flat
distribution for each score and remove the influence of extreme values.

4
  More specifically, the ten components of the Heritage Foundation index are: (1) Property Rights measures the
degree of protecting private property via legal system and government enforcement. (2) Government Integrity
assesses the corruption practices in all kinds within the government and the transparency of the government. (3)
Tax Burden measures the marginal tax rates on both individual income and corporate profits. (4) Government
Spending measures the overall expenditure burden of government, including direct spending for maintaining
government and transfer payment in all kinds. (5) Business Freedom measures the degree to which regulatory
and infrastructure environments hinders efficient business operations, such as the ease of starting, operating, and
closing a business. (6) Labor Freedom measures the extent to which a country's legal and regulatory framework
protects the labor market, such as minimum wages, and restrictions on hiring, working hours and layoff. (7)
Monetary Freedom measures the extent to which government activities distort prices, along with the overall
inflations. (8) Trade Freedom measures both tariff and non-tariff barriers on imports and exports of goods and
services. (9) Investment Freedom measures the constraints on the flow of investment capital, such as capital
controls, foreign exchange controls, and national treatment of foreign investment. (10) Financial Freedom
measures banking efficiency and the extent to which the financial sector is independent from government
intervention. While there is some conceptual overlap between several of the components of the Economic
Freedom and World Governance Indicator indexes, the two indexes focus on different issues. Economic
Freedom emphasizes the extent of freedom concerning economic activities such as business operation, trade,
capital flow, and the financial sector, whereas WGI stresses the quality and effectiveness of institutions.
5
  The competition law index developed by Bradford and Chilton (2018) ends in 2010. Given that the
competition law is relatively stable over a short period of time, we use the value of the law index in 2010 for the
period after 2010.
                                                                                                                  16




3. Empirical Results
3.1. Baseline specification
         We evaluate the association between competition laws and CSR activities using the
following specification.


                                                    &
!"#"%&'(!,#,$ = *% + , × !&./(0101&2345627(8#,$ + 9:!,#,$ + ;! + ;',$ + <!,#,$ ,(1)



where A , B , % , and 0 index firm, industry, country, and year, respectively. The dependent
variable !"#"%&'(!,$ represents either Average Score or PCA Score of firm f at time t. The

key explanatory variable, !&./(0101&2345627(8#,$ , denotes the stringency of laws that
                                                          &
regulate competition among firms in country c in year t. :!,#,$ denotes a vector of covariates

at (a) the firm-level, i.e., one-year-lagged values of Size, Leverage, and ROA, and (b) the
country-level (GDP Per Capita).6 Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definitions.
Equation (1) further includes a full set of firm (;! ) and industry (three-digit SIC) by year
(;',$ ) fixed effects to condition out any time-invariant firm traits and time-varying industry

characteristics. We estimate Equation (1) using ordinary least squares (OLS), with standard
errors clustered at the country level.


3.2. Competition laws and CSR
         As shown in Table 2, there is a positive and statistically significant relationship
between the stringency of a country's competition laws and firms' CSR activities. The strong
connection between the Competition Law Index and CSR performance holds when using
either the Average Score or PCA Score measures of CSR. The results are robust to including
or excluding time-varying country traits (Size, Leverage, and ROA) and the estimated
coefficient on Competition Law Index changes little across these specifications.7 Furthermore,


6
  In robustness test, the results hold when controlling for other country traits, namely financial development,
institutional quality, and economic freedom.
7
  In robustness tests, we find that these results hold when examining either the Authority or Substance
components of the Competition Law Index, rather than the overall Competition Law Index.
                                                                                               17


the analyses condition on GDP Per Capita, mitigating concerns that the positive association

between Competition Law Index and CSR is a simple manifestation of economic
development. Finally, note that these analyses include firm and industry-year fixed effects.
       The estimated coefficients are consistent with the view that firms operating in
countries with laws fostering more intense competition tend to engage in substantially more

CSR activities. To highlight the economic magnitudes, consider the estimates from column
(2) that uses Average Score to measure of CSR activity and contains the largest set of control
variables. The estimates imply that a one standard deviation increase in the Competition Law
Index leads to an increase of 5.16 (= 0.18 * 28.66) in Average Score. This is equivalent to

approximately 10% of the sample mean value of Average Score, and 25% of its standard
deviation.


3.3. Robustness
       We conduct a series of robustness tests to mitigate concerns that the positive
association between competition laws and CSR is driven by reverse causality or omitted
variables. As a preliminary exercise, we assess whether changes in CSR activities among
firms in an economy predict changes in that country's competition laws. As shown in Table 3,
we find no evidence that changes in CSR predict changes in competition laws. These findings
hold whether including or excluding other country characteristics, such as GDP per Capita,
Stock Market Capitalization /GDP, Private Credit / GDP, Institutional Quality, and
Economic Freedom.
       Next, we employ two strategies to address omitted variable concerns. For omitted
country traits to bias our results, the omitted variables must be (a) time-varying, as firm fixed
effects control for all time-invariant country characteristics, and (b) correlated with both
changes in competition laws and changes in CSR activities beyond any relation with either
GDP Per Capita or time-varying industry traits. Our first strategy simply adds additional
country traits into the baseline model and tests whether the baseline results hold. The second
strategy, presented in the next section, evaluates whether the association between competition
                                                                                          18


laws and CSR performance varies across firms, industries, and countries in a manner

consistent with theories of how competition laws shape CSR activities.
       With respect to the first strategy, we were primarily concerned that changes in
competition laws might be correlated with changes in other national reforms, such as those
shaping financial systems, institutional and regulatory quality, and economic freedom. As a

result, we include (1) two measures of financial development, Stock Market Capitalization /
GDP and Private Credit / GDP, (2) an overall index of the quality of public institutions,
Institutional Quality, and (3) an indicator of the absence of government restrictions on
economic activity, Economic Freedom.

       Results presented in Table 4 show that the positive, statistically significant
relationship between the stringency of competition laws and firms' CSR performance holds
when including these additional controls. The results hold when sequentially conditioning on
(1) financial development, (2) institutional development, and (3) economic freedom, or when
conditioning on all of these simultaneously. Moreover, the estimated coefficient on the
Competition Law Index hardly changes across these different regression specifications.
Although we cannot control for all conceivable omitted time-varying country traits, the
consistency of the estimated coefficient on Competition Law Index across different
conditioning information sets mitigates concerns that our findings are driven by omitted
variable bias.


4. Mechanism: Social Norms and the Stakeholder Value Maximization View
       Our findings so far suggest that firms increase CSR activities when competition laws
become more stringent. This is consistent with both the stakeholder maximization view that
competition spurs firms to strengthen trust and loyalty among key stakeholders through
socially responsible actions and the product differentiation view that competition induces
firms to distinguish themselves and their products by engaging in more CSR activities.
       We next explore a corollary of the stakeholder value maximization view and therefore
assess one potential mechanism linking competition laws and CSR activities. Specifically, the
stakeholder value maximization view holds that by fostering the well-being of workers,
                                                                                            19


customers, suppliers, and local communities, CSR activities build loyalty and trust among

those stakeholders. Therefore, when greater product market competition induces firms to
compete more aggressively for workers, suppliers, clients, resources, and markets, firms will
respond by increasing CSR activities. A natural corollary to this view is that competition will
have a bigger effect on CSR when firms expect CSR activities to generate greater loyalty and

trust with stakeholders. In conducting this examination, we both shed light on one potential
mechanism linking competition laws and CSR and reduce concerns with respect to omitted
variables and identification.



4.1. Social norms
       To assess this corollary, we turn to the vast literature on social norms to construct
proxies of the degree to which CSR activities are likely to positively shape the views of
corporate stakeholders. According to Akerlof and Kranton (2005, p.12), norms are defined as
"peoples' views of how they, and others, should or should not behave." From this perspective,
if firms engage in activities that conform to how people believe they and others should
behave, we posit that this will build positive bonds between people and those firms. Since
CSR activities involve firms protecting the environment and satisfying implicit and informal
contracts with stakeholders, we construct measures of the degree to which people in society
value those activities.
       We measure a country's social norms using data from the fifth wave of the World
Values Survey (WVS), which collects responses from a random sample of the population in
each country over the period of 2005 ­ 2009. Our overall index, Social Norms, is based on
three variables. Environmental Priority measures the extent to which respondents in a
country prioritize environment over the economy. Voice at work and community measures the
degree to which respondents in a country consider more important that people have more say
about how things are done at their jobs and in their communities than higher economic
growth and other national goals. Human rights gauges the degree to which people in a nation
give priority to progress toward a less impersonal and more humane society over a stable
economy and other aims of society. Social Norms equals the average of these three
                                                                                                20


components, and a higher value of Social Norms indicates that individuals in a country have

stronger social attitudes toward prioritizing environment, worker and human rights, and
individual voice and accountability. If a country has a value of Social Norms above the
sample median, then we set High Social Norms equal to one; correspondingly, if the country
has a Social Norms score below the sample median, we set High Social Norms equal to zero.



4.2. Competition laws, social norms, and CSR: Results
       To test the corollary that the CSR-enhancing effects of competition laws are stronger
in countries with higher social norms, we modify equation (1) by adding the interaction term

between Competition Law Index and High Social Norms. The model specification is as
follows.


      !"#"%&'(!,#,$ = *% + ,( × !&./(0101&2345627(8#,$ × C1D"&%14FG&'.H#
                                            &
           +,) × !&./(0101&2345627(8#,$ + 9:!,#,$ + ;! + ;',$ + <!,#,$ ,           (2)



where C1D"&%14FG&'.H# equals one if country c has a Social Norms value above the
sample median and zero otherwise and the other variables are same as those in equation (1).
       The results reported in Table 5 are consistent with the corollary to the stakeholder
value maximization view: the CSR-enhancing effects of competition laws are stronger in
countries with social norms that place a higher priority on CSR-type activities. The
interaction between Competition Law Index and High Social Norms enters positively and
significantly in all columns, whereas the linear term, Competition Law Index, enters
insignificantly. These results suggest that an intensification of competition enhances CSR
more in high social norms countries. That is, when competition increases the value of
stakeholder trust and loyalty, firms conduct more CSR activities when those activities are
likely to generate a positive response by stakeholders, i.e., in high social norms countries.
                                                                                             21


4.3. Social norms results: The components of competition laws and CSR activities

       Given the importance of social norms in shaping the CSR enhancing effects of
competition law stringency, we extend these results by examining the three individual
components of the CSR activities and the two components of the overall competition law
index. We first present the results when examining the three components of the CSR measure

as the dependent variable and report the results in Panel A of Table 6. Then, in Panel B of
Table 6 we provide the results when using the two competition law subcomponents as
explanatory variables.
       As shown in Panel A of Table 6, the results hold for each of the three CSR

components: Environmental, Social, and CSR Strategy. The CSR enhancing effects of
competition law stringency are greater in countries with social norms that give greater weight
to treating others fairly, mitigating environmental degradation, and giving individuals more
say about how things are done at work and in their communities. As shown, the coefficient
estimates of the interaction term between Competition Law Index and High Social Norms are
positive and statistically significant in the regressions of the overall score of Environmental,
Social, and CSR Strategy.
       In Panel B of Table 6, the results also confirm that the CSR-boosting effects of
competition law stringency are greater in countries where the Social Norms index is large.
That is, we find that the results hold for each of the two subcomponents of the Competition
Law Index: Authority and Substance. The Authority component measures power over the
enforcement of competition laws. The Substance component measures the laws that limit (1)
agreements among firms to limit competition, (2) mergers and acquisitions, and (3) firms
from exploiting their dominant positions. As the measure of CSR activity, we use the
Average Score, though the results are robust to using the PCA Score measure. As shown, the
interaction term between both (a) Authority and High Social Norms and (b) Substance and
High Social Norms enters positively and significantly. These results stress that an
intensification of competition laws tends to induce a bigger increase in CSR activities among
firms in economies with High Social Norms, i.e., in economies that place a higher priority on
                                                                                            22


CSR-type activities. These findings are fully consistent with the stakeholder value

maximization view of its corollary focusing on social norms.


5. Extensions: Market Power and Financial Constraints
       We next evaluate two key premises of both the stakeholder value and product

differentiation views of how competition laws shapes CSR performance. In this section, we
analyze how market power and financial constraints shape the CSR-enhancing effects of
competition law stringency.



5.1. Market power
       The stakeholder value and product differentiation views stress that competition laws
intensify competition and it is this intensification of competition that triggers more CSR
activities to strengthen ties with stakeholder (according to the stakeholder view) or
differentiate products (according to the product differentiation view). Since competition laws
are designed to combat monopolistic power by restraining anticompetitive behaviors, making
competition laws more stringent should spur competition more among firms that had greater
market power and in more monopolistic industries. Put differently, laws that restrict
anticompetitive behaviors are less likely to boost competition in highly competitive markets.
Hence, if competition laws spur CSR activities by intensifying competition, then the CSR-
boosting effects of making competition laws more stringent should be more pronounced (a)
among firms with greater market power, and (b) in more concentrated industries, where
monopolistic power is more likely to exist.
       To assess this premise, we use two measures of each firm's market power and two
measures of market structure at the industry level (e.g., Tirole, 1988; Giroud and Mueller
2010). To measure market power in each year, we set (1) Market power 1 equal to one if the
firm's share of total sales among all firms in the same industry-country-year is greater than
the sample median and zero otherwise and (2) Market power 2 equal to one if the firm's share
of total assets among all firms belonging to the same industry-country-year is greater than the
sample median and zero otherwise. We define industries at the 3-digit SIC level. To measure
                                                                                              23


competition at the industry level, we use two Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) measures of

concentration. For each industry in each year, we set HHI 1 equal to one if the sum of
squared market shares of each firm's total sales in an industry-country-year is greater than the
sample median and zero otherwise, and HHI 2 equal to one if the sum of squared market
share of each firm's total assets in the same industry-country-year is greater than the sample

median and zero otherwise. We use the values of Market power 1, Market power 2, HHI 1,
and HHI 2 in the first year of the sample period.
       To test whether the CSR-enhancing effects of more stringent competition laws are
stronger among firms with greater market power and within less competitive industries, we

employ the same regression specification as in Table 5. That is, we modify equation (1) and
add the interaction term between Competition Law Index and one of the four market power
indicators: Market power 1, Market power 2, HHI 1, and HHI 2.
       As reported in Table 7, the results indicate that the CSR-enhancing effects of
increasing competition law stringency are greater among firms with more pre-existing market
power and firms within industries with more market concentration. From columns 1 and 2,
both the linear term of Competition Law Index and its interaction with measures of a firm's
market power (High Market power 1 and High Market power 2) enter positively and
significantly. These results suggest that while more stringent competition laws on average
enhance CSR activities, the effects are stronger for firms with greater market power.
Consistent with these results, columns 3 and 4 suggest that the effects of competition law
stringency is more pronounced in concentrated industries. The coefficient estimates on the
interaction term of the competition law index with High HHI 1 and High HHI 2) are positive
and statistically significant at the 1% level. Furthermore, the estimated differential effects of
competition laws by pre-existing market power are substantial. For example, consider the
results on High Market power 2. The estimated coefficients indicate that a one standard
deviation increase in the Competition Law Index would increase CSR, as measured by
Average Score, by 4.4 (= 0.177 * 25.1158) for low-market-power firms and by 9.8 for high-
market-power firms. That is, the CSR-boosting effects of competition law stringency are
twice as large among less competitive firms.
                                                                                               24




5.2. Financial constraints
       Investing in CSR involves upfront expenditures for returns that are likely to accrue
over time. For example, improving worker safety conditions requires immediate capital
expenditures, while the benefits in terms of trust and loyalty among stakeholders and product

differentiation will likely emerge over the longer-run. Similarly, pollution abatement requires
sizeable initial investments, while the benefits in terms of stronger stakeholder bonds or
customer reactions will likely take longer to materialize. Thus, firms' actual investment in
CSR will likely depend on the financial constraint facing firms. In this regard, we expect the

effects of competition laws on a firm's socially responsible activities to be stronger if the firm
is less financially constrained, as financially constrained firms may be unable to respond to
an intensification of competition by boosting investment in CSR.
       We use two measures of the financial constraints facing each firm and one measure of
the degree to which the firm is in an industry subject to tighter financial constraints. These
measures have been extensively used in prior research, as discussed in Giroud and Mueller
(2015). First, the Kaplan-Zingales Index (KZ Index), which was originally developed by
Kaplan and Zingales (1997) and later used by Lamont, Polk, and Saa-Requejo (2001) among
others, is computed from five accounting indicators: cash flow/capital, Tobin's Q, debt/total
capital, dividend/capital, and cash/capital.8 Second, Size-Age Index (SA Index), developed by
Hadlock and Pierce (2010), is a linear combination of size, size squared, and age.9 Higher
values of the KZ index and SA indexes indicate that the firm is more financially constrained.
We compute these measures in the initial year of the sample periods. Third, we use a measure
of the degree to which firms in an industry tend to be less financially constrained based on
asset tangibility. This industry-based measure gauges the degree to which the industry has a
higher proportion of tangible assets, as tangible assets, such as property, plants, and
equipment, tend to be easier to collateralize than intangible ones. Since collateral helps
mitigate moral hazard and adverse selection problems, industries with more tangible assets

8
  Specifically, !"$%&'( = -1.001909  0124567/019:;15 + 0.2826389  A6B:%! 2C + 3.139193 
D'B;/A6;15019:;15 - 39.3678  D:F:&'%&/019:;15 - 1.314759  012/019:;15.
9
  Specifically, IJ$%&'( = -0.737  I:K' + 0.043  I:K' " - 0.040  JL'.
                                                                                               25


will tend to have easier access to external credit than those with less collateralizable assets

(e.g. Stiglitz and Weiss 1981). To measure each industry's overall degree of collateralizable
assets, we do the following. First, for each firm in each year, we calculate the ratio of tangible
assets to total assets, and call it Firm-Tangibility. Second, we compute the average Firm-
Tangibility across firms in the same country-industry in a given year and call it Industry-

Tangibility. Next, we set High Tangibility equal to one if the firm belongs to an industry with
an above the median value of Industry-Tangibility across industries in a country in a year and
otherwise zero. High Tangibility indicates the firms are in a less financially constrained
industry.

       To estimate the differential effects of competition laws on corporate ESG activities
across firms with varying degrees of financial constraints, we employ a model that is similar
to equation (2) except for replacing the conditioning variable with one of the measures of
financial constraints. In particular, High KZ Index (High SA Index) is a dummy variable equal
to one if a firm's KZ index (SA index) is above the sample median value and zero otherwise.
High Tangibility is a dummy variable equal to one if firm belongs to a country-industry with
above-the-sample-median Tangibility, and zero otherwise.
       The results reported in Table 8 are consistent with the view that the CSR enhancing
effects of intensifying competition laws are greater among less financially constrained firms.
In particular, we sequentially include the interaction between the Competition Law Index and
the three measures of financial constraints: High KZ Index, High SA Index, and High
Tangibility. Each of these interaction terms enters significantly. These results are consistent
with the view that (a) competition laws motivate firms to invest more in CSR, (b) such CSR
investments involve upfront expenditures, and (c) less financially constrained firms are more
able to make these investments and boost CSR performance.


5. Conclusion
       In this paper, we examine the impact of competition laws on corporate social
responsibility. Using firm-level data on CSR from 2002 through 2015 and panel data on
competition laws in 48 countries, we find that (1) intensifying competition stringency induces
                                                                                           26


firms to increase CSR activities and (2) the CSR-enhancing effects of competition law

stringency are stronger in countries with social norms that prioritize the types of activities

associated with CSR, including social attitudes toward environmental protection, worker and
human rights, and individual voice and accountability. Further analyses suggest that laws that
restrict anticompetitive behaviors exert a bigger influence on CSR among (a) firms with
greater market power and in more monopolistic industries and (b) less financially-constrained
firms. Overall, our results are consistent with the stakeholder value view that an
intensification of competition resulting from more stringent competition laws induces firms
to invest in strengthening relationships with customers, workers, and suppliers through CSR
activities.
                                                                                          27

References

Akerlof, George A., and Rachel E. Kranton, 2005, Identity and the economics of
       organizations, Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, 9-32.

Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz, 1972, Production, information costs, and economic
       organization, American Economic Review 62, 777-795.

Bagnoli, Mark, and Susan G. Watts, 2003, Selling to socially responsible consumers:
      Competition and the private provision of public goods, Journal of Economics &
      Management Strategy 12, 419-445.

Baron, David P., 2001, Private politics, corporate social responsibility, and integrated
       strategy, Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 10, 7-45.

Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole, 2006, Incentives and prosocial behavior, American
      Economic Review 96, 1652-1678.

Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole, 2010, Individual and corporate social responsibility,
      Economica 77, 1-19.

Bradford, Anu, and Adam S. Chilton, 2018, Competition law around the world from 1889 to
       2010: The competition law index, Journal of Competition Law & Economics 14, 393-
       432.

Bradford, Anu, Adam S. Chilton, Christopher Megaw, and Nathaniel Sokol, 2019,
       Competition law gone global: Introducing the comparative competition law and
       enforcement datasets, Journal of Empirical Legal Studies 16, 411-443.

Chen, Tao, Hui Dong, and Chen Lin, 2020, Institutional shareholders and corporate social
      responsibility, Journal of Financial Economics 135, 483-504.

Coase, Ronald H., 1937, The nature of the firm, Economica 4, 386-405.

Deng, Xin, Jun-Koo Kang, and Buen Sin Low, 2013, Corporate social responsibility and
      stakeholder value maximization: Evidence from mergers, Journal of Financial
      Economics 110, 87-109.

Di Giuli, Alberta, and Leonard Kostovetsky, 2014, Are red or blue companies more likely to
       go green? Politics and corporate social responsibility, Journal of Financial Economics
       111, 158-180.

Elfenbein, Daniel W., and Brian McManus, 2010, A greater price for a greater good?
       Evidence that consumers pay more for charity-linked products, American Economic
       Journal: Economic Policy 2, 28-60.

Ferrell, Allen, Hao Liang, and Luc Renneboog, 2016, Socially responsible firms, Journal of
        Financial Economics 122, 585-606.

Flammer, Caroline, 2015a, Does product market competition foster corporate social
     responsibility? Evidence from trade liberalization, Strategic Management Journal 36,
     1469-1485.
                                                                                       28

Flammer, Caroline, 2015b, Does corporate social responsibility lead to superior financial
     performance? A regression discontinuity approach, Management Science 61, 2549-
     2568.

Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller, 2010, Does corporate governance matter in
       competitive industries?, Journal of Financial Economics 95, 312-331.

Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller, 2015, Capital and labor reallocation within firms,
       Journal of Finance 70, 1767-1804.

Hadlock, Charles J., and Joshua R. Pierce, 2010, New evidence on measuring financial
      constraints: Moving beyond the KZ index, Review of Financial Studies 23, 1909-
      1940.

Hilger, James, Eric Hallstein, Andrew Stevens, and Sofia Villas-Boas, 2019, Measuring
       willingness to pay for environmental attributes in seafood, Environmental and
       Resource Economics 73, 307-332.

Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial
       behavior, agency costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3,
       305-360.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide
      useful measures of financing constraints?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-
      215.

Krüger, Philipp, 2015, Corporate goodness and shareholder wealth, Journal of Financial
       Economics 115, 304-329.

Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk, and Jesús Saaá-Requejo, 2001, Financial constraints and
      stock returns, Review of Financial Studies 14, 529-554.

Luo, Xueming, and C. B. Bhattacharya, 2009, The debate over doing good: Corporate social
      performance, strategic marketing levers, and firm-idiosyncratic risk, Journal of
      Marketing 73, 198-213.

Masulis, Ronald W., and Syed Walid Reza, 2015, Agency problems of corporate philanthropy,
       Review of Financial Studies 28, 592-636.

McWilliams, Abagail, and Donald Siegel, 2001, Corporate social responsibility: A theory of
      the firm perspective, Academy of Management Review 26, 117-127.

Miller, Terry, Anthony B. Kim, and James M. Roberts, 2020. 2020 Index of Economic
        Freedom (The Heritage Foundation).

Pagano, Marco, and Paolo F. Volpin, 2005, The political economy of corporate governance,
      American Economic Review 95, 1005-1030.

Porter, Michael E., and Mark R. Kramer, 2006, Strategy and society: The link between
        competitive advantage and corporate social responsibility, Harvard Business Review
        84, 78-163.
                                                                                            29

Shleifer, Andrei, 2004, Does competition destroy ethical behavior?, American Economic
        Review 94, 414-418.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of
        Finance 52, 737-783.

Siegel, Donald S., and Donald F. Vitaliano, 2007, An empirical analysis of the strategic use of
        corporate social responsibility, Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 16,
        773-792.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss, 1981, Credit rationing in markets with imperfect
        information, American Economic Review 71, 393-410.

Thomson    Reuters,   2018,     Thomson     Reuters   ESG     Scores,  Available   at
     https://www.refinitiv.com/content/dam/marketing/en_us/documents/methodology/esg-
     scores-methodology.pdf. Accessed March 4, 2020.

Tirole, Jean, 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization (MIT press).

Tirole, Jean, 2001, Corporate governance, Econometrica 69, 1-35.
                                                                                                             30

                                      Table 1 Summary Statistics
This table presents the summary statistics of the variables that we used in the following analysis. All the
statistics are calculated by the sample ranging from 2002 to 2015 for all manufacturing firms that are covered by
the Thomson Reuters ASSET4 database. Statistics for country-level variables are based on the country-year
level sample from 2002 to 2015.

Variable                                      N        Mean      Std. Dev.       P10       Median        P90
Firm CSR
Average Score                              13,907     53.749       20.341       26.757      53.687      81.253
PCA Score                                  13,896     51.960       21.840       22.948      51.983      81.431
Environmental                              13,896     53.675       21.918       24.340      53.745      83.300
Social                                     13,896     52.803       21.746       23.190      53.040      82.080
CSR Strategy                               13,907     54.710       27.306       19.840      52.750      92.100
Competition Laws
Competition Law Index                        503       0.673       0.177        0.517       0.678        0.885
Authority                                    503       0.670       0.212        0.357       0.643        0.929
Substance                                    503       0.674       0.152        0.419       0.698        0.837
Social Norms
Social Norms                                  33       0.494       0.096        0.379       0.512        0.600
Firm Characteristics
Size                                       13,907     15.421       1.377       13.786       15.329      17.225
Leverage                                   13,907     0.172        0.136        0.001        0.160      0.347
ROA                                        13,907     0.052        0.087        -0.014       0.051      0.138
KZ Index                                   13,868     -6.895       34.180      -12.774      -1.538      1.246
SA Index                                   12,785     -3.591       1.830        -5.897      -3.413      -1.468
Market power 1                             13,907     0.155        0.236        0.003        0.070      0.445
Market power 2                             13,907     0.155        0.236        0.003        0.071      0.448
HHI 1                                      13,907     0.705        0.327        0.201          1           1
HHI 2                                      13,907     0.706        0.326        0.215          1           1
Tangibility                                13,817     0.448        0.143        0.268        0.443      0.633
Country Characteristics
GDP Per Capita                               505      10.047       1.037        8.534       10.491     10.978
Stock Market Capitalization / GDP            490      77.677       51.501       28.215      63.470     137.160
Private Credit / GDP                         497      84.648       41.678       30.204      86.050     144.284
Institutional Quality                        505      0.747        2.133        -2.325       1.497      3.043
Economic Freedom                             505      68.258       9.521        56.200      68.200     80.400
                                                                                                                  31

                                  Table 2 Competition Laws and CSR
This table presents the association between competition law index and firm-level CSR score. We use two firm-
specific measures of CSR score. Average Score is an equally weighted scores of environmental, social, and CSR
strategy. PCA Score is the first principal component of the scores of environmental, social, and CSR strategy.
The key explanatory variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's
competition laws. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, and Profitability. Country controls include
GDP per capita. We include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects in all columns. The t-statistics are reported
in parentheses, with robust standard errors clustered at the country level. ***, **, * denote significance levels at
1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                 Average Score                              PCA Score
                                           (1)                   (2)                (3)                   (4)
Competition Law Index                  29.0427***           28.6618***          29.8465***           29.4427***
                                        (3.3498)             (3.3209)            (3.1281)              (3.1004)
GDP Per Capita                           8.9444               7.3479              9.0310                7.6093
                                        (1.5568)             (1.2778)            (1.4371)              (1.2095)
Size                                                        1.3144***                                 1.2091***
                                                             (3.1132)                                  (2.6899)
Leverage                                                      -0.1392                                  -0.0318
                                                             (-0.0947)                                (-0.0199)
ROA                                                          2.4558**                                 2.9309**
                                                              (2.2734)                                 (2.6215)
Firm FE                                    Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes
Industry by Year FE                        Yes                   Yes                Yes                   Yes
# of Obs.                                 13,983              13,907               13,972               13,896
Adjusted R2                               0.8071              0.8078               0.8128               0.8135
# of Clusters                               48                  47                   48                   47
                                                                                                              32

                         Table 3 Pre-existing CSR and Competition Laws
This table reports the connection between pre-existing measures of CSR score and the competition law index.
The dependent variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's competition
laws. The key explanatory variable is one-year-lagged measure of CSR, Average Score and PCA Score,
averaged across firms in each country. Country controls include GDP Per Capita, Stock Market Capitalization /
GDP, Private Credit / GDP, Institutional Quality, and Economic Freedom. We include country and year fixed
effects. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses, with robust standard errors clustered at the country level.
***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                        Competition Law Index
                                                          (1)             (2)           (3)                  (4)
Average Score                                           -0.0017         -0.0002
                                                       (-1.1007)       (-0.2714)
PCA Score                                                                                -0.0015          -0.0002
                                                                                        (-1.1049)        (-0.3136)
GDP Per Capita                                                          0.4470*                           0.4466*
                                                                        (1.8886)                         (1.8877)
Stock Market Capitalization / GDP                                       -0.0004                           -0.0004
                                                                       (-1.2278)                         (-1.2284)
Private Credit / GDP                                                    -0.0001                           -0.0001
                                                                       (-0.2318)                         (-0.2298)
Institutional Quality                                                   -0.0251                           -0.0251
                                                                       (-0.9715)                         (-0.9725)
Economic Freedom                                                        -0.0016                           -0.0016
                                                                       (-0.6267)                         (-0.6242)
Country FE                                                Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
Year FE                                                   Yes              Yes              Yes             Yes
# of Obs.                                                505              482              505              482
Adjusted R2                                             0.8905           0.9121           0.8906           0.9121
# of Clusters                                             47               46               47               46
                                                                                                                                                                        33



                                               Table 4 Competition Law and CSR Performance, Robustness
This table shows the association between competition law index and firm-level CSR score after controlling for additional country-level factors. We use two firm-specific
measures of CSR score. Average Score is an equally weighted scores of environmental, social, and CSR strategy. PCA Score is the first principal component of the scores of
environmental, social, and CSR strategy. The key explanatory variable, Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's competition laws. Firm-level
controls include Firm Size, Leverage, and Profitability. Country controls include GDP per capita, Stock Market Capitalization / GDP, Private Credit / GDP, Institutional
Quality, and Economic Freedom. We include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects in all columns. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses, with robust standard errors
clustered at the country level. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                  Average Score                                                        PCA Score
                                                (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)              (5)            (6)             (7)               (8)
Competition Law Index                      27.0067***       27.9458***     27.9129***       25.2610***       27.6015***      28.5588***      28.6894***       25.7262***
                                             (3.3977)        (3.2318)       (3.1787)          (3.1073)         (3.1896)       (3.0047)        (2.9879)          (2.9327)
GDP Per Capita                                6.9624          7.9976         8.1557           8.6599*           7.2468         8.4120          8.4236           9.0646*
                                             (1.5731)        (1.3982)       (1.3494)          (1.8109)         (1.4983)       (1.3417)        (1.2822)          (1.7399)
Stock Market Capitalization / GDP            -0.0143                                          -0.0174          -0.0170                                          -0.0201
                                            (-0.9822)                                        (-1.1129)        (-1.0566)                                        (-1.1674)
Private Credit / GDP                       -0.0670***                                       -0.0661***       -0.0727***                                       -0.0719***
                                            (-2.8024)                                        (-2.9697)        (-2.7919)                                        (-2.9091)
Institutional Quality                                         -0.7058                         -1.0421                          -0.8722                          -1.1615
                                                             (-0.8588)                       (-1.1455)                        (-0.9690)                        (-1.1827)
Economic Freedom                                                              -0.1036         -0.0954                                           -0.1046         -0.0970
                                                                             (-0.7225)       (-0.7419)                                         (-0.6557)       (-0.6715)
Firm Controls                                  Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Firm FE                                        Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Industry by Year FE                            Yes              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
# of Obs.                                     13,188          13,907          13,907           13,188          13,178          13,896           13,896           13,178
Adjusted R2                                   0.8095          0.8078          0.8079           0.8096          0.8147          0.8135           0.8135           0.8148
# of Clusters                                   46              47              47               46              46              47               47               46
                                                                                                              34

      Table 5 Competition Law and CSR Performance, Differentiate by Social Norm
This table presents the differential effects between competition law index and firm-level CSR score by different
levels of the social norm. We use two firm-specific measures of CSR score. Average Score is an equally
weighted scores of environmental, social, and CSR strategy. PCA Score is the first principal component of the
scores of environmental, social, and CSR strategy. The key explanatory variable, Competition Law Index,
measures the overall stringency of a country's competition laws. High Social Norms is a dummy variable that
equals one if a firm's headquarters is located in a country with an above-median social norm index, otherwise
zero. The Social Norms is calculated by using World Value Survey data, which captures the degree to which
individuals in a country prioritize the types of activities associated with CSR (e.g., social attitudes toward the
environment, worker and human rights, and individual voice and accountability). Firm-level controls include
Firm Size, Leverage, and Profitability. Country controls include GDP per capita. We include firm and industry-
by-year fixed effects in all columns. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses, with robust standard errors
clustered at the country level. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                             Average Score                    PCA Score
                                                                  (1)                              (2)
Competition Law Index * High Social Norms                     59.3005***                      65.5103***
                                                               (5.4295)                        (5.5561)
Competition Law Index                                           1.1238                          -0.8723
                                                               (0.1152)                        (-0.0885)
Firm Controls                                                     Yes                             Yes
Country Controls                                                  Yes                             Yes
Firm FE                                                           Yes                             Yes
Industry by Year FE                                               Yes                             Yes
# of Obs.                                                       13,142                          13,131
Adjusted R2                                                     0.8099                          0.8158
# of Clusters                                                     33                               33
                                                                                                               35

              Table 6 Competition Law and CSR Performance, Subcomponents
Panel A presents the association between competition law index and the specific subcomponents of firm-level
CSR scores. Panel B presents the association between firms' CSR score and the two subcomponents of the
Competition Law Index: Authority and Substance. The dependent variable in Panel A is the overall score of the
environmental, social, and CSR Strategy. Competition Law Index, measures the overall stringency of a country's
competition laws. The dependent variable in Panel B is the Average Score, an equally weighted scores of
environmental, social, and CSR strategy. The Authority component measures power over the enforcement of
competition laws. The Substance component measures the laws that limit (1) agreements among firms to limit
competition, (2) mergers and acquisitions, and (3) firms from exploiting their dominant positions. High Social
Norms is a dummy variable that equals one if a firm's headquarters is located in a country with an above-median
social norm index, and zero otherwise. Social Norms is calculated using World Value Survey data, which
captures the degree to which individuals in a country prioritize the types of activities associated with CSR (e.g.,
social attitudes toward the environment, worker and human rights, and individual voice and accountability.
Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, and Profitability. Country controls include GDP per capita. We
include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects in all columns. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses, with
robust standard errors clustered at the country level. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10%
respectively.

Panel A. Subcomponents of CSR Index
                                              Environmental                Social              CSR Strategy
                                                    (1)                      (2)                     (3)
Competition Law Index                          65.0959***               58.9211***               55.4217**
 * High Social Norms                             (3.5010)                (4.6942)                 (2.1571)
Competition Law Index                            -6.2392                 -12.5781                 21.9231
                                                (-0.7036)                (-1.5701)                (1.0330)
Firm Controls                                       Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Country Controls                                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Firm FE                                             Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Industry by Year FE                                 Yes                      Yes                     Yes
# of Obs.                                         13,131                   13,131                  13,142
Adjusted R2                                       0.7694                   0.7597                  0.6911
# of Clusters                                       33                       33                      33

Panel B. Subcomponents of Competition Laws
                                                                      Average Score
                                                   (1)                     (2)                        (3)
                                                 2.4072                                            4.8940
Authority
                                                (0.4364)                                          (0.8229)
                                               38.9006***                                        21.5391***
Authority * High Social Norms
                                                (2.9938)                                          (3.0561)
                                                                          -9.1128                  -9.7636
Substance
                                                                         (-0.8306)                (-1.0761)
                                                                        49.5403***               46.2551***
Substance * High Social Norms
                                                                         (3.8797)                 (4.1863)
Firm Controls                                       Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Country Controls                                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Firm FE                                             Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Industry by Year FE                                 Yes                      Yes                     Yes
# of Obs.                                         13,142                   13,142                  13,142
Adjusted R2                                       0.8087                   0.8097                  0.8100
# of Clusters                                       33                       33                       33
                                                                                                                 36

    Table 7 Competition Law and CSR Performance, Differentiate by Market Power
This table presents the differential effects between competition law index and firm-level CSR score by the
market power of a firm. Average Score is an equally weighted scores of environmental, social, and CSR strategy.
Competition Law Index measures the overall stringency of a country's competition laws. High Market power 1
(High Market power 2) is a dummy variable equal to one if a firm has the above-sample-median sales (assets)
within its country-industry, and zero otherwise. High HHI 1 (High HHI 2) is a dummy variable equal to one if a
firm belongs to an industry with an above-sample-median Herfindahl­Hirschman Index based on sales (assets)
in its country, and zero otherwise. Firm-level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, and Profitability. Country
controls include GDP per capita. We include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects in all columns. The t-
statistics are reported in parentheses, with robust standard errors clustered at the country level. ***, **, * denote
significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                      Average Score
                                            (1)                 (2)                   (3)                (4)
Competition Law Index                   58.1636**
 * High Market power 1                   (2.4413)
Competition Law Index                                       30.0868***
 * High Market power 2                                       (3.7773)
Competition Law Index                                                           64.1445***
 * High HHI 1                                                                    (3.0571)
Competition Law Index                                                                                26.9326***
 * High HHI 2                                                                                          (4.0131)
Competition Law Index                   23.9457**           25.1158***           22.6703**            22.1500**
                                         (2.6847)            (2.9619)             (2.5346)             (2.1811)
Firm Controls                               Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Country Controls                            Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Firm FE                                     Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Industry by Year FE                         Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
# of Obs.                                 13,907              13,907               13,907               13,907
Adjusted R2                               0.8082              0.8080               0.8083               0.8080
# of Clusters                               47                  47                   47                   47
                                                                                                               37

Table 8 Competition Law and CSR Performance, Differentiate by Financial Constraint
This table presents the differential effects between competition law index and firm-level CSR score by different
levels of financial constraint. Average Score is an equally weighted scores of environmental, social, and CSR
strategy. Competition Law Index measures the overall stringency of a country's competition laws. High KZ
Index and High SA Index are indicators equal to one if a firm has an above-median Kaplan-Zingales index
(Kaplan and Zingales 1997) or Size-Age index (Hadlock and Pierce 2010), respectively. High Tangibility is a
dummy variable that equals one if a firm belongs to an industry with an above-median asset tangibility. Firm-
level controls include Firm Size, Leverage, and Profitability. Country controls include GDP per capita. We
include firm and industry-by-year fixed effects in all columns. The t-statistics are reported in parentheses, with
robust standard errors clustered at the country level. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10%
respectively.

                                                                        Average Score
                                                       (1)                      (2)                    (3)
Competition Law Index                             -22.8847**
 * High KZ Index                                   (-2.0771)
Competition Law Index                                                       -19.3818**
 * High SA Index                                                             (-2.0500)
Competition Law Index                                                                               27.8030*
 * High Tangibility                                                                                 (1.9325)
Competition Law Index                             41.2962***                37.0014***               7.3240
                                                   (4.4473)                  (4.0540)               (0.5474)
Firm Controls                                         Yes                       Yes                    Yes
Country Controls                                      Yes                       Yes                    Yes
Firm FE                                               Yes                       Yes                    Yes
Industry by Year FE                                   Yes                       Yes                    Yes
# of Obs.                                           13,868                    12,785                 13,817
Adjusted R2                                         0.8076                    0.8049                 0.8092
# of Clusters                                         47                        44                     47
                                                                                                                                                             38

                                             Appendix Table A1 CSR Indicators in ASSET4 Database

Variable              Definition
                      The Environmental index is composed of information on Resource Use, Emission Reduction, and Green Innovation.
                      Resource Use includes information on (1) the extent to which companies have policies to improve water efficiency, energy efficiency,
                      and use sustainable packaging; (2) the actual resource use efficiency of companies, including measures such as the ratio of energy
                      consumption to net sales, the proportion of energy generated from renewable energy, and the ratio of water usage to net sales; and (3)
                      the degree to which companies provide detailed data and reports on achieving their own stated initiatives to reduce the use of toxic
                      substances, build environmentally friendly or green buildings, and lessen the degradation of land owned, leased, or managed by the
                      firm or firms in its supply-chain.
                      Emission Reduction includes data on (1) the extent to which companies have policies or targets to reduce emissions; (2) firms actual
                      emissions of toxic chemical and other pollutants; and (3) the degree to which companies provide detailed data and reports on (a)
                      environmental protection expenditures, (b) their stated initiatives to reduce pollution emissions and their adverse effects on
Environmental Score
                      biodiversity, (c) participation in emissions trading initiative and collaboration with environmentally-focused NGOs or other
                      organizations, and (d) whether firms have policies to recycle electronic waste, such as computers and air conditioners.
                      Green Innovation includes information on whether companies (a) report on at least one product line or service that is designed to have
                      positive effects on the environment or which is environmentally labeled and marketed, (b) develop products or technologies for use in
                      the clean, renewable energy (such as wind, solar, hydro and geo-thermal and biomass power), (c) develop products or technologies
                      that are used for water treatment, purification or that improve water use efficiency, (d) develop products and services that improve the
                      energy efficiency or sustainability of buildings, (e) develop new products to reduce noise emissions, (f) show initiatives to produce or
                      promote organic products, etc. The Green Innovation subcomponent also includes information on actual investments in green
                      technology, such as the ratio of environmental R&D expenditures to the revenues, the proportion of energy distributed or produced
                      from renewable energy sources, and average fuel consumption of the firms' fleet of vehicles.
                      The Social index aggregates information on the extent to which firms enhance employee welfare (Workforce), promote human rights
                      (Human Rights), engage in community development (Community), and fulfill their responsibilities to consumers (Product
                      Responsibility).
                      Workforce includes, but is not limited to, information on (a) the degree of employee satisfaction, whether a company provides flexible
                      working hours and day care services for its employees; (b) the number of occupational-generated diseases, injuries, and fatalities, as
                      well as the amount of company resources devoted to employee health and safety; (c) diversity and inclusion, such as the percentage of
Social Score
                      women employees, women managers, employees with disabilities, and whether the company has and implements policies to advance
                      diversity and equal opportunity; and (d) employee training and career development.
                      Human right measures whether a company has a policy to (a) ensure the respect of human rights in general, (b) ensure the freedom of
                      association of its employees, (c) avoid the use of child labor, and forced labor, and (d) use human rights criteria in selecting suppliers.
                      Product Responsibility includes information on the degree of customer satisfaction, whether companies (a) have policies to protect
                      customer health and safety, protect customer and general public privacy and integrity, adopt responsible marketing ensuring
                                                                                                                                                         39

                     protection of children, to comply with fair trade rules, regulations, and norms; (b) develop or market products and services that foster
                     specific health and safety benefits for the consumers (such as safe cars), and exclude potentially harmful products from its retail
                     offering (e.g., genetically modified organisms (GMOs), alcohol, tobacco); and (c) monitor the impact of products or services on
                     consumers or the community more generally.
                     Community includes inter alia, measures of whether firms (a) publicize a code of conduct to avoid bribery and corruption, maintain
                     the highest level of general business ethics, improve its good corporate citizenship, and operate as a fair competitor; (b) sell some
                     products or services at a discount in emerging markets, conduct research and development on drugs for diseases in the developing
                     world, and (c) follow international guidelines and provisions such as the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, and
                     Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
                     CSR Strategy covers whether firms (a) have a CSR sustainability committee, (b) publish CSR-related reports, and whether the reports
                     are published in accordance with the Global Report Initiative Guidelines, (c) have an external audit on CSR-related issues, (d)
CSR Strategy Score
                     explicitly integrate financial and extra-financial factors in the management discussion and analysis (MD&A) section of the annual
                     reports, and (e) explain how they engage with stakeholders.
