                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION AND PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH:
                 EVIDENCE FROM INDUSTRIALIZATION IN FRANCE

                                        Réka Juhász
                                     Mara P. Squicciarini
                                      Nico Voigtländer

                                      Working Paper 27503
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27503


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We thank Sandy Black, Bruno Caprettini, Diego Comin, Tarek Hassan, Michael Huberman, Felix
Iglhaut, Markus Lampe, Nils Lehr, Bob Margo, Joel Mokyr, Tomasso Porzio, Diego Puga, Eric
Verhoogen and numerous seminar audiences at Bocconi, Boston University, Cologne, Columbia,
Leuven, Lund, Montreal University, Namur University, Penn State, Yale, UCL, UCLA, and
participants at the 2020 NBER Summer Institute Meetings, the 2019 SED meetings, the 1st
Workshop of Economic History in Bologna, "The Transnational History of French
Industrialisation Before 1914" conference, and the IGC-Stanford conference on Firms,
Development and Trade 2019 for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Gaia Dossi,
Johanna Gautier, Angelo Krüger, Lorine Labrue, Simon Margolin, Marie Michaille, Alberto
Mola, and Sebastian Ottinger for excellent assistance throughout the construction of the dataset,
Guillaume Daudin for kindly sharing data, and Eugene White for sharing his expertise of
hyperinflation during the French Revolution. Financial support from the National Science
Foundation (Grant # 1628866) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Réka Juhász, Mara P. Squicciarini, and Nico Voigtländer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Technology Adoption and Productivity Growth: Evidence from Industrialization in France
Réka Juhász, Mara P. Squicciarini, and Nico Voigtländer
NBER Working Paper No. 27503
July 2020, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. F63,N23,O14

                                          ABSTRACT

We construct a novel plant-level dataset to examine the process of technology adoption during a
period of rapid technological change: The diffusion of mechanized cotton spinning during the
Industrial Revolution in France. We document new stylized facts that can help explain why major
technological breakthroughs tend to be adopted slowly and ­ even after being adopted ­ take time
to be reflected in aggregate productivity statistics. Before mechanization, cotton spinning was
performed in households, while production in plants only emerged with the new technology
around 1800. This allows us to isolate the plant productivity distribution of new technology
adopters in mechanized cotton spinning. We find that this distribution was initially highly
dispersed. Over the subsequent decades, mechanized spinning experienced dramatic productivity
growth that was almost entirely driven by a disappearance of plants in the lower tail. In contrast,
innovations in other sectors (with gradual technological progress) shifted the whole productivity
distribution. We document rich historical and empirical evidence suggesting that the pattern in
cotton spinning was driven by the need to re-organize production under the new technology. This
process of `trial and error' led to widely dispersed initial productivity draws, low initial average
productivity, and ­ in the subsequent decades ­ to high productivity growth as new entrants
adopted improved methods of operating the mechanized technology.

Réka Juhász                                      Nico Voigtländer
Department of Economics                          UCLA Anderson School of Management
Columbia University                              110 Westwood Plaza
420 West 118th Street                            C513 Entrepreneurs Hall
New York, NY 10027                               Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER                                         and NBER
rj2446@columbia.edu                              nico.v@anderson.ucla.edu

Mara P. Squicciarini
Bocconi University
Department of Economics
Via Roentgen, 1
Milan 20136
Italy
mara.squicciarini@unibocconi.it



A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27503
            [T]here were strong pairwise complementary relations between factory organization and ma-
            chinery [...] employers needed to simultaneously determine the choice of technique, the level
            of worker effort, and the way incentives were set up and communications and decisions flowed
            through the firm hierarchy. [...] Factories were the repositories of useful knowledge ... but they
            were also the places in which experimentation took place. ­ Mokyr (2010, pp. 345-46)


1       Introduction
The diffusion of innovation is at the core of aggregate productivity growth in the long run. Despite
its importance for economic development, understanding the determinants and effects of tech-
nology adoption has proven difficult. As a consequence, the literature faces a number of open
questions. For example, many technologies that ended up being widely adopted ­ such as hybrid
corn seed in agriculture (Griliches, 1957) or by-product coke ovens in the iron and steel industry
(Mansfield, 1961) ­ were slow to diffuse across firms.1 This slow adoption is particularly puz-
zling given that new technology can provide a substantial boost to firm productivity (Syverson,
2011; Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie, and Roberts, 2013; Giorcelli, 2019). There is also a
second, well-documented puzzle: When major innovations such as information technology (IT) or
electricity spread across firms, the widely expected boost in aggregate productivity proved hard to
document in the data. This prompted Robert Solow to remark in 1987 that "[...] what everyone
feels to have been a technological revolution, a drastic change in our productive lives, has been
accompanied everywhere, including Japan, by a slowing-down of productivity growth, not by a
step up. You can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics."2
     A natural lens to study aggregate effects of technology adoption is the firm (or plant) produc-
tivity distribution ­ an approach that has gained prominence over the last two decades (c.f. Melitz,
2003; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Combes, Duranton, Gobillon, Puga, and Roux, 2012; Perla and
Tonetti, 2014). However, applying this framework to technology adoption is difficult for numerous
reasons: The specific technology used by firms is rarely directly observed, and even if it is known,
new and old technologies typically coexist within narrowly defined sectors, or even within plants.
In addition, the productivity distributions under the old and new technologies are not independent
­ a plant's productivity with the old technology can affect its propensity to adopt innovations.
These factors render it difficult to isolate aggregate productivity growth among adopters of the
new technology. One approach to tackle these challenges is the use of randomized control trials
(RCTs), which provide clean identification of the effects of technology at the firm level (Bloom
et al., 2013; Atkin, Chaudhry, Chaudry, Khandelwal, and Verhoogen, 2017; Hardy and McCasland,
    1
     The more general observation that technology is often slow to diffuse is attributed to Rosenberg (1976). See Hall
and Khan (2003) and Hall (2004) for surveys of the literature on technology diffusion. Comin and Hobijn (2010)
document substantial lags in the adoption of new technologies, estimating that the variation in adoption lags across
countries can account for at least one-quarter of per capita income disparities.
   2
     New York Times, July 12, 1987, p. 36. Such productivity puzzles are not restricted to the introduction of com-
puters: David (1990) documents similar trends following the diffusion of electricity earlier in the 20th century.

                                                          1
2016). However, the relatively small sample size and short time horizon do not allow for a system-
atic analysis of the firm productivity distribution.
    This paper bypasses the typical limitations by exploiting a unique historical setting ­ the adop-
tion of mechanized cotton spinning in France during the First Industrial Revolution. Mechanized
cotton spinning had been invented in Britain and ­ if operated efficiently ­ promised huge pro-
ductivity improvements. We hand-collect novel plant-level data from historical surveys covering
mechanized cotton spinning and two comparison sectors ­ metallurgy and paper milling ­ at two
points in time, around 1800 and in 1840. Importantly, in 1800, mechanized cotton spinning had
only recently been adopted in France. Four decades later, the technology had reached maturity
(Pollard, 1965). Thus, the time period that we study encompasses both the initial phase of adop-
tion and the period when the new technology had widely spread.
    Our empirical strategy relies on a number of features of the historical setting. First, before
the emergence of the new technology, cotton spinning was performed in home production with
hand-operated spinning wheels (see the illustration in Appendix Figure A.1). Plants ­ or let alone
factories ­ did not exist in cotton spinning prior to its mechanization. The new technology ­ the
famous spinning jenny and the subsequent spinning mule ­ required the organization of produc-
tion in cotton mills (see Appendix Figure A.2). Thus, all cotton spinning facilities in our dataset
operated mechanized spinning in a central location, that is, in a plant.3 This allows us to isolate
the productivity distribution specific to the new technology and to examine its evolution over time.
Second, the mechanized spinning technology changed relatively little between 1800 and 1840. We
can thus narrow down potential drivers of productivity differences across plants and over time:
With the underlying technology being very similar, productivity differences likely resulted from
the more or less efficient operation of the new technology.4 This goes beyond existing work,
where productivity changes due to technology adoption reflect both the productivity differential
of the new technology itself and the efficiency with which this technology is operated. Third, we
document that owners who set up mechanized cotton spinning plants typically had a background
in banking and finance as opposed to handspinning, suggesting that productivity under the new
and old technologies were not systematically related.
   3
      Throughout the paper, we refer to mechanized cotton spinning production organized in a central location as a
plant. This is in order to delineate the organization of mechanized production from earlier organizational forms. In
particular, under the pre-industrial putting-out system across much of France, local merchant-manufacturers organized
home production across a multitude of households. They typically owned the capital equipment (the spinning wheels),
which they gave to spinners together with the raw material, then collecting the spun yarn and marketing it (Huberman,
1996). This system was akin to `firms' employing many external workers who performed production in scattered
locations, typically for a piece-rate as opposed to a wage. Our survey of cotton spinning in 1806 allows us to eliminate
the few cases of home production that were recorded by the enumerators. We thus focus on producers that organized
mechanized production in plants.
    4
      We do not claim that there was no technological progress in mechanized cotton spinning whatsoever. The tech-
nology did experience incremental changes. We show, using a number of robustness checks across plants and over
time, that these do not explain our results.

                                                           2
     We document three main findings for mechanized cotton spinning plants: 1) we observe a
highly dispersed productivity distribution in the initial period (1806) relative to 1840; 2) we esti-
mate that the mechanized cotton spinning industry underwent a substantial (82%) increase in plant
productivity between 1806 and 1840 after mechanization had already been adopted; 3) this aggre-
gate productivity growth in mechanized cotton spinning had a strong lower-tail bias: It was largely
driven by the disappearance of lower-tail plants.
     We compare the evolution of the plant productivity distribution in cotton spinning with two
comparison sectors ­ metallurgy and paper milling. Importantly, in these sectors, production was
already organized in plants before the Industrial Revolution because of their reliance on water
power and high-fixed-cost machinery (see the illustrations in Figures A.4 ­ A.7 in the appendix).
Thus, operational and organizational knowledge had already diffused. Technological progress in
these sectors was more gradual and took the form of integrating new capital vintages into existing
production setups ­ as opposed to the radical shift from home-based to factory-based production
in cotton spinning. We find that the whole productivity distribution shifted to the right in the
comparison sectors.
     To rationalize these findings, we build on a mechanism that has been emphasized by historians
and back it with new empirical evidence: Adopting mechanized cotton spinning required plants to
learn best-practice methods along multiple dimensions. This is consistent with a setting in which
plants learn about the optimal use of multiple inputs or tasks that in turn exhibit complementarities
in the production function. We show that these features initially (when plants have little experience
in the optimal performance of tasks) lead to a fat lower tail in the plant productivity distribution.
Over time, as plants learn about the efficient use of multiple inputs (tasks), the lower tail disappears.
We provide rich historical evidence consistent with this mechanism. Mechanization required the
move to factory-based production, which represented an important organizational challenge: How
should the layout of the mill be designed? How should machines be powered and how should the
work flow be organized? How should workers ­ not used to the hierarchy and discipline of factory
production ­ be recruited and managed? These organizational innovations proceeded via a process
of trial and error, and the diffusion of organizational knowledge took time. As Allen (2009, p.184)
writes: "The cotton mill, in other words, had to be invented as well as the spinning machinery per
se."
     We provide several pieces of evidence in line with the proposed mechanism. First, we show
that the exit rate of plants in mechanized cotton spinning was substantially higher than in other
sectors between 1800 and 1840. This is consistent with the idea that early adopters faced consid-
erable uncertainty about best-practice methods in production. Coherently, we show that exiting
plants were substantially less productive than those that survived. Second, using plant age, we
show that cotton spinning plants that entered the market later had higher productivity. This finding


                                                   3
supports our argument that knowledge about the optimal organization of mechanized cotton spin-
ning diffused slowly over time. Moreover, the productivity advantage of younger plants is only a
robust feature in cotton spinning around 1800. Younger spinning plants were not more productive
in 1840; and in metallurgy, young plants were as productive as older ones in both periods.5 This
is consistent with the idea that later entrants in mechanized cotton spinning could draw from a
better pool of organizational knowledge, which evolved over time and reached maturity around
1840. This process was muted in metallurgy, where plant-based production methods had been es-
tablished much earlier. Finally, we examine our data for patterns compatible with learning effects.
We find evidence supporting the spatial diffusion of knowledge: Plants located closer to other
high-productivity plants were themselves more productive, and this relationship is strong only for
cotton spinning plants and only during the initial period of technology adoption. We show, using a
rich set of controls and placebo tests, that these results are unlikely to be driven either by selection
into productive locations or by omitted variables.
    Overall, our findings allow us to shed light on the two puzzles of slow adoption of major in-
novations and slow aggregate productivity growth. In combination with rich historical evidence,
the highly dispersed initial productivity distribution points to information disparities across cotton
plants: The organization of factory production evolved via a process of trial and error such that
only the most productive adopters, those that `stumbled' onto the efficient organization of factory
production, survived. By 1840, information about the efficient organization of cotton mills had
dispersed, leading to a much narrower distribution of plant productivity. Uncertainty about the
optimal organization of production with a new technology can thus explain why aggregate pro-
ductivity gains for technologies are initially small. Early adopters need to experiment with the
efficient organization of production, and most of them will inadvertently operate the new technol-
ogy inefficiently. Consequently, the potential benefits of the new technology materialize relatively
slowly for the average plant. Our findings thus lend support to the view in the literature that the
effects of major new technologies, such as electricity and IT, appear slowly in industry productivity
"due to the need to re-organize the operation of the entire manufacturing facility to make effective
use of this innovation" (Hall and Khan, 2003, p.8).
    At the same time, potential adopters of a new technology expect that the knowledge about its
optimal operation will improve over time. This creates incentives to delay entry. Indeed, we ob-
serve that later entrants in cotton spinning had significantly higher productivity than early adopters.
These findings can help to explain the slow diffusion of major innovations, especially if they re-
quire a re-organization of production.
    Our paper is closely related to a large literature on technology adoption. The most developed
strand of this literature explains the low rates of technology adoption in agriculture in developing

   5
       Due to data limitations, we cannot conduct this exercise for paper milling.

                                                             4
countries.6 Given its importance in driving long-run sustained growth, understanding technology
adoption in manufacturing is arguably equally important. However, this strand of the literature is
much smaller, perhaps due to the difficulty of observing and categorizing the use of diverse tech-
nologies in manufacturing. The majority of recent papers circumvent this issue by using RCTs
to understand the determinants of technology adoption (c.f. Bloom et al., 2013; Hardy and Mc-
Casland, 2016).7 In line with our results, some of the evidence from experimental settings points
to the importance of organizational barriers (Atkin et al., 2017). We contribute to this literature by
studying the full plant productivity distribution for one of the most famous innovations in history,
both at the initial phase of technology adoption and once the industry had reached maturity. In-
terestingly, our results suggest that the complex nature of production processes in manufacturing
relative to agriculture may be important. In cases where technology adoption requires a substan-
tial re-organization of production, adoption may be slow and productivity effects may take time to
materialize.
     Second, theoretical and empirical research has pointed to the importance of firm dynamics
for understanding aggregate productivity (Jovanovic, 1982; Melitz, 2003; Syverson, 2011). A
key insight of this literature is that ­ as there are large differences in productivity even within
narrowly defined sectors ­ examining the entire distribution is critical for understanding aggregate
productivity (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009). We apply this insight to the arguably most important
structural break in economic history: The First Industrial Revolution, which saw unprecedented
growth in manufacturing productivity (Crafts, 1985; Crafts and Harley, 1992; Galor, 2011). So
far, productivity growth during this period has been studied mostly at the country level, or ­ in
some cases ­ at the aggregate sectoral level. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first
to study the contribution of plant dynamics to manufacturing productivity improvements during
the Industrial Revolution.8 In addition, we examine the puzzle of the slow diffusion of major
technological innovations through the lens of the firm-productivity literature: Our findings suggest
that focusing on the entire distribution of plant productivity can help deepen our understanding of
   6
      See for example Foster and Rosenzweig (1995), Munshi (2004), Bandiera and Rasul (2006), Conley and Udry
(2010), Duflo, Kremer, and Robinson (2011), Suri (2011), Hanna, Sendhil, and Schwartzstein (2014), BenYishay and
Mobarak (2018), Beaman, Magruder, and Robinson (2014), and Emerick, de Janvry, Sadoulet, and Dar. (2016).
    7
      One notable exception is Giorcelli (2019), who exploits a historical natural experiment to identify the productivity
effects of adopting modern management practices and modern machinery by Italian firms after WWII.
    8
      Similar to our setup, but in the modern context, Collard-Wexler and De Loecker (2015) examine how a specific
sector was affected by a major innovation: the introduction of the minimill in the steel industry starting in the 1960s.
This led to large aggregate productivity increases via both technology upgrading of surviving producers and exit of
old incumbents. In contrast, our setting isolates productivity gains within the new technology, by separating it from
pre-industrial home spinning. In other words, upgrading of existing `old' producers is not present in our data, so that
exit, entry, and improvements all occur among operators of the new, mechanized cotton spinning technology. A related
paper in the historical context is Braguinsky, Ohyama, Okazaki, and Syverson (2015), who study the Japanese cotton
spinning industry in the late 19th century and early 20th century. Rather than technology adoption, this paper focuses
on the effects of acquisitions on acquired plants. These see a rise in productivity due to lower inventories and higher
capacity utilization ­ which is likely a result of improved demand management.

                                                            5
technology adoption. This is in line with Foster, Grim, Haltiwanger, and Wolf (2018), who provide
empirical support for the argument by Gort and Klepper (1982) that periods of rapid innovation
are associated with a surge in firm entry, followed by a period where experience with the new
technology is accumulated, eventually leading to a shakeout where unsuccessful firms (or plants)
exit.9
     Third, our paper is related to a strand of the literature that studies the role of organizational
changes during the Industrial Revolution. In a set of papers Sokoloff (1984, 1986) shows that
in the first half of the 19th century in the United States, both mechanizing and non-mechanizing
industries displayed i) marked increases in firm scale as measured by the number of employees,
and ii) substantial increases in productivity. Sokoloff speculates that these results are consistent
with two important sources of productivity growth during the early stages of industrialization: di-
vision of labor and modifications in routines. However, a crucial distinction between the US and
French context is that the former did not have an important cotton handspinning sector prior to
mechanization. Thus, mechanized cotton spinning firms not only had to introduce the new tech-
nology to the US, but they also had to create the necessary infrastructure to supply raw materials
and to market their final products (Ware, 1931).10 In the European context, the seminal work by
Pollard (1965) documents important organizational innovations (in what we would call `manage-
ment' today) that took place in the first half of the 19th century in Britain.11 We contribute to this
literature in the following ways. First, we show that, similar to the US, plant size and industry
productivity were growing in France across a variety of sectors. This suggests that these patterns
are a general feature of the early process of industrialization. Second, our main interest lies in
understanding productivity growth during the process of technology adoption. While our results
are consistent with Sokoloff's conjecture that changes in firm organization contributed to rapid
productivity growth during this period, our findings highlight that these productivity gains took
time to materialize. Third, our unique setting allows us to isolate the effect of technology adop-
tion from other factors such as the development of input or output markets. Finally, we analyze

   9
      The literature has typically measured innovation via firm-level R&D expenditures or patents. Since these may
miss important dimensions of firm activity (such as learning), Foster et al. (2018) rely on broader indicators for the
presence of innovation: firm entry and productivity growth. Due to the indirect nature of these indicators, Foster et al.
(2018) are reluctant to conclusively tie their results to technological innovation. Our unique setting has the advantage
that we can isolate all plants in the cotton industry that operated a major new technology and track their productivity
distribution over time.
   10
      This type of confounder is not present in the French setting, which had a long history of handspinning before
the Industrial Revolution. Raw cotton and cotton yarn markets were well-developed across France by 1800. Thus,
one cannot replicate our results in the US context, despite the availability of US firm level data across a broader set
of industries. In addition, the first US manufacturing census with wide coverage is from 1820. At this point, the US
mechanized sector was arguably more mature than the French one from 1806. In other words, the early first cotton
industry survey in France allows a unique look at its infancy period.
   11
      Subsequent research in this area is discussed in Mokyr (2010). Squicciarini and Voigtländer (2015) show that
upper-tail human capital played an important role in the industrialization of France.

                                                           6
the overall plant productivity distribution and are thus able to shed new light on how productivity
growth evolved.
    The paper is structured as follows. The next section discusses the historical context. Section
3 describes the construction of our novel dataset from archival sources, while Section 4 presents
and discusses our empirical results. Section 5 draws conclusions from our results for technology
adoption during periods of major innovation.

2        Historical Background
Early nineteenth century France presents an ideal setting for our study of technology adoption.
While England was the first country to industrialize, France was a close follower and structurally
similar to England (Crafts, 1977; Voigtländer and Voth, 2006). The flagship inventions of the
Industrial Revolution ­ most notably the spinning jenny ­ were developed in Britain. France
adopted these widely during the first half of the 19th century and witnessed a similar acceleration
in industrial output as Britain (Rostow, 1975).12 By focusing on France, we thus study the effects
of technology adoption in the context of an industrializing economy that was (at least initially)
mostly adopting technology developed elsewhere.
    Our empirical analysis builds on three pillars that emerge from the historical context. First, the
new cotton spinning technology entailed a move from home-based to factory-based production.
This allows us to isolate the productivity distribution of adopters of the new technology. Second,
we compare the productivity distribution in cotton spinning to two other sectors: metallurgy and
paper milling. Production in these sectors was already organized in plants prior to the Industrial
Revolution and experienced mostly incremental technological change that did not entail a drastic
reorganization of the production process. Using these comparison sectors helps us to distinguish
the effect of adopting a major new technology in cotton spinning from other trends that may have
affected productivity distributions more broadly. Third, we discuss the historical evidence for the
mechanism that arguably explains our empirical findings: The move to large-scale factory-based
production in cotton spinning required the development of best-practice methods for organizing
production through a process of trial and error.
2.1        Mechanized Cotton Spinning
Development of Mechanized Spinning in Britain. Cotton textiles was the flagship industry of the
First Industrial Revolution, contributing one-quarter of TFP growth in Britain during the period
1780-1860 (Crafts, 1985). Cotton spinning is the process by which raw cotton fiber is twisted
into yarn. Traditionally, this task was performed mostly by women in their homes, using a simple
spinning wheel (see Figure A.1 in the appendix). With this old technology, each spinner was able
to spin only one thread of yarn. The industry was rurally organized and generally centered around a
    12
         Appendix A.1 provides a more detailed discussion of the Industrial Revolution in France.

                                                             7
local merchant-manufacturer who would supply spinners with the raw cotton, collect their output,
take care of the marketing, and often also owned the spinning wheels (Huberman, 1996).
    The breakthrough "macro-invention" in spinning was forged in Britain in 1765, when James
Hargreaves invented the spinning jenny. This made it possible to spin multiple threads simulta-
neously, as twist was imparted to the fibre not by using the worker's hands, but rather by using
spindles. In 1779, Samuel Crompton further improved the design, inventing the water-powered
spinning mule (see the left panel in Figure A.2). The productivity effect of these innovations was
enormous. Allen (2009) estimates that the first vintage of the spinning jenny alone led to a three-
fold improvement in labor productivity. Correspondingly, the price of yarn declined rapidly in
the late 18th century (Appendix Figure A.3), especially for the highest-quality yarn, where prices
declined from 1,091 pence per pound to 76 pence per pound in real terms between 1785 and 1800
(Harley, 1998).13
    The mechanization of cotton spinning required production to be organized within factories for
two reasons. First, the dependence on high fixed-cost inanimate power sources (such as water and
steam) led to the concentration of production in one location.14 Second, mechanized production
increased the need for monitoring workers, who were now paid factory wages rather than for their
home-produced output (Williamson, 1980; Szostak, 1989).15 As production moved to factories
(see the illustration in the right panel of Figure A.2), cotton spinners faced a set of new challenges
in organizing production effectively. We return to this issue in the next section.
Adoption of Mechanized Spinning in France. Mechanized spinning was adopted with some lag in
France. Efforts to adopt the technology had begun with state support during the Ancien Régime. By
the beginning of our sample period in 1806, the large-scale expansion of the industry documented
in Juhász (2018) had just begun: The technology was known throughout the country (Horn, 2006),
and a number of domestic spinning machine makers had been established (Chassagne, 1991). The
spinning machinery itself was produced mainly in France (using British blueprints) because of a

  13
      Harley (1998) collected price data for three different qualities of yarn from British sources: 18, 40 and 100 count
yarn (the count is an industry-wide standard that refers to the length per unit mass, implying that higher counts are
finer). While all counts saw striking price declines (see Figure A.3), this trend was most pronounced for the finest,
highest-quality varieties. Machine spinning had the largest impact on the fine high-quality yarn, which British hand-
spinners had not been able to effectively produce and to which the mule-jenny (a subsequent vintage of the machine
introduced in the late 18th century) was well-suited (Riello, 2013). Our data include information on the type of yarn
produced, allowing us to account for quality differences across plants.
   14
      The initial spinning jenny was hand-powered, but newer vintages of machinery that used inanimate sources of
power (the throstle and the mule) were rapidly developed.
   15
      Huberman (1996, p. 11) describes the need for monitoring in mechanized cotton spinning: "If there were multiple
breakages of yarn on the larger machines, the mule had to come to a complete stop to piece the broken threads. There
was also doffing, when the reels were full of spun cotton, the mule had to be stopped and the reels removed. Finally,
there was cleaning. At all times, the spinners could expend effort as they were motivated to, and without proper
supervision or incentives they could disguise how hard they could in fact work." This created a strong need for
monitoring, so that even early hand-powered machines (a particular vintage of spinning machinery) were housed in
the "garrets of cottages and later in sheds" (Huberman, 1996, p. 11).

                                                           8
ban on exporting machinery from Britain until 1843 (Saxonhouse and Wright, 2004).
    A number of features in the historical setting allow us to study how technology adoption af-
fected productivity growth. First, mechanized spinning technology operated in centralized loca-
tions (plants), while the old technology relied on home production. This allows us to identify all
producers that used the new technology, i.e., all plants observed in our data.16 Consequently, we
are able to isolate the productivity distribution for plants that used the new, mechanized technology.
    Second, the sharp break in organizational requirements under the new technology rendered ex-
perience with the old technology effectively useless: The type of skills necessary for successfully
running mechanized cotton spinning factories were very different from those required under the old
cottage-industry technology. Correspondingly, historical evidence suggests that most owners who
operated the new technology in France around 1800 did not have a background in the old technol-
ogy. Table 1 presents information on the socio-economic background of the owners of mechanized
cotton spinning establishments for the early period of technology adoption (1785-1815). Based
on these figures, the vast majority of owners were "traders, bankers and commercial employees"
(62.5%), while only a small faction (10.2%) came from the production side, i.e. "workers and me-
chanics," and three-quarters of this latter group were in fact highly skilled mechanics Chassagne
(1991, p. 274).17
    Third, during our sample period, the vintages of capital in cotton spinning and the technology
remained largely unchanged.18 This renders it unlikely that our analysis is confounded by the
introduction of novel technology after the onset of mechanized spinning.19 We can confirm this
in our data, because the plant survey in 1806 asked which vintage of capital plants used. We find
that both the throstle and the mule-jenny were widely used by existing cotton mills in France. The
next vintage to appear (the self-acting mule ­ a fully automated machine) did not spread until the
1840s, i.e., after our sample period ended (Huberman, 1996). Moreover, in contrast to Britain,
mechanized cotton spinners in France did not switch from water to steam power to a large extent,


  16
      We follow Mokyr (2010, p. 339) in defining factory-based production as "the precise circumscription of work
in time and space, and its physical separation from homes." This definition is solely based on the organization of
production; it does not rely on the use of inanimate sources of power. This is important because it allows us to refer to
`factory' or `plant' production even when our data do not include specific information on power sources. Section 3.1
describes how we clean the data of a small number of observations that mix features of home and factory production.
   17
      It is possible that some merchant-manufacturers previously involved with handspinning are reported under the
category "traders, bankers and commercial employees." However, Chassagne (1991, p. 274) clarifies that "Two-thirds
of entrepreneurs came from a general trade background, predominantly in fabric and cloth, which proves the predom-
inance of commercial factors in the launching and success of industrial enterprises." This highlights the importance of
marketing skills (as opposed to previous experience with handspinning) in setting up cotton spinning factories.
   18
      There were three main types of machinery in use: the spinning jenny, the throstle and the mule-jenny. These were
not good substitutes; in particular, the mule-jenny was well-suited to spinning higher-count, finer yarns (Riello, 2013).
   19
      This is not to say that there were no improvements of the existing technology, or that plants did not increase
their capital intensity. In robustness checks, we show that our main results are unlikely to be driven by these types of
incremental improvements to the technology.

                                                           9
owing to the fact that France was not particularly well-endowed with coal (Cameron, 1985).20
     Fourth, the historical literature summarized in Juhász (2018) underlines that the French needed
to figure out many aspects of operating the technology efficiently themselves. That was partly
because of the ban on machine exports and emigration of engineers and skilled workers from
Britain throughout our sample period (Saxonhouse and Wright, 2004), and partly because a lot of
the learning that needed to be done was tacit (Mokyr, 2001, 2010).21
2.2    Comparison Sectors: Metallurgy and Paper Milling
We compare the evolution of the plant productivity distribution in mechanized cotton spinning to
two other sectors: metallurgy and paper milling. The key feature of both comparison sectors is
that they had already organized production in plants since well before the Industrial Revolution.
In metallurgy, plant production was mostly due to the reliance on high fixed-cost machinery such
as the furnaces used both in smelting and refining. In paper milling, production was organized in
plants because of the beating engine's reliance on water-power.22
    Technological change in the two comparison sectors was introduced gradually and within the
existing organization of production. The switch from charcoal to coal in metallurgy could be
introduced by modifying a plant's existing machines and ovens (see the illustration in Figures
A.4 and A.5 in the appendix). In paper milling, the mechanization of forming paper (one step
in the production process) did not substantially alter the layout of the factory or other parts of
the production process (see Figures A.6 and A.7). Moreover, the adoption of new technologies
in both sectors was slow in France. Adoption began in the 1820s, and it was fairly modest until
1840. In metallurgy, the switch to coal was delayed because ­ in contrast to Britain ­ the relatively
low price of charcoal kept the old (charcoal-based) technique profitable until the new (coal-based)
technology's efficiency had risen (Allen, 2009). The new production processes using coal ­ coke
smelting and the puddling process in refining ­ were both introduced around the 1820s in France
and gradually adopted thereafter. By 1827, there were only four French departments where iron
was smelted with coke. The adoption of the puddling process was more widespread, with 149
puddling furnaces in use across 15 out of 86 departments (Pounds and Parker, 1957).23

  20
      This is confirmed in our data for 1840, showing that the majority of cotton spinning plants were still using water
power (see Table D.3 in the appendix).
   21
      Some British involvement in technology transfer took place despite the legal bans and the wars that occurred
during this time period (Horn, 2006; Chassagne, 1991). However, while foreign technology transfer likely played
some role in French learning, machines had to be produced domestically, workers were local, and some fundamental
factors were different (such as the relative scarcity of coal).
   22
      The beating engine breaks down the raw input vegetable matter into cellulose fiber. The production process is
described in more detail in Appendix A.3.
   23
      We can also verify indirectly that the new coal-based technology was introduced slowly in metallurgy: Adopting
coal required a switch from water to steam as power source (Pounds and Parker, 1957), and the latter is reported by
plants in 1840. Only 16% of plants in metallurgy report using steam-power, suggesting that the vast majority of them
still used the older charcoal-based technology (see Table D.3 in the appendix).

                                                          10
    In paper milling, the adoption of mechanized paper formation was similarly slow. While evi-
dence on the adoption of mechanized paper-making is relatively scarce, our plant-level data from
1840 suggest that the technology had not been widely adopted. Only 10 (out of 348) plants explic-
itly mention having mechanized their production process, and only 42 plants report using steam
power, which was necessary for the mechanized machine.
    Given these features, the plant productivity distributions in metallurgy and paper milling re-
flect the same mix of old and new technology vintages that is typically observed in standard data
sources. Observing two industries that were already organized in plants prior to the Industrial
Revolution allows us to disentangle the productivity dynamics that were specific to mechanized
cotton spinning from broader trends that affected the productivity distributions of all industries
simultaneously.
2.3   The Challenging Transition to Factory-Based Production in Cotton Spinning
The transition to large-scale factory-based production has been characterized as "one of the most
dramatic sea changes in economic history" (Mokyr, 2010, p. 339). While cotton spinning was not
the first sector to organize production in factories, the organizational changes during its industrial-
ization went far beyond the experience made by other sectors. By the time cotton spinning mills
reached maturity around 1830 in Britain (Pollard, 1965), they were larger, with a finer division of
labor and a greater concentration of capital than production units in other sectors that had been
organized as plants earlier (Chapman, 1974). However, the biggest change was the development
of flow production ­ the production of standardized goods in huge quantities at low unit costs by
"arranging machines and equipment in line sequence to process goods continuously through a se-
quence of specialized operations" (Chapman, 1974, p. 470). It is this synchronisation of highly
specialized machines that distinguishes the cotton spinning factory as a "fully-evolved factory"
from earlier developments (Chapman, 1974, p. 471).
     Developing efficient cotton spinning mills meant solving organizational challenges along mul-
tiple dimensions. As Allen (2009, p.184) writes:

      "The spinning jenny, water frame and mule were key inventions in the mechanization of cotton
      spinning, but they were only part of the story. [...] the machines had to be spatially organized,
      the flows of materials coordinated, and the generation and distribution of power sorted out.
      A corresponding division of labour was needed. The cotton mill, in other words, had to be
      invented as well as the spinning machinery per se."

Successful mill designs were observed and copied. Chapman (1970, p. 239) shows that early mills
in England had a remarkably similar structure because plants quite literally copied the original
design of the Arkwright mills over and over again. Moreover, since few millwrights were qualified
to build the power units of their mills, these were typically built by the same handful of engineers,
qualified from experience (Chapman, 1970, pp. 239-40). It took time for design defects to be

                                                     11
improved; for example, contemporaries were aware of ventilation problems in the Arkwright-style
mills, but continued to use the same layout regardless (Fitton and Wadsworth, 1958, p. 98).
     Beyond organizing the production process efficiently, the factory setting and the use of inan-
imate power itself produced a host of new, unanticipated challenges. For example, fire hazards
were a particularly pressing issue in the case of cotton spinning because of the highly flammable
cotton dust (Langenbach, 2013). A process of trial and error eventually led to best-practice mill
design that reduced fire hazards: Cotton textile mills introduced the so-called "fire-proof building"
in Britain in the late 18th century, which entailed leaving no timber surfaces exposed by using cast-
iron columns instead of wood (Johnson and Skempton, 1955). However, it quickly became appar-
ent that fireproof mills were not indeed fireproof, because "steel or wrought iron, when heated, will
fail by buckling or bending very much sooner than the equivalent beam of post or wood" (Boston
Mutual Fire, 1908, p. 3). US textile mills developed what became known as "slow-burning mills"
in the 1820s, recognizing that fires could not be prevented but their effects could be minimized
by better mill design. Partly, this entailed moving back to using wood: "Timber posts offer more
resistance to fire than either wrought-iron, steel, or cast iron pillars, and in mill construction are
preferable in many respects (Boston Mutual Fire, 1908, p. 3). Chassagne (1991, p. 340) posits
that early 19th century French mills consisted of multiple buildings and covered vast spaces (as
opposed to building vertically) partly to minimize the fire hazard. Similarly, building structures
needed to withstand the stress they faced from the vibrations of machines (Chassagne, 1991, p.
435). Iron rods with plates held beams to the masonry walls to prevent the vibrations of machines
from shaking the walls apart (Langenbach, 2013).
     Besides the need to develop the optimal mill layout and building structure, plants faced a host
of other challenges that stemmed from concentrating workers under one roof and implementing a
division of labor. On the one hand, workers had to adapt to the discipline and economic hierar-
chy of factory work. Following instructions, showing up to work on time, or getting along with
other employees was new to workers who largely had experience with a domestic system (Pollard,
1963). Huberman (1996) describes that monitoring worker effort was a huge problem in cotton
spinning mills.24 He estimates that it took two generations for efficient labor management prac-
tices to be developed. Once again, progress was made via trial and error. Firms in Britain initially
experimented with dismissals, which led to disastrously high turnover rates, and later with replac-
ing male with female spinners in the hope that the latter could be more easily disciplined. Finally,
around 1830, the industry settled on efficiency wages to motivate unobservable effort.

  24
     As machines were not yet standardized, managers (overseers) lacked the technical information necessary to mon-
itor effort. "[T]he operative spinner was firmly of the opinion that no two mules could ever be made alike. As a
consequence, he proceeded to tune and adjust each of his own particular pair of mules with little respect for the inten-
tions of the maker or the principles of engineering. Before very long, no two mules ever were alike" (Catling, 1970,
quoted in Huberman, 1996, p. 59).

                                                          12
    Managing teamwork efficiently became an issue when continuous flow processes were devel-
oped, which happened first in cotton spinning (Mokyr, 2001, 2010). Manufacturers did not have
the experience, training, or access to knowledge to effectively manage labor or the mills in general.
As Mokyr (2010, p. 350) emphasizes:
      "[...] `management' was not a concept that was known or understood before the Industrial
      Revolution. Military and maritime organization, the royal court, and a few unusual set-ups
      aside, the need for organizations in charge of controlling and coordinating large numbers of
      workers and expensive equipment was rare anywhere before 1750. British managers fumbled
      and stumbled into solutions, some of which worked and some did not."

In fact, Pollard (1965) argues that the lack of modern management techniques limited the size of
firms. In his seminal book on the topic, he shows that large firm size (above 100-200 workers) was
seen as undesirable:
      "up to the end of the eighteenth century at least...management was a function of direct involve-
      ment by ownership, and if it had to be delegated..., the business was courting trouble. This was
      a powerful argument against the enlargement of firms beyond the point at which an interme-
      diate stratum of managers became necessary. [...] In the centuries preceding the Industrial
      Revolution, firms engaged in production were unable to cope with size, essentially because
      they could not cope with the problems of management which it involves." (Pollard, 1965, p.
      23)

The fact that owners were directly involved in management in the late 18th century is also con-
firmed in our data. In the paper milling survey of 1794, we have information on the name of the
owner and of the manager for 174 plants in the sample. In 135 of these plants (78%), the owner
and the manager were the same person.
    In summary, the first generation of mechanized cotton spinners faced many organizational
challenges all at once, along multiple dimensions. Developing efficient factory-based production
proceeded via a process of trial and error, and it took decades for best-practice methods to emerge.
According to Pollard (1965), the process was more or less complete by about 1830 in Britain: "a
cotton mill was so closely circumscribed by its standard machinery, and there was so much less
scope for individual design, skill or new solutions to new problems, by 1830, at least, ... that little
originality in internal layout was required from any but a handful of leaders" (Pollard, 1965, p. 90).
The initial lack of knowledge about best practice along multiple dimensions is a crucial element in
the discussion of our empirical findings.

3   Data Construction
Our analysis is based on a novel plant-level dataset constructed from handwritten historical indus-
trial surveys. The data have a panel-like structure covering three industries: mechanized cotton
spinning, metallurgy, and paper milling. We observe plants in these sectors at two points in time:
around 1800 and again in 1840. Below, we discuss the main features of the data and the vari-

                                                    13
ables used in our analysis. Appendix B provides a more detailed description of the data, including
sources.
3.1    Industrial Surveys Around 1800
Our data from the turn of the 19th century are based on three industry-specific surveys that were
conducted by the French government. The survey for paper milling was implemented in 1794
during the French Revolution; it contains data on 593 plants. The most important survey for our
analysis ­ cotton textiles ­ was conducted by the Napoleonic regime in 1806, covering 389 plants.25
Finally, the survey in metallurgy in 1811 covers 477 plants.26 Each of the three surveys provides
hundreds of pages of handwritten returns that are available in the French National Archives in
Pierrefitte-sur-Seine. Figures B.1, B.2, and B.3 in the appendix show sample pages from the three
surveys. Although these data have not been systematically used for quantitative analyses,27 the
quality of French record-keeping in this period is well-known. The period is referred to as the
"Golden Age of French Regional Statistics" (Perrot, 1975). Grantham (1997, p. 356) observes that
"the quality equals that of any estimate of economic activity for a century to come." Though the
surveys were conducted at different points in time, we refer to their date henceforth as 1800.
Distinguishing Mechanized Cotton Spinning Taking Place in Plants. The rich data collected in the
cotton spinning survey of 1806 allow us to identify production units that used the new, mechanized
technology, organized in a central location, i.e., in a plant ­ as distinct from producers using
handspinning technology. This distinction can be made with relatively high confidence because
the 1806 survey specifically deals with mechanized cotton spinners. Thus, with the exception
of a handful of cases, handspinning was not typically enumerated. We can identify these cases
because establishments were asked about the vintage of mechanized capital that they used. We
drop observations where handspinning wheels were reported. In addition, the 1806 survey also
asked for the location of the plant. This helps us to filter out a few merchant-manufacturers who

  25
      In France, cotton spinning and weaving were generally not vertically integrated during this time period. Weaving,
particularly in the early 19th century, was rurally organized. This implies less of an incentive to locate the workers in
a common location, i.e, in a plant. Nevertheless, our dataset contains a few examples of vertically integrated spinning
and weaving plants. We deal with these integrated plants in the following way. In the 1806 survey, enumerators were
instructed to separately collect data for spinning and weaving activities (which is indicative of the lack of integration
across these sectors in general). In the few cases where both took place under the same roof, we observe labor and
output reported by activity and can thus estimate productivity separately for the spinning activities. In the 1840 survey
(for which we only observe total labor and revenues), only 7% of plants that spun cotton yarn reported activities in
both spinning and weaving. We follow the classification in Chanut, Heffer, Mairesse, and Postel-Vinay (2000) and use
only plants that reported exclusively cotton spinning.
   26
      Bougin and Bourgin (1920) compiled an enormously rich overview of the metallurgy sector in 1788 using data
from a wide variety of archival sources, including some recall data that was asked of plants in the 1811 survey.
Unfortunately, since about 80% of plants do not report employment in Bougin and Bourgin (1920) for 1788, we
cannot use these data in our baseline analysis. However, we do use the data as a validation check on plant survival.
   27
      The only exception that we are aware of is Juhász (2018), who uses the data from 1806 on the mechanized cotton
spinning industry.

                                                          14
placed early vintages of the spinning jenny (i.e., a mechanized vintage) in workers' homes: In
these cases, the survey does not report one location for production, but many.28
3.2    Industrial Census around 1840
The second period in our study is based on data from the first industrial census in France, conducted
in 1839-47 and digitized by Chanut et al. (2000). For simplicity, we refer to these data as the `1840
census.' While this census covers all manufacturing establishments, we only use data for cotton
spinning (528 plants), metallurgy (839 plants), and paper milling (348 plants).29 Figure 1 shows
the spatial distribution of plants around 1800 and in 1840 for the three industries.
    The different surveys contain remarkably rich information, although the exact set of variables
varies from survey to survey. Here, we discuss only the variables used across all sectors, as well
as additional, sector-specific variables when they are used in the empirical analysis. Our main
variable of interest is labor productivity measured at the plant level and defined as the log of
revenues per worker. We use this measure because it can be constructed for all sectors and in both
time periods.30 Additionally, we are interested in estimating plant survival across the different
industries over time. Given the importance of these variables for our analysis, we discuss the key
assumptions made in constructing them for each sector.
3.3    Constructing Plant Productivity
We face two challenges in constructing consistent productivity measures across plants and time.
First, while the surveys for the three sectors around 1800 report output quantity (and some infor-
mation on product-specific prices and quality), the census in 1840 directly reports plant-specific
revenues (but not output quantities). To render productivity measures comparable over time, we
have to construct revenues for 1800. Second, worker categories are not consistently reported across
all plants in 1800 in metallurgy and paper milling. We discuss how we deal with each of these is-
sues below.




  28
      Juhász (2018, Appendix pp. 21-22) contains a detailed description of the cleaning process for these data. Of the
626 entries, only 43 plants were dropped for these reasons. This is not because these types of production units were so
insignificant, but rather because the survey was not designed to capture them, so they were typically not enumerated.
Note that the number of observations in Juhász (2018) differs substantially from that used in this paper, because the
former contains all plants active in the French Empire.
   29
      One potential concern with the 1840 census is that plants with less than 10 workers may have been systematically
under-reported (Chanut et al., 2000). This is mostly relevant for paper milling, where plant size is the lowest. In
robustness checks, we show that our baseline results hold even when only using plants with at least 10 workers in both
periods.
   30
      Our revenue-based productivity measure reflects both product prices and quantities. It is thus potentially affected
by changes in markups (Garcia-Marin and Voigtländer, 2019). However, this is unlikely to be quantitatively important
because all three sectors in our analysis produced standardized, often intermediate products.

                                                          15
Estimating Plant Revenues in 1800
In cotton spinning, the 1806 survey reports the quantity of yarn spun (in kilograms) as well as the
minimum and maximum count of yarn spun, where the count of yarn is the standardized measure
of quality in the sector.31 We construct plant-level revenue by multiplying the quantity of plant-
level output by the price of the average quality of yarn produced by the plant. We use a schedule
of prices for different counts of yarn reported by the French government.32
In metallurgy, the 1811 survey asked for the quantity of output produced (by product) as well as the
price charged by the plant, by product type.33 While product-specific output quantity is reported
by all plants, the product-specific price is only reported by a subset of plants. We compute the
average price for each product using the subset of plants where this information is available. We
obtain plant revenues by multiplying product-specific plant output by the average price for each
product and summing across products.
In paper milling, the 1794 survey reports the total quantity of paper products produced (in metric
quintals), but it does not provide plant-specific output prices. To construct revenues, we multiply
plants' output quantity with the average price of paper products produced in the corresponding
department, as reported in the Tableaux du Maximum ­ an extraordinary data source compiled
in 1794 during the French Revolution that provides detailed data on goods prices and trade links
across French regions. We use the department-specific price in order to accurately capture the
product mix produced by plants in this area (see Appendix B.4 for detail). In robustness checks,
we use the country-wide sectoral price.
Price deflators Finally, to compare revenues in the earlier periods and in 1840, for all three sectors,
we deflate revenue data using the producer price index (PPI) for the respective survey years from
Mitchell (2003). Appendix B.5 provides detail on the underlying assumptions and approximations
in constructing these deflators. We note in passing that potential errors in the deflators would
affect our estimates for average growth rates in the three sectors between 1800 and 1840, but they
would not change the growth pattern across the plant distribution (e.g., the lower-tail bias in cotton
spinning).
Constructing Consistent Labor Variables
In cotton spinning, the data provide consistent information on the number of workers employed by
the plant.

  31
      We use the (unweighted) average of the minimum and maximum count of the yarn produced by the plant as a
proxy for its average output quality. The maximum and minimum count is the only information that plants provided
on the quality of yarn that they produced.
   32
      Source: Document number AN F12/533 from the French National Archives. In robustness checks, we use a single
sector-level price, which we define based on the average quality of yarn produced across all cotton spinning plants.
   33
      The survey includes the following products: iron of first quality, iron of second quality, iron of third quality, steel
using the cementation process, natural steel, and pig iron.

                                                            16
In metallurgy, about 40% of the plants reported both `internal' and `external' labor in the 1811
survey, while the remainder of plants reported only total labor. Woronoff (1984, p. 138) describes
external labor as only having very loose ties to the plant. These workers did not typically work
at the location of the plant, their work was not supervised by the manager, and their identity was
often not even formally known to the manager. They performed tasks such as driving, collecting
charcoal for the plant, or performing other jobs without belonging to the hierarchy or reporting to
superiors in the chain of command. These types of workers were highly unlikely to be considered
formal salaried employees of the plant in the 1840 census. The challenge is thus to construct a
consistent measure of labor in 1811, given that approximately 60% of the observations report only
total labor, with no indication of whether this includes external labor. For these plants, we need an
estimate of the size of their internal labor force. We use a nearest neighbor matching algorithm to
determine whether plants that only report total labor are more likely to be reporting internal labor
only or the sum of internal and external labor.34 When our algorithm suggests that the plant is
reporting internal and external labor together, we estimate the number of internal workers by using
the mean proportion of internal labor from all plants that report both types (the internal labor share
is 20%).
In paper milling, the vast majority of plants only reported male labor in 1794. We impute the total
number of employees in each plant by scaling male labor (reported by each plant) in 1794 by the
average proportion of total employees to male employees in 1840 (where we observe both). The
validity of this method hinges on the assumption that the proportion of male employees remained
constant over time. We are able to check this using the subset of plants that report all types of
workers in 1794. We find that the proportions are remarkably consistent.35 Moreover, we show
that our results are robust to using only male employees in both periods.
3.4    Linking Plants over Time
It is possible to link plants over time given that all surveys report the name of the owner and the
location up to the commune, which is the lowest administrative unit in France.36 We use two pieces
of information to link plants over time: First, we match plants by their owner names in a given
location in the respective industry.37 Since the name of the owner may change even if the physical
structure of the plant is the same, we also match by location in a second step: We match locations

  34
      We match each plant that reports only total labor to its nearest neighbor that reports internal and external labor,
where matching is based on capital, output, and the stage of production. We then classify a plant as "reporting only
internal lablor" ("reporting total labor") if its reported total labor is closer to the matched plant's internal labor force
(internal plus external labor force).
   35
      The proportion of total employees to male employees is 2.26 in 1794 for the subset of 20 plants that report all
types of labor, while in 1840 it is 2.28 (among all plants).
   36
      In bigger cities such as Paris, the arrondissement is also reported.
   37
      We use a fuzzy string match to allow for differences in spelling as well as for different first names of owners, in
cases where the plant was passed on within a family. Ambiguous matches were verified by hand.

                                                            17
where there is only one plant in the respective sector in 1800 and where there is at least one plant
active in the same sector in 1840. This turns out to be fairly common in the data. An obvious
concern is whether this `local matching' indeed identifies the same plant. This is likely, given a
fortuitous feature across all three of our industries: their reliance on water power. Only a small
number of locations in a particular commune will be suitable for setting up a water-powered mill,
as rapid stream flow is needed to yield sufficient power. Moreover, the backwater created by one
mill means that another mill cannot be located in close proximity. Consistent with this, Crafts and
Wolf (2014) argue that agglomeration in the cotton textile industry was not observed until steam
became the common source of power in Britain. Consequently, our `local matching' arguably
identifies plants that have the same location within communes. Whether these were owned by the
same entrepreneur (or their descendants), or whether they had passed on to a different owner is not
crucial for our analysis.
     One way to validate the assumptions underlying our `local matching' is to examine how fre-
quently communes with a single plant active in the sector in 1800 show up in 1840 with multiple
plants active in the same sector. If this occurs frequently in the data, it would suggest that in fact
there are multiple suitable locations for production in that sector for a particular commune. This
is not the case in our data: For the vast majority of single-plant communes that we identify in the
initial period, there either continues to be one plant or no plants in the subsequent survey. It is
exceedingly rare (6% of cases in both paper milling and cotton spinning, and 8% in metallurgy)
across all three surveys for single plant communes to `add' additional plants (despite the large in-
crease in the overall number of plants in metallurgy and cotton spinning). As an additional check
on our methodology, it is also possible to compare plant survival in metallurgy to that reported in
Woronoff (1984) for this sector over the period 1788-1811. If our strategy of `local matching' led
to too many plant matches over time, we would expect an exaggerated survival rate. The contrary
is true: Our estimates of plant survival rates for the period 1811-1840 are well below (one half
or less) those that we calculate for the period 1788-1811. This suggests that it is unlikely that we
systematically overestimate plant survival.
3.5   Plant Survival Rates
Our main measure of plant survival is based on the combination of matching by owner name and
`local matching' that we described above. We define the survival rate as the percentage of plants
from the initial period that survive into the later period. The numerator counts all plants that fulfill
at least one of the following two conditions: i) the plant has the same owner in both periods; ii)
there is only one plant in the respective sector in the location in the initial period and at least one
plant in the same sector in 1840. The denominator is the sum of all plants in the given sector in
the initial period. Note that this rate does not adjust for the fact that the number of plants located



                                                  18
in communes that have only one plant varies across the three sectors in our sample.38 Thus, we
may mechanically find higher survival rates in a sector where single-plant communes are relatively
more frequent. To address this issue, we also construct the `restricted sample' survival rate as a
robustness check. This measure is based solely on single-plant locations. The numerator counts
the number of communes that had only one plant in the respective sector, in both the initial period
and in 1840 (indicating plant survival). The denominator counts the number of communes that
had a single plant in the respective sector in the initial period and either one or no plant in 1840
(indicating plant survival and plant exit, respectively).39

4        Empirical Analysis
In this section, we use our data to study the evolution of the plant size and productivity distribution
in mechanized cotton spinning after the new technology had been adopted. We contrast the patterns
in cotton spinning to those observed in two comparison sectors ­ metallurgy and paper milling.
After documenting our main result, we propose and investigate a mechanism that can rationalize
the observed patterns. Finally, we consider a set of alternative mechanisms that could account for
the results and test them empirically.
4.1      The Evolution of Plant Scale
What did plants look like in 1800 across the three sectors, and to what extent did they undergo
change during our study period? Table 2 provides an overview, reporting the evolution of plant
size, measured by the number of workers. A few points stand out. First, as early as 1806, cotton
spinning plants were strikingly large. The average spinning plant in this period had 63 employees
(the median was 30).40 Despite the recent introduction of mechanized cotton spinning in France,
plants were already much larger than in the two comparison sectors, which had a much longer
tradition of factory-based production: Plants in metallurgy (reported in 1811) had on average 20
workers; paper milling plants had on average 13 employees.41 In sum, despite the late start of
    38
      Among the 593 plants in paper milling in 1794, 218 (36.8%) were the only plants active in their commune in this
sector. For cotton spinning in 1806, the proportion is 25.4% (99 out of the 389 plants), and in metallurgy in 1811, 69%
(329 out of 477 plants).
   39
      Based on this sample definition, we exclude plants that were the only ones in their commune in 1800, and where
there was more than one plant in 1840. As discussed above, the number of these "uncertain" observations is very small
across all sectors, which we consider a validation of our methodology.
   40
      Recall that mechanization, which triggered the move to factory-based production, was invented only in the late
18th century. Moreover, the machines were only adopted sporadically across France prior to the 1800s. Consistent
with these facts, the median plant in cotton spinning was three years old in 1806.
   41
      One caveat with making this comparison is that the paper milling survey dates from 1794. Thus, plant size may
have grown by 1806 ­ the year of the cotton spinning survey. In addition, we had to extrapolate the overall number
of workers in paper milling in 1794 (including women and children ­ see Section 3.3). However, it is unlikely that
true plant scale would have been very different in 1806. This is because even in 1840, the average plant size in paper
milling was only 43 (including women and children, which are reported in this year). We can thus be confident that
paper milling plants in 1806 were substantially smaller than cotton plants. Finally, there is a concern that the 1840
census did not enumerate all plants with less than 10 employees. Table D.13 shows that plant scale increased across

                                                         19
factory-based production in cotton spinning, the average plant was large compared to other sectors
already at the turn of the 19th century.42
    Table 2 also shows that all sectors underwent significant growth in plant size over the period
1800-1840. Average plant size doubled in cotton spinning and grew threefold in the other two sec-
tors. In 1840, the average cotton spinning plant had 112 employees (median 72), while metallurgy
and paper milling had 57 and 43 workers on average, respectively. The level and increase in plant
scale is consistent with Sokoloff's (1984, Table 1, p. 5) findings for the United States using estab-
lishment level data from the 1820 and 1850 manufacturing censuses. The data for the US cover 10
industries. Similar to our data for France, the US data include both mechanizing sectors (such as
cotton textiles) and non-mechanizing sectors such as tanning.43 While their coverage is richer, the
US data are less suitable for isolating productivity changes in mechanized cotton spinning over the
early phase of industrialization. The reasons are twofold: First, there was no handspinning tradi-
tion before mechanization in the US, so that local input and output markets had to be established at
the same time as plants (Ware, 1931). This is prone to lead to differences in local production costs
and markups, thus affecting (revenue-based) productivity estimates (Garcia-Marin and Voigtlän-
der, 2019). Second, the US coverage begins at a later point in time, in 1820, when mechanization
was already well underway (Ware, 1931).
4.2    The Pattern of Productivity Growth
Next, we examine the evolution of plant productivity in France during the first decades of the
19th century. We begin by examining average annual labor productivity growth. Column 1 in
Table 3 shows that all three sectors experienced a significant increase in labor productivity. The
largest productivity gains were achieved in cotton spinning (2.4% per year), followed by metallurgy



all three sectors even when we limit the sample in both years to only include plants with more than 10 employees.
   42
      Granted, our data only cover two comparison sectors. However, these two sectors had a long tradition of factory-
based production and relied on high fixed-cost capital as well as inanimate power sources. This makes it likely that
metallurgy and paper milling plants had relatively large plant size, as compared to plants in other sectors around 1800
for which we do not have data. We can also use the 1840 Census, where we know the size of plants in all other sectors
to gauge support for this assertion: The average plant size in cotton spinning in 1840 is in the 85th percentile of all
plants, while both metallurgy and paper plants are in the upper tercile of the plant size distribution across all sectors.
In addition, all three sectors belonged to the top 90th percentile in terms of the share of plants using "any power,"
where the 81 sectors in the census are ranked by the share of plants using inanimate power sources.
   43
      For comparison, the average size of cotton textile establishments was 34.6 in the US in 1820 and 97.5 in 1850.
Similar to France, but based on a larger set of comparison sectors, cotton textiles was the biggest in terms of plant
scale already in 1820. The one exception to this is glass-making, but Sokoloff (1984) urges those numbers to be
treated with caution as they are based on a sample of only 8 establishments. "Iron and iron products" in the US had
19.5 and 24.2 employees in the two periods, respectively, while paper milling had an average of 14.3 and later, 22.4
employees. Since employment and productivity grew in both mechanizing and non-mechanizing sectors, Sokoloff
(1986) concluded that mechanization itself cannot be the only driving force behind these trends. Our findings for the
French sectors support this conclusion and add the additional finding that even after the initial adoption of mechanized
spinning, productivity and plant size grew substantially.

                                                           20
(1.9%) and paper milling (0.7%).44 Remarkably, the estimated productivity increase is largest in
spinning, despite the fact that all plants in this sector already used the new technology in 1800. In
other words, because we only compare plants that used mechanized cotton spinning, the observed
productivity increase must be due to efficiency gains within the new technology. This is in contrast
to the two comparison sectors, where innovations replaced older technology vintages in existing
plants ­ most prominently, coal as an energy source in metallurgy, and the Foudrinier machine
in paper milling (which mechanized the formation of paper). Thus, labor productivity growth in
those sectors reflects not only improvements in operating existing vintages, but also gains from the
adoption of new technology vintages.
    In which part of the productivity distribution were these gains concentrated? Figure 2 plots
the distribution of labor productivity in the three sectors at the beginning and at the end of our
sample period, illustrating our main results. In cotton spinning, two features stand out. First,
the initial dispersion in labor productivity was large in 1800 relative to that in 1840. Second, the
productivity gains are almost exclusively concentrated in the lower tail ­ the lower tail disappeared
over our sample time period, while increases in productivity at the upper tail were modest. The
contrast between cotton spinning and our two comparison sectors is striking. In metallurgy and
paper milling, the entire productivity distribution shifted to the right between 1800 and 1840.
Quantile regressions confirm this pattern. Columns 2-6 in Table 3 report these results for the three
sectors, estimating regressions for productivity growth at different quantiles of the productivity
distribution. Figure 3 displays the corresponding coefficients. In cotton spinning, the bias towards
productivity growth in the lower tail is striking. Productivity growth at the 25th percentile was
twice as large as that at the 75th percentile (3.3% per year relative to 1.65%), and the difference is
more than fourfold between the 10th and the 90th percentile (3.9% and 1.0%, respectively). In the
comparison sectors, the differences are more modest across the distribution; if anything, growth
was concentrated in the upper tail: In both metallurgy and paper milling, the productivity growth
at the 25th percentile was marginally lower than at the 75th percentile.
    Could the different pattern in cotton spinning be driven by output quality? Recall that our data
enable us to use quality-adjusted prices in 1800 for cotton spinning, while quality adjustments are
not possible in the two comparison sectors. Panel B in Table D.1 in the appendix presents quantile
regressions without quality-adjustments, i.e., using the same sector-level price across all plants in
cotton spinning. The magnitude of the lower-tail bias is slightly smaller, but it remains striking.

  44
    Given that we discount revenues using price indices, all our productivity calculations reflect price-adjusted
revenue-based productivity. To obtain the average annual growth rates between the two time periods (around 1800
and 1840), we first regress log output per worker ln(Y /L) on a dummy for 1840 in each sector. This coefficient
measures the percentage growth in output per worker over the entire time period between the respective survey years.
We then annualize these values (and corresponding standard errors) by dividing by the number of years between the
surveys in each sector. Note that this method delivers average annual growth figures, not accounting for compound
growth. In cotton spinning, the overall growth over the period 1806-40 amounts to 82% (2.42% per year x 34 years).

                                                        21
The difference in productivity growth between the 10th and the 90th percentile is 3.4% relative
to 1.6%. Thus, differential trends in output quality do not drive the observed differences in the
productivity distributions across the three sectors.
    Our baseline productivity measure is log output per worker. For cotton spinning, we can also
compute TFP, using detailed data on physical machinery (number of spindles) ­ see Appendix
D for detail. Panel C in Table D.1 confirms the lower-tail bias of productivity growth in cotton
spinning using TFP. Table D.2 presents additional robustness checks on data choices we have
made in the paper milling industry. We show that our quantile regression results in paper milling
are robust to i) using only male labor and ii) to pricing output in 1794 using the country-wide
average price as opposed to the departmental price used in the baseline analysis.
    Summing up, the results in this section show that after the adoption of the new technology
in mechanized cotton spinning, the industry witnessed major increases in productivity that were
driven by a disappearance of the lower tail of the productivity distribution. Over time, the plant
productivity distribution became less dispersed. This is in contrast to the patterns observed in the
comparison sectors, where mean productivity growth was more modest and occurred relatively
evenly across the productivity distribution.
4.3    Proposed Mechanism: Learning About Best Practice in Factory-Based Production
What explains the lower-tail bias of productivity growth in mechanized cotton spinning? The his-
torical narrative points to an important role of learning about the efficient organization of factory-
based production and adequate handling of new machinery. As documented in Section 2, early
adopters in cotton spinning needed to engage in trial and error along multiple dimensions. This
involved the development of best-practice methods for operating the new technology efficiently
and integrating it into other, similarly new aspects of factory-based production.
A Stylized Framework. We formalize this process in a simple stylized framework that gives rise to
lower-tail biased productivity growth. We summarize the key features here; Appendix C presents
the model and shows simulation results. The essential ingredients are: i) a production function that
involves multiple complementary inputs (tasks); ii) independent, random draws in the efficiency
associated with each input; and iii) the lower bound of each input's efficiency draw increases over
time (i.e., very bad draws disappear).
    In cotton spinning, initially, very low input efficiency draws are possible. The complemen-
tarity across inputs implies that a low efficiency draw for only one input diminishes output sub-
stantially.45 This gives rise to a fat lower tail of the productivity distribution. Over time, we let
the lower bound for the input efficiency draws in cotton spinning increase. This reflects improved
knowledge about organizing and handling each input ­ either due to learning within plants or due
  45
   In the extreme complementarity case ­ a Leontief production function ­ output drops in proportion to the mini-
mum efficiency draw, no matter how large the draws for the other inputs are.

                                                       22
to knowledge diffusion across plants.46 At the same time, we assume that the upper bound for
input efficiency draws does not change, i.e., the technological frontier in mechanized cotton spin-
ning remains the same. Intuitively, learning (within plants or from other producers) eliminates the
worst mistakes in organizing production; but the best possible draws remain unchanged because
the underlying technology does not change. This setup leads to productivity growth concentrated
in the lower tail. Figure C.1 in the appendix illustrates the simulated productivity distributions.47
The left panel of Figure C.1 shows the resulting evolution of the plant productivity distribution
over time: The initially fat lower tail disappears in the second period ­ intuitively, very bad draws
that pull down output towards zero (even if all other draws are high) have been eliminated. This
productivity pattern mirrors the one for cotton spinning in the data (see Figure 2).
    We also adapt our simulation to the comparison sectors. Since plant-based production in these
sectors was already well-established around 1800, we choose a higher lower bound to reflects that
learning had already occurred. To represent the incremental technological progress that improved
these technologies over time, we shift both the upper and lower bound outward in the second
period. The corresponding simulation results are shown in the right panel of Figure C.1. They
resemble the pattern observed for our control sectors, metallurgy and paper milling, where the
whole productivity distribution shifted to the right.
    While this stylized theoretical framework is not the only one that gives rise to lower-tail bias in
productivity growth, it is a simple setup that represents the key features of the historical evidence.
In what follows, we use this stylized framework to guide our discussion of possible mechanisms.
Plant Survival Across the Sectors. The historical evidence discussed in Section 2 suggests that
learning best-practice methods was an important dimension during the shift to factory-based pro-
duction in cotton spinning. We now provide evidence that this mechanism can explain the observed
plant productivity patterns. First, we examine plant survival across sectors. If early adopters of
mechanized cotton spinning technology had to experiment with best-practice methods, we would
expect initially low plant survival rates relative to the other two sectors. Experimentation was
arguably costly. For example, the layout of the factory was to a large extent a sunk investment.
Changes and extensions could of course be made, but at substantial cost. Thus, initial design flaws
were hard to correct and likely led to exit. Indeed, we find evidence of substantially larger exit
rates in cotton spinning relative to the other two sectors. Table 4 reports plant survival rates over
our sample period, using the two measures defined in Section 3.5 in each of the three sectors.
Based on our baseline measure, survival rates in spinning (7%) were slightly lower than in paper

  46
      While our stylized theory is agnostic as to which of these mechanisms dominated, the empirical results below
suggest that the diffusion of organizational practices across plants was an important dimension.
   47
      We use a CES production function with three inputs and choose the elasticity of substitution across inputs to
be 0.5, indicating a strong degree of complementarity. Efficiency in each of the inputs is drawn from a uniform
distribution with support [0, 1]. Over time, the lower bound for each distribution increases to 0.1.

                                                        23
milling (9%) and much lower than in metallurgy (34%). Note that the paper milling survey was
conducted in 1794, more than 10 years earlier than the cotton spinning survey (1806). If we ad-
justed for the longer horizon in paper milling, the implied survival rates for 1806-1840 would be
significantly higher. This implies that the differences in survival rates between cotton spinning and
paper milling are probably higher than reflected in Table 4.
    Turning to the `restricted sample' survival rates, the differences across the three sectors are even
starker. By this measure, the survival rate in spinning is still about 7%, but it is much higher in the
comparison sectors: 20% in paper milling and 49% in metallurgy. Recall that this second survival
rate is based on single-plant locations. Thus, the low survival rate observed in cotton spinning
means that many locations lost their (only) cotton mill. This is consistent with a mechanism in
which owners that invested in a cotton spinning mill with poor layout had to exit the market, and
the structure of the mill was not subsequently used by other firms in cotton spinning.48
Plant Exit and Productivity. In Table 5 we examine the extent to which plants that eventually
exited the market by 1840 had lower initial productivity around 1800, as compared to surviving
plants. This pattern is strong in cotton spinning, where churn was the highest: Exiting plants were
53% less productive than survivors, and this difference is highly statistically significant. Exiting
plants were also less productive in the comparison sectors, but there, the pattern is less pronounced:
exiting plants were about 15% less productive in both sectors, and this number is not statistically
different from zero. Columns 2 and 3 in Table 5 also show that exiting plants were significantly
smaller, both in terms of employees and output, and that this pattern is particularly pronounced in
cotton spinning.
    Overall, we find that exiting plants in cotton spinning were particularly unproductive compared
to survivors, and ­ likewise ­ the survival rate was significantly lower than in other sectors. These
findings ­ in combination with the widely dispersed productivity distribution in cotton spinning ­
are consistent with large organizational challenges and low initial guidance in switching to factory-
based production in cotton spinning.
Age Profile of Plant Productivity. Next, we examine whether the age profile of plant productivity
is consistent with a mechanism of learning best-practice methods. We expect younger plants to
have higher productivity, because they had a larger set of previously established plants from whom
they could learn. We exploit the richness of our data to test this in both 1800, when best practice
mill design was still evolving, and in 1840, when according to Pollard (1965), the industry had
reached maturity ­ at least in Britain. The 1806 survey in cotton spinning contains the year of

  48
    Lower survival rates in spinning could also be consistent with the fact that the industry moved towards steam
power to a larger extent than other sectors and hence moved away from water power. However, note in Table D.3 that
even in spinning, steam power seemed to be used in addition to water power: 66% of cotton spinning plants still used
water power as a source in 1840. Moreover, cotton mills using steam power were somewhat less productive (see Table
D.4), suggesting that in France plants did not face a strong profit incentive to move away from water power.

                                                        24
foundation of plants. This allows us to compute a dummy for `young' plants, defined as below-
median age (with the median age in 1806 being three years). We first examine whether plant age
is systematically correlated with productivity in cotton spinning. Column 1 in Table 6 shows that
the unconditional association is strongly positive: `Young' plants were 58% more productive in
1806. This could be driven by mechanisms other than the one we examine. For example, new
entrants may have used the most recent vintage of capital, leading to higher physical productivity
(Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson, 2008). To address this issue, we control for several important
plant characteristics in columns 2-7 of Table 6. These include the average quality (count) of the
yarn spun, the capital intensity of the plant (measured as log spindles per worker), the number of
workers in the plant, and the vintage of machinery (a binary variable for using different vintages of
machinery ­ these are not mutually exclusive categories)49 The coefficient of interest remains large
and highly significant when we add these controls one-by-one.50 The only control that notably
changes the magnitude of the coefficient of interest is the quality of yarn (column 2). However, the
quality of the yarn that a plant could spin partly reflected its level of learning, and is thus arguably
also capturing our mechanism. This is because the quality of yarn that could be spun by a plant
depended on the quality of the machine and the precision of its operation (Huberman, 1996). This,
in turn, may have reflected improvements of the machinery achieved by tinkering, and the acquired
skill of the spinners, both of which are a central part of our learning mechanism.
    Next, we turn to the productivity-age pattern in 1840. While the data for this second period are
generally more comprehensive, we do not observe plant age. However, we can perform a similar
­ albeit weaker ­ test based on the comparison of surviving and entrant plants: In Table 7 we
regress log output per worker on an indicator for whether the plant was an `entrant' in 1840 (as
opposed to a surviving plant by our definition from Section 3.5). The coefficient on the `entrant'
dummy thus reflects the average productivity differential for plants that entered between the initial
survey year (1806) and 1840. Best-practice mill design evolved over this period, and it had largely
converged by 1840 (Pollard, 1965). Correspondingly, we find that `young' plants were not more
productive; the coefficient is in fact negative, but not statistically different from zero. This holds
also when we control for the use of water power, steam power, any other power source (wind or
animal power used by a small subset of plants), and for the number of workers. We perform an
additional exercise in the appendix, using data on metallurgy plants in both periods (Tables D.5
and D.6). For this sector, in both periods, the best measure of plant age that we observe is a binary
indicator of plant survival from 1788 to 1811, and for survival from 1811 to 1840 (the latter being
the same procedure as for cotton spinning in Table 7). Overall, the results do not point to younger
plants in metallurgy having a strong productivity advantage: In 1811, `young' metallurgy plants

  49
       The three different vintages of machinery are the spinning jenny, the throstle, and the mule-jenny.
  50
       We do not include all controls together because of multicollinearity concerns.

                                                            25
were only marginally more productive, and in 1840 `young' metallurgy plants were somewhat less
productive.51
Spatial Diffusion of Knowledge. In what follows we shed light on how the learning process took
place. The historical background discussed in Section 2 suggests that plants copied successful
designs and setups of the production process from each other. To examine this channel, we estimate
whether a plant's own productivity was higher in the proximity of other high-productivity plants.
We use the following specification:

                                ln(Y /L)ij = 0 + 1 Distp 90
                                                       ij + F Ej +              ij   ,

where ln(Y /L)ij is labor productivity (log output per worker) for plant i located in department
j ; Distp 90
         ij is log distance to the nearest plant (in the same sector) with productivity in the 90th
percentile (in the distribution of all plants in the sector across France). Plants that are themselves
in the top productivity decile are excluded from the sample to avoid introducing a mechanical rela-
tionship. Our preferred specification includes department fixed effects (F Ej ) to absorb unobserved
location characteristics that may make all plants in a given region more productive, irrespective of
local spillovers. Thus, the coefficient of interest 1 reflects the extent to which plants in the same
department benefit from being located closer to a high-productivity plant (which may be located in
the same or in another department). We do not interpret these correlations as causal effects, but as
evidence that is compatible with spatial spillovers of production knowledge. We estimate the spec-
ification separately for the three sectors, and in both time periods. Standard errors are clustered at
the department level to account for spatial correlation.
    Before presenting the results, we first examine the spatial distribution of high-productivity
plants across our sectors and time periods. Figure D.1 in the appendix plots the spatial distribution
of cotton spinning, metallurgy, and paper milling plants, distinguishing those in the 90th percentile
of the productivity distribution. Unsurprisingly, some regions have a larger concentration of high-
productivity plants than others, but there are no marked differences in this pattern across the three
sectors or over time. Since we exploit within-department variation in distance to high-productivity
plants, the cross-regional differences in the concentration of high-productivity plants do not affect
our results.
    Figure 4 visualizes our baseline results on spatial diffusion, and Table D.7 in the appendix
reports the corresponding regressions. To allow for direct comparability, we report the standardized
beta coefficients of Distp90 for all three sectors in the two periods. The estimated coefficient for

  51
    In metallurgy in 1811, `young' plants were 22% more productive when no controls are added (as compared to
almost 60% for the same specification in cotton spinning). Once we control for plant size (log workers) in column 2
in Table D.5, the productivity advantage disappears. Note that the metallurgy survey has sparser information on this
dimension; plant size is the only control that can be added in 1811.

                                                        26
cotton spinning in 1806 is negative, statistically significant and large in magnitude: A one standard
deviation increase in distance to a high productivity plant in the sector is associated with a 0.81
standard deviation decline in labor productivity. The pattern is much weaker in the two control
sectors, metallurgy in 1811 and paper milling in 1794 ­ the coefficients are less than one-third in
magnitude as compared to cotton spinning. In addition, in 1840, there is essentially no relationship
between labor productivity and distance to top-plants in any of the three sectors. Thus, proximity
to high-productivity plants mattered the most in cotton spinning in 1806, i.e., in the sector that
saw the most dramatic change during industrialization, and in the period before knowledge about
the optimal organization of production had spread widely. While this pattern is consistent with a
learning mechanism, it could also be driven by a number of other forces. We turn to examining
possible alternative explanations below.
    While department fixed effects capture unobserved differences that vary at the department level,
they cannot capture unobserved differences at a finer spatial level. To test for these, we use four
approaches. First, we control directly for some prominent location fundamentals at the commune
level such as the availability of fast-flowing streams (as a source of water power), proximity to
coal (which matters for steam power), and the share of forest cover (which matters for access
to charcoal ­ a major input in metallurgy).52 Table D.8 in the appendix shows the results for
specifications that control for all of these location fundamentals. The pattern of the coefficients of
interest does not change, and the estimated magnitudes remain very similar. Moreover, the location
fundamentals themselves are mostly small and statistically insignificant. This is probably driven by
the fact that the department fixed effects already account for the most important spatial differences
in location fundamentals. Second, our results could be affected by more general agglomeration
externalities, as opposed to learning. In particular, our findings may be driven by high-productivity
plants emerging (within departments) where the density of production is large due to agglomeration
forces. We investigate this explanation directly by adding a control for the density of production
at the commune level (measured as the log of total output in the sector, excluding a plant's own
output). Table D.9 in the appendix shows that controlling for the local density of production barely
affects our results: The estimated coefficient on distance to high-productivity plants in cotton
spinning in 1806 decreases by about 10% to -0.74 (se 0.19), while the distance coefficients in the
other sectors and in 1840 remain relatively small. The coefficient on local production density itself
is generally small, positive, and never statistically different from zero.
    Appendix Table D.10 presents our third approach to probe for unobserved location fundamen-
  52
     The sources for these data are as follows. Data on the stream flow of rivers are from EURO-FRIEND (http://ne-
friend.bafg.de/servlet/is/7397/). These data report water flow rates from thousands of geocoded collection points
across France. Data on charcoal sources are from the highly detailed `Cassini maps' produced in the late 18th century
that contain information on forest cover. These maps were geo-referenced by Vallauri, Grel, Granier, and Dupouey
(2012). Finally, data on the location of coal deposits ­ both in France and near its borders ­ were geo-referenced from
maps in Tarr and McMurry (1993) and Guiollard (1993).

                                                         27
tals (within departments). We conduct a placebo exercise that examines whether plant productivity
in 1800 was also related to the distance to high-productivity plants that only emerged later, i.e.,
plants in the top-90th percentile of productivity in 1840. Reassuringly, the estimated coefficient in
cotton spinning is close to zero and statistically insignificant. In other words, productivity in cotton
spinning in 1806 was not related to high-productivity locations three decades later. This suggests
that the large estimated coefficient in our baseline specification is not driven by persistent location
fundamentals within departments.
    Finally, we examine the extent to which the estimated distance coefficient in cotton spinning in
1806 may be driven by plant selection. It is possible that we estimate a large (negative) coefficient
in cotton spinning in 1806 not because plants were learning from their high-productivity neighbors
but rather because ex-ante high-productivity plants selected into `productive locations' (i.e., chose
to locate near existing high-productivity plants). Given that we observe plant age in cotton spinning
in 1806, we can examine selection patterns, building on our findings from Table 6 that `young'
plants in cotton spinning were particularly productive. In Table 8, we show that our coefficient
of interest is robust to controlling for log plant age (column 1) and to adding the interaction of
plant age and distance to high productivity plants (column 2). This suggests that (conditional
on department fixed effects) plant entry did not vary systematically with the location of high-
productivity plants. A different, arguably more conservative approach is to estimate the coefficient
of interest using only the subsample of plants that entered before the nearest high-productivity
plant. The timing of entry of these plants rules out systematic selection. In column 3 of Table
8 we show that the coefficient on distance to high-productivity plants remains statistically highly
significant, although it is somewhat smaller than in the baseline sample (-0.44, se 0.153). Columns
4 and 5 show that the coefficient of interest remains stable and statistically significant as controls
for plant age and the interaction between plant age and distance to high-productivity plants are
added in this subsample.
    In summary, the consistently larger distance coefficient estimated in cotton spinning in 1806,
in combination with a series of robustness checks, points to the spatial diffusion of knowledge as
one mechanism through which learning across plants took place.
4.4   Robustness to Alternative Explanations
In the final part of this section we consider potential alternative mechanisms that could explain
our results. Recall that we observe the lower-tail bias in productivity growth only in cotton spin-
ning, and not in the other two sectors. This suggests that the mechanisms driving the effect are
either specific to cotton spinning or they affect this sector differentially. Below, we consider some
competing mechanisms that would fit this pattern.
Market Integration. Could increased market integration explain our results in cotton spinning? As
the French economy became more integrated over time, it is possible that lower-productivity plants

                                                  28
faced tougher competition and had to exit the market.53 However, we do not observe a lower-tail
bias in productivity growth in the two comparison sectors. Thus, for market integration to explain
our results, it must have affected the cotton sector differently.
    We first note that the exit pattern in Table 5 speaks against such a mechanism: If market
integration increased particularly strongly in cotton spinning, we would expect even relatively
productive plants to exit the market, because of an increased productivity threshold that allows
for profitable production (Melitz, 2003). However, the contrary is true: Exiting plants in cotton
spinning had a particularly low productivity, as compared to the other two sectors.
    Second, data on market integration also speak against a confounding role of this channel. Cot-
ton yarn (and textiles more generally) are high value-to-weight products, which makes them more
easily tradable over long distances than iron or paper. This suggests that cotton spinners may al-
ready have faced tougher competition through more integrated markets in the early 1800s. Thus,
we would not necessarily expect cotton spinning to be the most affected sector by increased mar-
ket integration after 1800. Consistent with this reasoning, we present evidence for relatively high
market integration in cotton yarn in the late 18th century. We use data in 1794 from Daudin (2010)
on the number of districts across France that reported consuming cotton textiles, iron, or paper
products from any district in a given department.54 Intuitively, higher market integration means
lower price differentials across departments, which in turn implies that highly productive areas
could dominate the market throughout France. Consequently, we can infer high market integration
from the data if we observe that a few (presumably highly productive) departments sold to many
other departments, while the majority of departments produced no output, or did so only for local
consumption. Figure D.2 in the appendix shows that this pattern is particularly strong in cotton
textiles. Many departments produced mostly for themselves if at all (these are the zeros and ones),
while a few departments supplied cotton to a large number of districts. The top tercile of depart-
ments exported cotton textiles to 30 or more districts. In the two comparison sectors, there is less
specialization and less evidence for market integration: Fewer departments report not supplying to
anyone (particularly in paper), and the top decile of departments supplied only to 6 (paper) and 7
(iron) districts in total. This suggests that cotton textile plants were already competing in a bigger
market than the comparison sectors around 1800.
    The appendix presents two further robustness checks that probe the extent to which market
integration may explain our results. We introduce two controls in our quantile productivity regres-
sions (see the baseline results in Table 3). Table D.11 controls for market potential, and Table

  53
      Market integration arguably increased during our sample period both for policy reasons such as the abolition of
internal barriers to trade during the French Revolution (Daudin, 2010), and because of infrastructure improvements
that reduced transport costs such as the introduction of railways in the late 1820s.
   54
      Districts are administrative units that stayed in place for approximately five years, from 1790 to 1795 ­ with each
department including from a minimum of 3 to a maximum of 10 districts.

                                                          29
D.12 introduces region fixed effects.55 Controlling for market potential changes the coefficients
of interest only marginally, while adding region fixed effects dampens the lower-tail bias in cotton
spinning: Productivity growth at the 10th percentile is now only twice as large as in the 90th per-
centile (as compared to a factor of almost 4 in the baseline regressions in Table 3). This suggests
that a part of the pattern is driven by reallocation across regions, but not in a way systematically
related to market potential.
Plant Size and Early Spinning Workshops. Another potential concern is that our results may be
driven by the disappearance of small cotton spinning plants (or `workshops'). While our baseline
sample filters out small establishments that used handspinning wheels (see Section 3.1), it may
include relatively small plants that operated early vintages of mechanized spinning jennies that did
not necessarily need inanimate sources of power. This small-scale setup may have been inherently
different from the larger-scale factories powered by inanimate power sources. While the move to
factory-based production was swift, systematic differences of smaller mechanized cotton work-
shops could account for the lower-tail bias of productivity growth in this sector. Our data does not
differentiate between these two types of plants (we observe the capital vintage, but not the power
source in the 1800 data). However, we can examine the extent to which our results could be driven
by these forces in a number of ways.
    One way to examine the influence of smaller plants on our results is to adopt a stricter definition
of `factory-production' and use only those plants that have more than 10 employees. This should
exclude the majority of the smaller workshops that may have been organized as factory-based
production along some but not all dimensions. Figure D.3 and Table D.14 in the appendix show
that the lower-tail bias in productivity growth is robust to using only larger plants. The magnitudes
remain similar at most quantiles, while the lower-tail bias of productivity growth remains unique
to mechanized cotton spinning. These findings also address the concern that smaller plants may
have been under-sampled in 1840.
    Next, we implement an even more conservative definition of factory-production. We drop any
plant from the 1806 survey that reports using the earliest vintage of machinery ­ the spinning
jenny. These were the types of machines that could, in principle, have been operated also in small
workshops without inanimate power sources. While the introduction of spinning jennies ­ even
in workshops ­ would have faced challenges in re-organizing production, dropping them from
the survey allows us to assess the extent to which these may have driven the lower-tail bias of
productivity growth. Table D.15 contains the quantile regression results. The lower-tail bias of
productivity growth remains striking. Thus, it is unlikely that early spinning workshops that share

  55
    Market potential is computed as the sum of inverse distance-weighted city population in 1800. Regions are larger
than departments: There are 22 regions in France and 86 departments. Our data in the three sectors do not have
enough observations to include department fixed effects, i.e., to estimate meaningful productivity distributions within
departments.

                                                         30
some, but not all features of factory-based production drive the lower-tail bias of productivity
growth.
    Finally, our results could also be driven by increasing plant scale. Recall, however, that this is
unlikely, as all sectors witnessed an increase in plant scale. Indeed, as the results in Table D.16
show, controlling for the number of workers in each plant does not alter our findings.
Effects of the Napoleonic Blockade on the Cotton Spinning Sector. Juhász (2018) shows that tem-
porarily higher trade protection from British competition shifted the location of the mechanized
cotton spinning industry within France. To what extent does varying trade protection explain the
lower-tail bias of productivity growth in cotton spinning? This is unlikely, given that our results
hold within regions, where the pattern of protection was very similar (see Table D.12). Figure
D.4 presents further evidence that varying trade protection does not drive our results, by splitting
the sample into plants in northern and southern regions in France (corresponding to the main di-
mension along which protection varied). The productivity distributions in the north and south are
remarkably similar, and in both regions, productivity growth until 1840 was due to a disappearing
lower tail.
    Could the blockade explain the lower plant survival rates observed in cotton spinning relative to
the other sectors? In Table D.17 we split mechanized cotton spinning plants into the same northern
and southern regions and report survival rates separately. Indeed, consistent with Juhász (2018),
survival rates are lower in the south than in the north (which experienced a relative increase in
trade protection during the blockade). However, survival rates remain low relative to the other two
sectors even when we narrow our sample to only northern plants.56 This suggests that an important
part of low survival rates in mechanized cotton spinning are not driven by the uneven effects of the
Napoleonic blockade across France.
Improvements in the Technology. Another possible alternative mechanism is that productivity
growth in cotton spinning was driven by technological improvements of the mechanized machin-
ery after 1800. This is unlikely for two reasons. First, as we discussed in Section 2.1, the vintages
of capital in cotton spinning remained largely unchanged during our sample period. Second, it is
unclear why the successive adoption of better capital vintages would be concentrated in the lower
tail of the plant-productivity distribution. In fact, in our two comparison sectors ­ where new
vintages became available ­ the whole distribution shifted to the right.
     In Table D.18 we examine whether capital deepening can account for our results by controlling
directly for the capital-labor ratio of the plant (measured as the number of spindles per employee).
  56
     Note that the raw baseline survival rate for northern plants is now slightly higher than in paper milling (11%
and 9%, respectively). Recall, however, that the cotton spinning survey was conducted much later than paper milling
(1806 as opposed to 1794). Moreover, the restricted sample survival rate in the north is half that measured in paper
milling (10% and 20%, respectively). Taken together, this suggests that even comparing only cotton spinning plants in
the north of France to the comparison sectors (calculated for all of France), survival rates for northern cotton spinning
plants were low.

                                                          31
The lower-tail bias for productivity growth remains robust and similar in magnitude, suggesting
that neither differential capital deepening nor changes in the vintages of capital drive our results.57
In sum, our results are unlikely to be driven exclusively by technological improvements over time
that were accessible to all plants.
Quality Upgrading. We assess the extent to which the lower-tail bias in mechanized cotton spin-
ning could be driven by quality upgrading across plants over time. The concern is that if plants
shifted their product mix to higher-quality products over time (or more precisely, plants producing
higher-quality yarn entered the market), this could explain our result. We have no way of directly
testing for this because we do not observe any information about the quality of output produced in
the 1840 census. However, we can use our data in 1806 to examine the extent to which plants pro-
ducing low quality account for the fat lower tail in that period. Unsurprisingly, quality is positively
correlated with our measure of labor productivity (see column 2 in Table 6). However, quality does
not account for a significant part of the lower-tail bias in productivity growth (see Panel B of Table
D.1): The lower-tail bias of productivity growth in cotton spinning continues to hold even when
using prices in 1806 that do not account for quality differences across plants. The negative gradi-
ent is not as steep when we do not adjust for quality, but productivity growth at the 10th percentile
remains twice that of productivity growth at the 90th.
    Finally, quality could still drive our results indirectly if it led to higher sales and thus larger
plant size. To examine this possibility, we estimate the quantile regressions not adjusting for
quality differences in prices across plants in 1806, and controlling for plant size by the number
of employees (Table D.19). The lower-tail bias of productivity growth continues to hold. Taking
all pieces of evidence together, it seems unlikely that quality upgrading alone could explain our
results.

5        Conclusion
The unique setting examined in this paper allows us to shed light on some of the open questions
in the technology adoption literature. First, our findings speak directly to why the aggregate pro-
ductivity effect of major technological breakthroughs such as IT and electricity may be hard to pin
down in the data. Based on our results, the full effects of a new technology may take significant
time to materialize, as firms need to learn how the new technology can be operated efficiently once
the technology has been widely adopted. In our context, adopting mechanized cotton spinning
required producers to reorganize production from households to factories. In other settings, the
specific challenges may be different, but they are plausibly subject to similar mechanisms. For
mechanized cotton spinning, we estimate that productivity for the average plant using essentially
    57
     Newer versions of the different machines on the market had more spindles. We use the number of spindles per
worker as our measure of the capital-labor ratio of the plant (as opposed to the number of machines per worker). Thus,
the results in Table D.18 capture the effect of newer machines having more spindles.

                                                         32
identical new production methods increased by about 82% until 1840, relative to when the tech-
nology was in its infancy in 1806. Put differently, observers estimating the productivity effect of
switching from handspinning to mechanized spinning would significantly underestimate the long-
run aggregate productivity gain if they only looked at the initial data around 1800.
     Second, our results also shed light on the slow adoption of major new technologies. When
there is uncertainty about how to operate a new technology efficiently, and the knowledge ­ once
acquired ­ is observable to competitors, firms face a strategic incentive to delay adoption. The high
exit rates observed in cotton spinning relative to other sectors, alongside the higher productivity
observed for younger plants in 1806, suggest that plants that entered later were at an advantage.
If firms understand the significant uncertainty they face when setting up a spinning mill at early
stages of adoption, they have an incentive to delay the switch to the new technology in order to
take advantage of the learning externalities generated by other early adopters.
     Finally, our unique setting allows us to isolate a dimension of productivity growth that is usually
hidden: Productivity differences across firms (or plants) reflect both the underlying technology and
the efficiency with which the respective technology is used. Both features play important roles in
firms' decisions to adopt new technologies: What are the potential productivity gains of a new
technology (i.e., its frontier), and is the operational knowledge needed to achieve these gains (i.e.,
operate at the frontier) readily available? Separating these features empirically is difficult because
of data limitations. In our context, the frontier in the mechanized cotton spinning technology
changed relatively little between 1800 and 1840. At the same time, all plants in mechanized cotton
spinning operated the new technology using identical or very similar vintages. This allows us to
observe productivity differences that are driven by the (more or less efficient) operation of the new
technology. Our results suggest that this dimension is important: Approaching the frontier of a
given new technology via operational improvements can take a long time, and it can explain some
of the salient features in the adoption of major innovations.




References
Allen, R. C. (2009). The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective. Cambridge University Press.
Atkin, D., A. Chaudhry, S. Chaudry, A. K. Khandelwal, and E. Verhoogen (2017). Organizational Barri-
  ers to Technology Adoption: Evidence from Soccer-Ball Producers in Pakistan. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 132(3), 1101­1164.
Bandiera, O. and I. Rasul (2006). Social Networks and Technology Adoption in Northern Mozambique.
  Economic Journal 116, 869­902.
Beaman, L., J. Magruder, and J. Robinson (2014). Minding Small Change Among Small Firms in Kenya.
  Journal of Development Economics 108, 69­86.

                                                   33
BenYishay, A. and A. Mobarak (2018). Social Learning and Incentives for Experimentation and Communi-
  cation. Review of Economic Studies 86, 976­1009.
Bloom, N., B. Eifert, A. Mahajan, D. McKenzie, and J. Roberts (2013). Does Management Matter? Evi-
  dence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1), 1­51.
Boston Mutual Fire (1908). Report No. 5: Slow-Burning or Mill Construction. Boston Manufacturers
  Mutual Fire Insurance Co. 3rd ed., rev. and enl. Boston: The Company. .
Bougin, H. and G. Bourgin (1920). L'Industrie Sid'erurgique en France au D'ebut de la R'evolution. Paris:
  Imprimerie Nationale.
Braguinsky, S., A. Ohyama, T. Okazaki, and C. Syverson (2015). Acquisitions, Productivity, and Prof-
  itability: Evidence from the Japanese Cotton Spinning Industry. American Economic Review 105(7),
  2086­2119.
Cameron, R. (1985). A New View of European Industrialization. Economic History Review 38(1), 1­23.
Catling, H. (1970). The Spinning Mule. David & Charles, Newton Abbott.
Chanut, J., J. Heffer, J. Mairesse, and G. Postel-Vinay (2000). Editions de l'école des hautes études en
  sciences sociales, Paris.
Chapman, S. (1970). Fixed Capital Formation in the British Cotton Industry, 1770-1815. Economic History
  Review 23(2), 235­253.
Chapman, S. (1974). The Textile Factory Before Arkwright: A Typology of Factory Development. Business
  History Review 48(4), 451­478.
Chassagne, S. (1991). Le coton et ses Patrons: France 1760-1840. Editions de l'Ecole des Hautes Etudes
  en Sciences Sociales.
Collard-Wexler, A. and J. De Loecker (2015). Reallocation and Technology: Evidence from the US Steel
  Industry. American Economic Review 105(1), 131­171.
Combes, P., G. Duranton, L. Gobillon, D. Puga, and S. Roux (2012). The Productivity Advantages of Large
  Cities: Distinguishing Agglomeration from Firm Selection. Econometrica 80(6), 2543­94.
Comin, D. and B. Hobijn (2010). An Exploration of Technology Diffusion. American Economic Re-
  view 100(5), 2031­59.
Conley, T. G. and C. R. Udry (2010). Learning About a new Technology: Pineapple in Ghana. American
  Economic Review 100, 35­69.
Crafts, N. (1977). Industrial Revolution in England and France: Some Thoughts on the Question, `Why
  Was England First'? Economic History Review 30(3), 429­441.
Crafts, N. (1985). British Economic Growth During the Industrial Revolution. Oxford: Oxford University
  Press.
Crafts, N. and K. Harley (1992). Output Growth and the British Industrial Revolution: A Restatement of
  the Crafts-Harley View. Economic History Review 45(4), 703­730.
Crafts, N. and N. Wolf (2014). The Location of the UK Cotton Textiles Industry in 1838: A Quantitative
  Analysis. Journal of Economic History 74(4), 1103­1139.
Daudin, G. (2010). Domestic Trade and Market Size in Late-Eighteenth-Century France. Journal of Eco-
  nomic History 70(3), 716­743.
David, P. (1990). The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity
  Paradox. American Economic Review 80(2), 355­361.


                                                   34
Duflo, E., M. Kremer, and J. Robinson (2011). Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental
  Evidence from Kenya. American Economic Review 101(6), 2350­90.
Emerick, K., A. de Janvry, E. Sadoulet, and M. Dar. (2016). Technological Innovations, Downside Risk,
  and the Modernization of Agriculture. American Economic Review 106(6), 1537­61.
Fitton, R. and A. Wadsworth (1958). The Strutts and the Arkwrights, 1758-1830: A Study of the Early
   Factory System. Manchester University Press.
Foster, A. and M. Rosenzweig (1995). Learning by Doing and Learning from Others: Human Capital and
  Technical Change in Agriculture. Journal of Political Economy 103(6), 1176­1209.
Foster, L., C. Grim, J. Haltiwanger, and Z. Wolf (2018). Innovation, Productivity Dispersion, and Produc-
  tivity Growth. NBER Working Paper 24420.
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008). Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency: Selection
  on Productivity or Profitability? American Economic Review 98(1), 394­425.
Galor, O. (2011). Unified Growth Theory. Princeton University Press.
Garcia-Marin, A. and N. Voigtländer (2019). Exporting and Plant-Level Efficiency Gains: It's in the Mea-
  sure. Journal of Political Economy 127 (4), 1777­1825.
Giorcelli, M. (2019). The Long-Term Effects of Management and Technology Transfers. American Eco-
  nomic Review 109(1), 1­33.
Gort, M. and S. Klepper (1982). Time Paths in the Diffusion of Product Innovations. Economic Jour-
  nal (367), 630­653.
Grantham, G. (1997). The French Cliometric Revolution: A Survey of Cliometric Contributions to French
  Economic History. European Review of Economic History 1(3), 353­405.
Griliches, Z. (1957). Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change. Economet-
  rica 25(4), pp. 501­522.
Guiollard, P. (1993). Les chevalements des houillères françaises. Pierre-Christian Guiollard.
Hall, B. (2004). Innovation and Diffusion. NBER Working Paper 10212.
Hall, B. and B. Khan (2003). Adoption of New Technology. NBER Working Paper 9730.
Hanna, R., M. Sendhil, and J. Schwartzstein (2014). Learning Through Noticing: Theory and Experimental
  Evidence in Farming. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(3), 1311­1353.
Hardy, M. and J. McCasland (2016). It Takes Two: Experimental Evidence on the Determinants of Tech-
  nology Diffusion. Working Paper.
Harley, C. (1998). Cotton Textile Prices and the Industrial Revolution. Economic History Review 51(1),
  49­83.
Horn, J. (2006). The Path Not Taken: French Industrialization in the Age of Revolution, 1750-1830. Cam-
  bridge MA: MIT Press.
Hsieh, C. and P. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 124(4), 1403­1448.
Huberman, M. (1996). Escape from the Market. Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, H. and A. Skempton (1955). William Strutt's Cotton Mills, 1793-1812. Transactions of the
  Newcomen Society 30(1).
Jovanovic, B. (1982). Selection and the Evolution of Industry. Econometrica 50(3), 649­670.


                                                    35
Juhász, R. (2018). Temporary Protection and Technology Adoption: Evidence from the Napoleonic Block-
  ade. American Economic Review 108(11), 3339­76.
Langenbach, R. (2013). Better than Steel? Part 2: Tall Wooden Factories and the Invention of "Slow-
  burning" Heavy Timber Construction. Article URL accessed June 20, 2020.
Mansfield, E. (1961). Technical Change and the Rate of Imitation. Econometrica 29(4), 741­766.
Melitz, M. (2003). The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productiv-
 ity. Econometrica 71(6), 1695­1725.
Mitchell, B. (2003). International Historical Statistics. Europe, 1750-2000. Palgrave Macmillan.
Mokyr, J. (2001). The Rise and Fall of the Factory System: Technology, Firms, and Households since the
 Industrial Revolution. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 55, 1­45.
Mokyr, J. (2010). The Enlightened Economy: An Economic History of Britain 1700-1850. Yale University
 Press.
Munshi, K. (2004). Social Learning in a Heterogeneous Population: Technology Diffusion in the Indian
 Green Revolution. Journal of development Economics 73, 185­213.
Perla, J. and C. Tonetti (2014). Equilibrium Imitation and Growth. Journal of Political Economy 122(1),
  52­76.
Perrot, J. (1975). L'age d'Or de la Statistique Régionale Française (An IV-1804). Paris: Société des Etudes
  Robespierristes.
Pollard, S. (1963). Factory Discipline in the Industrial Revolution. Economic History Review 16(2), 254­
  271.
Pollard, S. (1965). The Genesis of Modern Management: A Study of the Industrial Revolution in Great
  Britain. Harvard University Press.
Pounds, N. and W. Parker (1957). Coal and Steel in Western Europe: The Influence of Resources and
  Techniques on Production. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Riello, G. (2013). Cotton: The Fabric that Made the Modern World. Cambridge University Press.
Rosenberg, N. (1976). Factors Affecting the Diffusion of Technology. Explorations in Economic His-
  tory 10(1), 3­33.
Rostow, W. (1975). How it All Began: Origins of the Modern Economy. Methuen and Co., London.
Saxonhouse, G. and G. Wright (2004). Technological Evolution in Cotton Spinning. In D. Farnie and
  D. Jeremy (Eds.), The Fibre that Changed the World: The Cotton Industry in International Perspective,
  1600-1990s, pp. 129­152. Oxford University Press.
Sokoloff, K. (1984). Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the Nonmechanized Factory Associated
  with Gains in Efficiency? Evidence from the US Manufacturing Censuses of 1820 and 1850. Explorations
  in Economic History 21(4), 351­382.
Sokoloff, K. (1986). Productivity Growth in Manufacturing During Early Industrialization: Evidence from
  the American Northeast, 1820-1860. In Long-Term Factors in American Economic Growth, pp. 679­736.
  University of Chicago Press.
Squicciarini, M. and N. Voigtländer (2015). Human Capital and Industrialization: Evidence from the Age
  of Enlightenment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 30(4), 1825­1883.
Suri, T. (2011). Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption. Econometrica 79, 159­209.
Syverson, C. (2011). What Determines Productivity? Journal of Economic Literature 49(2), 326­365.


                                                    36
Szostak, R. (1989). The Organization of Work: The Emergence of the Factory Revisited. Journal of
  Economic Behavior and Organization 11(3), 343­358.
Tarr, R. and F. McMurry (1993). New Geographies: Second Book. Macmillan Company.
Vallauri, D., A. Grel, E. Granier, and J. Dupouey (2012). Les Forets de Cassini. Analyse Quantitative et
  Comparaison Avec les Forets Actuelles. Marseille: WWF/INRA.
Voigtländer, N. and H. Voth (2006). Why England? Demographic Factors, Structural Change and Physical
  Capital Accumulation During the Industrial Revolution. Journal of Economic Growth 11(4), 319­361.
Ware, C. (1931). Early New England Cotton Manufacture; A Study in Industrial Beginnings. Houghton
 Mifflin Company.
Williamson, O. (1980). The Organization of Work: A Comparative Institutional Assessment. Journal of
  Economic Behavior and Organization 1(1), 5­38.
Woronoff, D. (1984). L'industrie sidérurgique en France pendant la Révolution et l'Empire. Paris: École
 des hautes études en sciences sociales.




                                                  37
FIGURES

                                    1806         Cotton Spinning                   1840




      Number of plants                                       Number of plants
                 1                                                     1


                 34                                                       32


          Regions                                                Regions




                                    1811           Metallurgy                      1840




       Number of plants                                       Number of plants
          1                                                        1
           8                                                         13
           Regions
                                                                  Regions




                                      1794        Paper Milling                  1840




                 Number of plants                            Number of plants
                        1                                       1
                                                                 8
                          22
                                                                 Regions
                      Regions




                    Figure 1: Spatial Distribution of Plants Across France in the Three Sectors
Note: The figure shows the spatial distribution of plants in cotton spinning (top), metallurgy (middle), and paper
milling (bottom). Dot sizes reflect the number of plants per commune.




                                                        38
                                                          Spinning                                                                                           Metallurgy                                                                                             Paper Milling




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .8
                                                                                                                                    .5
                              .8




                                                                                                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .6
                              .6
 Kernel density




                                                                                                       Kernel density




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kernel density
                                                                                                                                    .3
                                             1806                                                                                                  1811                                                                                                       1794




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .4
                              .4




                                             1840                                                                                                  1840                                                                                                       1840




                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2
                              .2




                                                                                                                                    .1
                              0




                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                   2                4                6              8             10                                     2               4                  6             8           10                                            2               4                  6             8           10
                                                          ln(Output per worker)                                                                                    ln(Output per worker)                                                                                      ln(Output per worker)



                                                             Figure 2: Changes in the Productivity Distributions in the Three Sectors

Notes: The figure shows the distribution of log(output per worker) for the three sectors at the beginning of our sample
period (around 1800) and in 1840. Productivity growth in spinning was mainly due to a disappearing lower tail. In
contrast, in metallurgy and paper milling, the whole distribution shifted to the right.



                                                          Spinning                                                                                           Metallurgy                                                                                             Paper Milling
                                                                                                                                    4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                              4
 Avg annual growth rate (%)




                                                                                                       Avg annual growth rate (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Avg annual growth rate (%)
                                                                                                                                    3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
                              3




                                                                                                                                    2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                              2




                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                              1
                              0




                                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0


                                       0.1   0.2    0.3      0.4    0.5     0.6   0.7    0.8    0.9                                          0.1   0.2       0.3      0.4        0.5     0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9                                         0.1   0.2       0.3      0.4        0.5     0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9
                                                                   Decile                                                                                                       Decile                                                                                                     Decile



                                                              Figure 3: Productivity Growth at Different Quantiles of the Distribution

Notes: The figure visualizes the results of quantile regressions for growth in ln(output per worker) for the three sectors,
estimated at each decile. Productivity growth in spinning was concentrated in the lower tail of plant productivity. In
contrast, in metallurgy and paper milling, productivity growth occurred relatively evenly across the distribution.



                                                          Spinning                                                                                           Metallurgy                                                                                             Paper Milling
  0




                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
  -.5




                                                                                                        -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.5
  -1




                                                                                                        -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -1




                                               1800                               1840                                                               1800                                      1840                                                             1800                                      1840



                                                                                               Figure 4: Proximity to High-Productivity Plants

Notes: The figure shows that proximity to high-productivity plants mattered the most in mechanized cotton spinning
at the beginning of our sample period (around 1800), when the technology had just been introduced in France. The
figures plots the standardized beta coefficients of Distp90 , which measures the log distance to the closest plant (in the
same sector) with productivity in the 90th percentile. The dependent variable is log(output per worker). All regressions
include department fixed effects (see Table D.7). Whiskers indicate 90% confidence intervals.



                                                                                                                                                                                         39
TABLES


          Table 1: Background of Owners of Mechanized Cotton Spinning Establishments

                                       Owners active between 1785-1815
                           Traders, bankers, and commercial employees 62.5%
                           Nobility or administrator pre-1789         10.2%
                           Workers and mechanics                      10.2%
                           Industrialists                              9.5%
                           Liberal profession                           6%
                           Other                                       3.5%
Notes: Data are from Chassagne (1991, p. 274). The author collected data on the owners from a variety of archival
source. The sample covers 185 establishments in mechanized cotton spinning.




                      Table 2: Summary Statistics: Plant Scale in the Three Sectors

                                                (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)
              Sector                  year    mean        sd      median      10perc      90perc      N
              Cotton spinning        1806       63      (101)        30           4         150      372
                                     1840      112      (148)        72          28         210      528
              Metallurgy             1811       20       (23)        11           4         46       457
                                     1840       57      (114)        22           7         135      839
              Paper milling          1794       13       (19)        11           5         23       550
                                     1840       43       (58)        19           5         112      348
Notes: The table reports summary statistics on the number of workers per plant in the three sectors covered by our
analysis. The year of the first survey varies across the sectors, while information in 1840 is available for all sectors.
Data sources: See Section 3.




                                                          40
       Table 3: Annual Productivity Growth (in %) at Different Quantiles of the Distribution

                                       (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)        (7)
                                    Average                     At the following quantiles:                         N
                                                    0.1         0.25        0.5      0.75                0.9
                                                                                               
 Spinning (1806-1840)               2.420        3.917        3.293        2.234        1.651          1.014       868
                                    (0.154)      (0.204)      (0.229)      (0.151)      (0.167)        (0.297)

 Metallurgy (1811-1840)             1.949        1.700        1.776        1.787        2.025          2.465      1296
                                    (0.185)      (0.415)      (0.271)      (0.236)      (0.187)        (0.226)

 Paper milling (1794-1840)          0.734        0.713        0.681        0.779        0.759          0.726       868
                                    (0.111)      (0.157)      (0.137)      (0.098)      (0.137)        (0.256)

Notes: The table reports the average annual productivity growth (in %) between the initial sample period (around 1800)
and 1840 for the three sectors (column 1), and annual productivity growth estimated at different quantiles (columns
2-6). Column 7 reports the number of observations. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Notation for statistical
significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                     Table 4: Survival Rates Across Sectors

                                                          Spinning       Metallurgy       Paper milling
               Period                                     1806-1840      1811-1840          1794-1840
               Survival rate                                7.5%             34%                 9%
               Number of plants                              389             477                 593
               Restricted sample survival rate              6.5%             49%                 20%
               Number of plants                              93              303                 218
Notes: The "survival rate" is defined as the percentage of plants from the initial period that survived to the later period
based on matching either by name or location (see Section 3.5 for details). The "restricted sample survival rate"
adjusts for the fact that different sectors have single-plant communes to a varying degree. It is based on the subset of
plants located in communes that had only one plant in the initial period and that had either exactly one plant in 1840
(`survival') or no plant at all in the 1840 data (`exit').




                                                           41
                      Table 5: Productivity of Exiting Relative to Surviving Plants

                                                           (1)            (2)           (3)
                        Dependent variable              log(Y/L)       log(L)         log(Y)
                                                                                
                        Spinning (exit = 1)            -0.533         -0.869        -1.402
                                                        (0.165)        (0.218)       (0.251)

                        Metallurgy (exit = 1)            -0.139       -0.439        -0.578
                                                         (0.087)       (0.089)       (0.097)

                        Paper milling (exit = 1)         -0.179        -0.151        -0.331
                                                         (0.150)       (0.131)       (0.172)

Notes: The dependent variables are log(output per worker) in column 1, log(total labor) in column 2, and log(output)
in column 3. Exit is a dummy variable equal to one for plants that existed in the initial period and that had exited the
market by 1840 (based on the baseline survival rate ­ see Section 3.5). In cotton spinning, there were 340 plants in
1806 with information on output and labor, and 314 of these had exited by 1840. In metallurgy, there were 457 plants
with data to compute productivity in 1811, and 292 had exited by 1840. In paper milling, there were 520 plants with
information on output and labor in 1794, 473 of which had exited by 1840. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Notation for statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          42
                Table 6: Cotton Spinning in 1806: Productivity and Plants' Age Profile

                                  Dependent variable: log(Output per worker)
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
                                                                                                      
 Young plant                    0.575        0.374        0.543       0.575        0.493       0.608        0.534
                                (0.088)      (0.079)      (0.083)     (0.089)      (0.085)     (0.086)      (0.085)
 log(Yarn quality)                           0.673
                                             (0.074)
 Spinning jenny                                          -0.626
                                                          (0.087)
 Throstle                                                               -0.003
                                                                       (0.092)
 Mule jenny                                                                        0.481
                                                                                   (0.086)
 log(Workers)                                                                                  0.107
                                                                                               (0.025)
 log(Spindles per worker)                                                                                   0.336
                                                                                                            (0.070)
 R2                                0.11        0.32         0.20         0.11        0.18         0.14        0.17
 N                                 340         323          340          340         340          340         340
Notes: The table shows that mechanized cotton spinning plants that had just entered the market by 1806 had a signif-
icantly higher productivity. `Young' is a dummy variable equal to one for cotton spinning plants with below-median
age (with the median age in 1806 being three years). log(Yarn quality) is the log (unweighted) average of the minimum
and maximum count of the yarn produced by the plant. Spinning-jenny, throstle and mule-jenny are binary indicators
equal to one for plants using the earliest (spinning-jenny), intermediate (throstle), and latest (mule-jenny) vintage of
spinning machinery, respectively. The number of spindles is a standard measure of a spinning machine's production
capacity, irrespective of vintage. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Notation for statistical significance: ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          43
                Table 7: Cotton Spinning in 1840: Productivity and Plants' Age Profile

                                  Dependent variable: log(Output per worker)
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)
                      Entrant 1840     -0.084       -0.029           -0.080    -0.078     -0.144
                                       (0.077)     (0.077)          (0.078)    (0.077)     (0.065)
                      Water power                 0.327
                                                  (0.062)
                      Steam power                                    -0.045
                                                                    (0.076)
                      Other power                                              -0.193
                                                                                (0.090)
                      log(Workers)                                                        -0.373
                                                                                           (0.027)
                      R2                 0.00          0.03          0.00       0.01        0.24
                      N                  839           839           839        839         839
Notes: The table shows that in 1840, when the mechanized cotton spinning technology had reached maturity, new
entrant plants did not have a productivity advantage over existing plants anymore. Entrant 1840 is a binary indicator
equal to one for plants that entered the market after 1806. Water power, steam power, and other (wind or animal)
power are binary indicators equal to one for plants using the respective source of power. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Notation for statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



          Table 8: Testing for Spatial Selection of New Plants in Cotton Spinning in 1806

                                 Dependent variable: log(Output per worker)
                                                 (1)               (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)
                                                                                Only plants entering before
                                                                                 high-productivity plants
          Distp90 (1806)                    -0.791            -0.845          -0.439      -0.393     -0.481
                                             (0.136)           (0.129)         (0.153)     (0.153)    (0.196)
          Plant age (in 1806)                  -0.046           -0.203                     -0.153    -0.388
                                               (0.085)         (0.135)                    (0.133)    (0.205)
          Plant age × Distp90 (1806)                            0.237                                 0.365
                                                               (0.203)                               (0.258)
          Department FE
          R2                                    0.56               0.57         0.66       0.66        0.67
          N                                     284                284          176        176         176
Notes: The table shows that our results for proximity to high-productivity plants (see Figure 4) are not confounded
by new, more productive plants entering near existing high-productivity plants. Distp90 (1806) is the log distance to
the nearest plant in cotton spinning with productivity in the 90th percentile in 1806. Plant age is the log number of
years since the plant had been established, reported in 1806. Standard errors (clustered at the departmental level) in
parentheses. Notation for statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


                                                              44
