                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                GOING BANKRUPT IN CHINA

                                              Bo Li
                                         Jacopo Ponticelli

                                       Working Paper 27501
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27501


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




We are thankful to Chinese Supreme People's Court judges for helpful discussions. We received
valuable comments from Darrell Duffie, Hanming Fang, Giovanni Favara, Douglas Gale, Paul
Gao, Nicola Gennaioli, Vikrant Vig, Xavier Giroud, Edith Hotchkiss, Kose John, Hao Liang,
Ron Masulis, Maijun Qian, Andrei Shleifer, Andrea Tesei, Karin Thorburn, Neng Wang, Cong
Wang, Wei Wang, Shang-Jin Wei, Wei Xiong, Wanli Zhao, Qifei Zhu, Xiaodong Zhu and
seminar participants at NBER China Working Group, Chicago Booth Political Economy of
Finance Conference, SFS Cavalcade Asia, ABFER Singapore, NYU, Tsinghua University, the
Hanqing Summer Workshop in Finance, CFRC, CICF, CKGSB and the AFA. Tao Chen, Yihan
Deng, Xinwen Liu, Junli Ye, Jiaqi Zhang and Mark He provided excellent research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Bo Li and Jacopo Ponticelli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Going Bankrupt in China
Bo Li and Jacopo Ponticelli
NBER Working Paper No. 27501
July 2020
JEL No. G33,K22,O16

                                          ABSTRACT

Using new case-level data we document a set of stylized facts on bankruptcy in China and study
how the staggered introduction of specialized courts across Chinese cities affected insolvency
resolution and the local economy. For identification, we compare cases handled by specialized
versus traditional civil courts within the same city. Specialized courts hire better-trained judges
and cut case duration by 35%. State-owned firms experience larger declines in case duration
relative to privately-owned firms, consistent with higher judicial independence. Cities introducing
specialized courts experience faster firm entry, larger increase in average capital productivity and
reallocation of employment out of "zombie" firms-intensive sectors.


Bo Li
Tsinghua University
43 Chengfu Rd
Beijing, China
100083
lib@pbcsf.tsinghua.edu.cn


Jacopo Ponticelli
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
jacopo.ponticelli@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1         Introduction

        The lack of an efficient and independent judicial system is a major obstacle to eco-
nomic and financial development. In many developing countries, for example, courts are
slow at processing cases, lack specialized judges and are subject to political interference.1
This issue is particularly prominent in China, where local courts traditionally suffer from
the interference of local governments when dealing with bankruptcy cases.2 In particular,
local politicians have strong incentives to delay the liquidation and keep in operation low-
productivity and financially distressed state-owned firms in order to contain unemploy-
ment, avoid social unrest and promote their political careers. Government's protection of
insolvent but politically connected firms through preferential credit lines or bailouts has
been documented in several countries (Faccio, Masulis, and McConnell 2006) and shown
to be conductive of a distorted allocation of resources across firms.3 However, there is
scarce direct empirical evidence on the role played by the judicial system in shaping the
treatment of politically connected firms when they enter financial distress.
        We aim at closing this gap in the literature by providing micro-based evidence from
China. China is an ideal laboratory to study this question. Until recent years, bankruptcy
cases were filed in local civil courts, which lack specialized judges and tend to operate
under the oversight of local party officials (Henderson 2007). In the last decade, however,
in an attempt to increase the legal protection of creditors, China introduced 97 specialized
bankruptcy courts in different prefecture-level cities. Compared to traditional civil courts,
specialized courts should be run by better trained judges and are part of an effort by the
central government to limit local governments' interventions in bankruptcy cases (INSOL
2018). This allows us to exploit the introduction of specialized courts across Chinese cities
as a source of variation in the degree of judicial efficiency and independence.
        Our paper has two objectives. First, we construct a new case-level dataset that allows
    1
     See Djankov, Hart, McLiesh, and Shleifer (2008) and Dakolias (1999) on differences in court efficiency
across countries. See the 2007 Global Corruption Report of Transparency International (Rodriguez and
Ehrichs 2007) for an analysis of political interference on judges and courts in developing countries.
   2
     See Fan, Huang, and Zhu (2013). See also Henderson (2007) on the relationship between the Chinese
judicial system and the Communist Party more generally.
   3
     See, among others, Khwaja and Mian (2005) and Caballero, Hoshi, and Kashyap (2008).




                                                    2
to shed light on bankruptcy resolution in China. How the second largest economy in
the world deals with corporate insolvency has important policy implications, especially in
light of the recent increase in corporate defaults following a decade-long debt boom. Still,
this question has been so far largely unexplored due to the lack of micro data. Second,
we document how the introduction of specialized courts that started in the mid-2000s
has affected insolvency resolution in China. In this analysis we are particularly interested
in understanding the effect of court specialization on judicial efficiency ­ as captured by
case duration ­ and on judicial independence ­ as captured by the judicial treatment of
state-owned firms relative to privately-owned firms.
      Let us start by describing the new data. We construct a new dataset covering 2,021
bankruptcy cases filed in China between 2011 and 2019. Our data source is a new online
platform created by the Chinese Supreme Court which allows debtors and creditors to
monitor the evolution of bankruptcy cases. In addition to firm and court characteristics,
the platform provides access to a digitized version of the court documents accompanying
each case. We extracted from these digitized documents the dates of the main judicial
decisions for each case, the type of case (liquidation vs reorganization), the names of the
judges in charge of each case and, for a small sample of cases, detailed information on
the name of the debtor/creditor that initiate the case and the recovery rates obtained by
different classes of creditors.
      In the first part of the paper, we present a set of stylized facts on bankruptcy in
China. Similar to other emerging economies, the vast majority of Chinese bankruptcies
are liquidations (77%). Over half of the cases in our sample involve firms operating in
manufacturing, construction and real estate. Liquidation cases are mostly initiated by
unsecured creditors, while banks ­ whose claims tend to be secured by some form of
collateral ­ initiate 7.5% of cases. The average duration of bankruptcy cases observed in
the data is 1.6 years, around 60% longer than the average duration observed in the US
during the same period according to World Bank data.4 However, there is large variation
in case duration, which spans from a few months to around 8 years. Reorganizations and
  4
      Doing Business, The World Bank Group (http://www.doingbusiness.org), years 2011-2019.




                                                3
cases involving small firms tend to be closed faster than liquidations and cases involving
large firms respectively.
   Next, we propose an empirical strategy to study how the introduction of specialized
courts has affected insolvency resolution. Specialized courts were introduced at different
times in different Chinese cities between 2007 and 2017. The main identification challenge
with comparing cases initiated in cities that introduced specialized courts with cases
initiated in cities that did not is the potential endogeneity in the timing of introduction.
For example, cities that introduced specialized courts might be on a different economic
cycle, which would also affect the type of firms going bankrupt in each city. To deal with
this challenge we exploit the fact that, even after the introduction of specialized courts,
bankruptcy cases were still handled by both traditional civil courts and specialized courts
within the same city (in almost equal proportions). This allows us to use a saturated
model with city fixed effects interacted with year fixed effects, effectively comparing cases
initiated in different courts within the same city and year. Even within a given city
and year, cases are not randomly allocated across courts. However, we show that cases
handled by traditional versus specialized courts within the same city and year are strongly
balanced along firm and case characteristics (including firm size, sector of operation, and
case type), and the magnitude of our estimates is unchanged when controlling for such
characteristics.
   Our empirical analysis proceeds in two steps. First, we document how the introduction
of specialized courts affected judicial outcomes. We are particularly interested in their
effect on court efficiency, average education of judges, and on the judicial treatment of
state-owned firms. We think of the judicial treatment of SOEs as a measure of judicial
independence from local politicians. Second, we study the impact of new specialized
courts on the local economy, and in particular their effect on firm entry and on the
average capital productivity of local firms.
   We start by documenting the impact of specialized courts on observable measures
of performance of local courts. We find that specialization leads to faster resolution.
Case duration in specialized courts is 35% lower than in traditional civil courts when



                                               4
comparing similar cases initiated in the same city and year. This corresponds to a decline
in case duration of around 210 days. To investigate the effect of specialization on judicial
independence we focus on the judicial treatment of state-owned versus private firms.
According to the Chinese Supreme Court, one of the objectives of specialized courts was
to facilitate an orderly and swift liquidation of unproductive state-owned firms and the
reallocation of their resources to the rest of the economy. We find that the effect of
specialization on case duration is significantly larger for cases regarding state-owned firms
than privately owned firms. Our estimates indicate that specialized courts cut the time
to deal with bankruptcies of SOEs by around 300 days more than for privately owned
firms, a large and statistically significant difference. In particular, the magnitude of our
estimates indicate that specialized courts reduce case duration for privately owned firms
by around 198 days, and for state-owned firms by 506 days. We also investigate the
average education of judges assigned to specialized courts. We find that cases entering in
specialized courts are 60 percent more likely to be dealt with by judges that graduated
from an "elite" law school.5 Finally, we document that, potentially as a consequence of
being faster at processing cases, specialized courts accept bankruptcy cases at a faster
rate (23%) than traditional civil courts in the same city and year.
       In the second step of our analysis, we study the effect of specialized courts on the
local economy, intended as the economy of the prefecture-level city. This analysis exploits
city-level variation, which does not allow us to exploit variation across courts facing the
same city-level shocks. Thus, we rely solely on the staggered introduction of specialized
courts across cities as a source of identification. To attenuate the concerns associated
with endogenous opening of specialized courts, we estimate a discrete time hazard model
that studies whether differences in economic trends at city level predict the timing of
introduction of specialized courts across cities. We find that the timing of their introduc-
tion is uncorrelated with different measures of local economic performance as captured by
contemporaneous and lagged changes in GDP per capita, number of firms, average firm
size and share of manufacturing in local GDP.
   5
  Elite schools include Project 985 universities and the 5 top professional law schools in China: CUPL,
SWUPL, ZUEL, NWUPL, and ECUPL.


                                                  5
   Exploiting the staggered introduction of courts across cities, we study their effect
on several measures of local economic development. A more efficient and independent
bankruptcy system can promote local economic development in several ways. First, by
facilitating the liquidation of low-productivity firms and favoring a quicker reallocation of
their real assets, their labor force and their market shares to other firms in the economy
(Bernstein, Colonnelli, and Iverson 2019). Second, by increasing the expected recovery
rate of creditors and thus promoting lending to firms that operate under specialized courts
(Visaria 2009).
   We focus on three main outcomes which are observable in our data: firm entry, average
firm productivity at city level (as captured by average product of capital and return on
assets), and the share of local labor employed in industries with higher diffusion of "zom-
bie" firms. Following Caballero et al. (2008), we define zombie firms as low-productivity
firms benefiting from financing conditions that are not justified by their fundamentals,
independently from whether they are privately-owned or state-owned. Using data on
publicly-listed firms we rank industries based on the diffusion of zombie firms, and define
industries above the median of this measure as zombie-intensive industries, or Z-industries.
Finally, we compute the city-level labor share in Z-industries using data from the China
Statistical Yearbooks, which cover employment in both publicly listed and private firms.
   We find that cities that introduced courts specialized in bankruptcy experienced a 3
percent faster increase in the number of local industrial firms and a 4.5 percent larger
increase in average product of capital of local firms relative to cities where insolvency is
still resolved exclusively by civil courts. We also find that cities that introduced specialized
courts experienced a 1.7 percentage points larger decline in the share of labor employed
in zombie-intensive industries.
   Our paper is related to several literatures. First, the literature on law and finance.
The seminal papers in this literature have showed ­ using cross-country variation ­ that
a country's legal and judicial infrastructure can shape the development of its financial
markets (La Porta, Lopez-de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny 1997, La Porta, Lopez-de
Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny 1998; Djankov et al. 2008; Claessens and Klapper 2005;



                                               6
Safavian and Sharma 2007). Recent work in this literature has focused on micro-data
and within-country variation to study the effect of specialization and efficiency of judicial
enforcement on both financial and real outcomes (Visaria 2009, Iverson 2017, Ponticelli
and Alencar 2016, Rodano, Serrano-Velarde, and Tarantino 2011, M¨
                                                                uller 2019), or the
effect of specific legal reforms that target creditor rights on bank lending decisions (Vig
2013).6 Similarly to these recent works, our paper exploits micro data and within-country
variation. Our contribution relative to this literature is twofold. First, we present, to the
best of our knowledge, the first micro-level evidence on the role of judicial institutions in
bankruptcy resolution in China. Second, the use of case-level data on bankruptcies filed in
Chinese courts allows us to better identify the channel through which institutional changes
can affect financial and real outcomes. In particular, our paper provides direct empirical
evidence on the effects of specialized courts on case duration and judicial treatment of
politically connected firms.
       Second, our paper is related to the political economy literature on the value of firms'
political connections. Faccio et al. (2006) show that politically connected firms are more
likely to be bailed out by the government when in financial distress relative to similar but
not politically-connected firms.7 Relatedly, preferential lending by state-owned banks to
politically connected firms ­ and its real effects ­ has been documented in Sapienza (2004)
and Carvalho (2014). Several papers have also shown that political concerns can directly
or indirectly affect lenders' behavior even in advanced economies (Agarwal, Amromin,
Ben-David, and Dinc 2018, Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi 2010). Relative to this literature, our
paper focuses on political interference on judicial decisions ­ which is both widespread and
largely understudied in developing countries ­ and how court specialization and better
judges' training can mitigate its effects.
       Finally, our paper is related to recent work on the development of the Chinese financial
system and the role of state-owned firms. In particular, several recent papers have focused
   6
      See also Iverson, Madsen, Wang, and Xu (2018) and Coviello, Ichino, and Persico (2014) on the role
of judicial experience and work practices on judicial productivity.
    7
      On this, see also Cong, Gao, Ponticelli, and Yang (2019) in the context of China. Consistently, Fisman
(2001) and Faccio (2006) show how the market value of politically connected firms is more sensitive to
political events relatively to non-politically connected firms, especially in developing countries.




                                                     7
on the drivers and consequences of the Chinese credit boom that followed the 2009-2010
stimulus plan. Part of this literature has focused on the allocative effects of the credit
boom across firms with different connections to the government (Cong et al. 2019, Huang,
Pagano, and Panizza 2016, Chong-en, Hsieh, and Michael 2016), while other papers have
focused on the institutional drivers of the rise in shadow banking (Hachem and Song 2016,
Chen, He, and Liu 2020, Wang, Wang, Wang, and Zhou 2016). Our paper complements
this literature by investigating the role and evolution of the bankruptcy system that is in
charge of resolving the growing amount of corporate debt that is becoming insolvent in
the aftermath of the credit boom.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional
background of recent bankruptcy reforms introduced in China in the last decade and the
role of specialized courts. In section 3 we describe the new case-level dataset used in
the paper and we present a set of new stylized facts on bankruptcy in China that can
be observed in the data. Section 4 presents the identification strategy and describes the
main empirical results. Section 5 concludes.



2     Institutional Setting: Bankruptcy in China

    In the last decade, China experienced two major changes of its bankruptcy system.
First, in 2007, the Chinese government introduced a new bankruptcy law with the ob-
jective of strengthening the protection of creditors. Second, in the decade between 2007
and 2017, Chinese cities introduced courts specialized in bankruptcy proceedings. In this
section we briefly describe these two changes to the Chinese bankruptcy system in more
detail.


2.1       Bankruptcy Law and Frictions in Traditional Civil Courts

    Until 2007, insolvency in China was resolved under the 1986 People's Republic of China
Bankruptcy Law, which focused exclusively on how to address insolvency of state-owned




                                            8
enterprises (SOEs).8 The text of the old bankruptcy law states that secured creditors
have first priority in the order of repayment, followed by workers, tax claims and general
unsecured creditors (art. 32). However, during the 1990s, the State Council issued two
decrees specifying that payment of resettlement costs and other benefits for employees of
bankrupt SOEs had priority over secured creditors (Booth 2008).9 These deviations from
the wording of the 1986 bankruptcy law made the Chinese bankruptcy regime particularly
unfriendly to secured creditor, prioritizing government interests and workers' claims with
the primary objective of maintaining social stability and preventing social protests.
       In 2006, the National People's Congress approved a new bankruptcy law which drew on
regulations and judicial experiences of the United States and Europe. The new law entered
into force in June of 2007, replacing the 1986 law and all other local insolvency legislation,
thus providing a unified legal insolvency framework for China.10 The 2007 bankruptcy law
brought important changes in creditor rights' protection. First, secured creditors are given
priority over any workers' claims, and should be repaid with the specific property used as
collateral (Art. 109).11 Secured claims are followed by: general expenses of bankruptcy
proceedings, workers' claims, tax claims and general unsecured claims such as suppliers
(Art. 113). Second, the new law introduces a new reorganization procedure (Chapter
8), which resembles Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code, where creditors
hold meetings with the debtor and have the right to review and approve a reorganization
plan. In addition, the 2007 bankruptcy reform attempted to lay out unified rules for
mandatory liquidation of firms that are in severe financial distress and whose bankruptcy
   8
     Chapter 19 of the Civil Procedure Law introduced in 1991 dealt with insolvency of non-SOEs. In
addition, some local governments had their specific bankruptcy regulations (e.g. "Shenzen Special Eco-
nomic Zone Enterprise Bankruptcy Regulations". See Booth (2008) for a detailed description of the legal
landscape before the introduction of the 2007 Bankruptcy Law.
   9
     These decrees took the form of "Notices". In particular, the 1994 Notice specified that the proceedings
obtained from selling the land use rights of bankrupt SOEs should be used to cover the resettlement costs
of employees. The 1997 Notice clarified that these payments to employees would take priority over
secured creditors. If land use rights' sale was not sufficient to cover resettlement costs, these costs would
be financed by auctioning firm property (whether secured or unsecured) and, if not sufficient, directly
paid by the government at the same level of the bankrupt SOE (Booth 2008).
  10
     The drafting of the Chinese bankruptcy law started in 1994; the draft was amended and revised
several times until its final approval in 2006. See Booth (2008) for a detailed description of the drafting
process of the new law.
  11
     One exception are workers' claims filed bef ore the introduction of the new law, which are granted
special status and received priority over secured claims (Art.132).




                                                     9
proceedings become too lengthy ­ regardless of government ownership. In particular,
when judges deem the likelihood of survival to be very low, they can decide to bypass
the reorganization procedure completely and move to liquidation directly. This provision
had to objective of shortening bankruptcy proceedings and guaranteeing higher recovery
to creditors' claim on non-viable firms.
   Despite the substantial changes in bankruptcy rules, the enforcement by traditional
civil courts has remained problematic. Bankruptcy cases involve complex legal, social
and economic challenges which many local civil courts in China lack the resources to
handle. In addition, the inefficiency of the civil court in handling cases also reflects
the limited expertise of judges in interpreting the language and the spirit of the new
regulation. In interviews with senior judges of civil courts, several judges underlined how
many of their peers were trained under the planned economy and with the social objective
of maintaining employees' benefits, instead of reorganize firms in an efficient manner.
According to a recent report by the International Association of Restructuring, Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Professionals (INSOL 2018), among the main challenges with bankruptcy
resolution in China are the limited understanding of the new law by non-specialized courts
and the performance evaluation system of judges which does not weight the additional
complexity of bankruptcy cases. In addition, Chinese firms in financial distress often
wait to obtain the "consent" of the local government to start an official bankruptcy
procedure (Fan et al. 2013), and local governments try to avoid formal bankruptcy or
delay bankruptcy proceedings of SOEs as they have to bear the financial and social costs
associated with resettling employees when a firm is liquidated (INSOL 2018). In sum, even
after the introduction of the new law, the judicial system remained largely unprepared to
effectively implement the changes brought by the new law.


2.2    Introduction of Specialized Bankruptcy Courts

   In the decade following the introduction of the 2007 bankruptcy law, the Chinese
central government started promoting a slow shift from a policy-mandated bankruptcy
system ­ in which the government largely decides which companies fail or survive ­ to a


                                            10
more "market-oriented" bankruptcy system, in which market forces decide who are the
winners and losers. A key part of this process was the introduction of bankruptcy tribunals
that are specialized in handling bankruptcy cases. These tribunals (whose Chinese name
translates into "Liquidation and Bankruptcy Tribunal") are specialized sections of existing
courts. In that sense, they are not separate, independent new courts, but specialized
tribunals operating within a pre-existing civil court. In the rest of the paper, whenever
we refer to specialized courts, we refer to specialized tribunals within existing civil courts.
       After the introduction of the new bankruptcy law in 2007, a handful of Chinese cities
started a first phase of introduction of such tribunals. In November 2014, the Supreme
Court formulated a recommendation to introduce specialized courts across China and pro-
vided official guidelines for such introduction. In the two years after the formulation of
the Supreme Court's guidelines ­ between December 2014 and May 2016 ­ a second phase
of introduction of specialized courts took place, which included the following provinces:
Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin; Hebei, Jilin, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Anhui, Hubei, Hunan, Guang-
dong. Finally, in June 2016, a third phase was started when the Supreme Court formally
required all provinces to have at least one court specialized in bankruptcy cases. As of
December 2017, there were 97 specialized courts across China and in almost all Chinese
provinces there was at least one of such courts.12 The 97 specialized courts include 3
higher people court, 63 intermediate courts, and 31 people's courts (INSOL 2018).
       The introduction of specialized courts modified the old regime in several ways. First,
specialized courts brought with them changes in the selection of judges and the evaluation
system for judges' productivity. As we document in the paper, judges hired to preside over
bankruptcy cases in specialized courts are more likely to be graduates from China's elite
law schools. The selection of better-educated judges could not only improve the quality of
judicial decisions but also potentially alleviate political capture by local governments. In
addition, the evaluation system of judicial productivity in specialized courts is different
than the one used in traditional civil courts. This is to take into account the higher degree
  12
    The Guizhou province, Tibet autonomous region and Ningxia Hui autonomous region have not yet
courts specialized in bankruptcy.




                                               11
of complexity of bankruptcy cases relative to other civil cases.13
       In addition, specialized courts simplified the procedure for debtors to file for bankruptcy
and facilitated creditors' vote in remote areas by allowing online votes on reorganization
plans. This alleviated creditor coordination problems, especially among general unsecured
creditors. Better trained judges, more adequate schemes to evaluated judges' productivity,
and higher coordination among creditors aimed at fastening the bankruptcy proceedings
while generating safeguards over local government influence in bankruptcy resolution.
       Let us also briefly discuss how these new courts are formed. The initiative to create a
specialized bankruptcy tribunal in a given city is taken at the local level. In particular, it is
the local judiciary that submits a proposal to introduce a specialized court to the Supreme
Court, which then has to approve it. Although this is, at least formally, an independent
initiative of the local judicial system, such initiative is usually at least in part coordinated
with the local government. The widespread introduction of specialized courts across
Chinese cities suggests that local politicians were willing to accept limits to their influence
on the local insolvency process, possibly because being at the forefront of reforming the
bankruptcy resolution system can be rewarded with better career opportunities. In fact,
the central government sees favorably the introduction of specialized courts as a way to
deal with "zombie" enterprises ­ low-productivity but politically connected firms ­ whose
liquidation is often opposed or delayed by local party officials. In addition, in recent years,
the central government has emphasized the ease of doing business as an important criteria
for local government officials' promotions.
  13
    For example, according to a recent Wall Street Journal report (Ng and Zhou 2019): "To speed up
processing, courts have given judges productivity targets and evaluate them with a system that gives
them more credit for handling bankruptcy cases. In southern China's Hunan province, one standard
bankruptcy case could be deemed equal to 30 civil cases when evaluating a judge's performance, according
to a guideline published last year."




                                                  12
3        A new dataset of bankruptcy cases in China: space

         Data and stylized facts

       Our empirical analysis is based on a new case-level dataset of bankruptcies filed in Chi-
nese courts between 2011 and 2019. We sourced case-level information from the "National
Corporate Bankruptcy Information Disclosure Platform", an online platform launched in
2016 by the Chinese Supreme's People Court (SPC) that allows debtors and creditors to
monitor the evolution of bankruptcy cases.14 For each case, the online platform reports
the name of the company filing for bankruptcy, the name of the court in which the case
was filed, the current status of the case, as well as the province, sector, size and ownership
category of the bankrupt firm.
       The platform also offers access to the text of the court documents accompanying the
case. Court documents include the text of the rulings made by the judges in charge of each
case, as well as any communications from the bankruptcy administrators to the parties
involved in the case.15 Using text analysis we extracted from these court documents the
following case information. First, we extracted the date of case filing, the date in which
the court accepted the case, the date of the main judicial decisions and the date of official
closure of the case. Second, we extracted the type of bankruptcy case ­ i.e. whether the
case is a liquidation or a reorganization ­ and the name of the creditor or debtor who filed
the case. Third, we extracted information on the judicial team in charge of each case,
including the names of the main judge and the secondary judges. For a small sample of
cases (94 cases) we were also able to extract information on the recovery rate obtained by
different categories of creditors: secured creditors, workers, tax authority and unsecured
creditors.
       All the information used in this paper is updated to January 2020. As of January 2020,
the platform contained 2,021 cases with available court documents.16 These 2,021 cases
  14
     The platform is publicly available at http://pccz.court.gov.cn/pcajxxw/index/xxwsy
  15
     Both judges and bankruptcy administrators are required by Chinese regulation to upload these doc-
uments in the platform.
  16
     Overall, as of January 2020 the platform contained 3,180 entries. After we focus on cases filed or
accepted in the period between January 2011 and December 2019 and with available court documents in
the platform, we are left with 2,021 cases.


                                                  13
are the main dataset used in our empirical analysis. Around 50 percent of these cases
(982) were still in progress as of January 2020, while the remaining 1,039 had reached a
formal conclusion.17 In this section, we use this new data to document a set of stylized
facts that shed light on the composition of cases and on the characteristics of firms going
bankrupt in China. We also discuss the representativity of our sample and the potential
selection issues we face.
       We start in Table 1 by reporting the distribution of cases by type and firm charac-
teristics. Notice that each case is uniquely identified by a firm, so in what follows we
use the two terms interchangeably. Liquidations represent the vast majority (77 percent)
of bankruptcy cases in our sample, while 16 percent of cases are reorganizations. The
remaining 7 percent of cases in our sample are cases that change status over time. These
include reorganizations where creditors fail to find an agreement and are therefore turned
into liquidations, or liquidations in which the debtor manages to find new investors and
then applies for a reorganization.18 In terms of firm size, 68 percent of the bankrupt
firms in our sample are below 50 employees, 28 percent are bankruptcies of firms with
between 50 and 500 employees, while the remaining 4 percent are firms with more than
500 employees. In terms of firm ownership, around 7 percent of the firms in our sample
are registered as state-owned, while the remaining 93 percent are privately owned. Hsieh
and Song (2015) show that the share of state-owned firms in the China's Industrial Survey
in the early 2010s is around 12 percent. The lower share of SOEs in our dataset might
reflect the fact that SOEs are on average larger firms which tend to receive preferential
treatment in credit markets. Finally, in terms of sector composition, almost half of the
firms filing for bankruptcy in our sample operate in the manufacturing sector, followed
by real estate, wholesale & retail trade, and construction.19

                                             [Table 1 here]
  17
     Among the cases that were still in progress as of January 2020, 263 had already reached the resolution
stage, which corresponds to the approval of the reorganization plan or the liquidation plan by the court.
Most reorganization cases are quickly closed right after approval of the reorganization plan. On the other
hand, there can be a long delay between the approval of the liquidation plan and closure of the liquidation
case, which only happens after assets are sold and proceeds used to repay legal fees and creditors.
  18
     In a very limited number of cases, we observe the same firm going multiple times between reorgani-
zation and liquidation.
  19
     For around 10 percent of firms the sector information is reported as "Other" in the original data.


                                                    14
   Next, we report the time series of case characteristics. Figure 1 shows the number of
cases in our dataset by year in which they were filed. As shown, the number of cases filed
in our sample has been increasing significantly after 2012 and up to 2016, then stabilizing
in more recent years.
   In Figure 2 we then decompose the number of cases filed each year by different case
characteristics (liquidations vs reorganizations) and firm characteristics (size, sector and
ownership). While the composition of cases by type and sector is relatively stable over
time, some clear trends emerge in the composition of cases by firm size and ownership. In
particular, bankruptcies of small firms have become a larger fraction of cases over time,
going from 60 percent in 2011 to 80 percent in 2019. On the other hand, the share of
bankruptcies of state-owned firms ­ which tend to be large firms ­ has declined over time
from more than 20 percent of cases in 2011 to roughly 5 percent in 2019.

                                   [Figure 1 and 2 here]

   Next, in Table 2, we report the share of cases initiated by debtors vs creditors for
the 1,285 cases in our sample for which we could extract this information. As expected,
liquidations are mostly initiated by creditors, while reorganizations are mostly initiated
by the debtor firm. Among creditors, we can additionally differentiate between banks
and non-bank creditors (usually suppliers). Banks initiated 7.5 percent of liquidations
in our sample, with around half of the filings made by China's Big Four banks (China
Construction Bank, ICBC, Agricultural Bank of China, and Bank of China).
   Our statistics on recovery rates are limited to a sample of 94 cases for which this
information is available, so they should be taken as only suggestive evidence. Table 3
reports the average recovery rate for the four main categories of creditors: secured debts,
labor claims, tax debts and ordinary unsecured debts. The categories are ordered by their
absolute priority according to the 2007 Chinese bankruptcy law (i.e. categories higher in
this order get paid first with the proceeds obtained from selling liquidated assets). As
Table 3 shows, recovery rates are, on average, higher for creditors that rank higher in
terms of absolute priority. Labor claims tend to be paid almost in full (95%), which is
consistent with the special attention that Chinese courts often have for workers (Booth

                                            15
(2008)). Secured creditors recover on average almost 90% of their claims, the tax authority
around 80%, while the ordinary unsecured creditors, such as suppliers, receive on average
only 13% of the value of their claims at the end of the bankruptcy process.

      In Figure 3 we report the geographical distribution of the bankruptcy cases in our
sample across Chinese provinces. The geographical distribution of cases is correlated
with the geographical distribution of economic activity across provinces. This can be seen
in Figure 4, which shows a strong and positive correlation between the average number
of bankruptcy cases filed per year in our dataset (in logs) and the average number of
industrial firms registered in each province per year according to the China Statistical
Yearbooks (also in logs).


                                    [Figures 3 and 4 here]



      We complement the case-level dataset described above with information on judges'
education. We extract this information from the China Masters Theses Full-text Database
(CMFD) made available via the China Knowledge Resource Integrated Database (CNKI).
This dataset contains information on master theses from all major schools in China since
1948, including author, school, title and full text of the thesis. We code a judge as having
a master from an "elite" law school if we find a master thesis under its name at Project
985 universities or at one of the 5 top professional law schools in China.20

      Before moving to the empirical analysis, it is important to discuss how representative
the data reported in the bankruptcy disclosure platform is of the population of bankruptcy
cases filed in China during the period under study. This question is hard to answer given
the limited information available on the population of bankruptcy cases. To the best
of our knowledge, the only publicly available statistics that we can use as benchmark
is the total number of bankruptcy cases accepted in Chinese courts every year, which
is reported yearly by the Supreme Court (INSOL 2018). Figure 5 reports this number
between 1989 and 2017. According to the Supreme Court data, between 2011 and 2017,
 20
      Top professional law schools include: CUPL, SWUPL, ZUEL, NWUPL, and ECUPL.


                                              16
around twenty-five thousand bankruptcy cases were accepted in Chinese courts, against
the approximately two thousand cases recorded in our sample.


                                        [Table 5 around here]


    There are two types of potential selection issues we face in using the data made
available in the bankruptcy disclosure platform. First, we face selection based on duration
in the early years of our sample. Since the bankruptcy disclosure platform was launched
in 2016, cases filed between 2011 and 2015 are recorded in the platform only if they were
still in progress as of 2016.21 This mechanically leaves out cases filed in early years of
our sample and closed before 2016. In the empirical analysis we deal with this selection
based on duration by including year of acceptance fixed effects in our specifications. This
allows us to effectively compare cases that were filed in different courts but that started
in the same year.22
    Second, despite Chinese regulation requires judges and bankruptcy administrators to
upload information on all cases in the online platform, the gap between aggregate statistics
reported by the Supreme Court and the bankruptcy online platform makes evident that
not all cases are reported in the online platform. From our conversations with bankruptcy
professionals, a large number of bankruptcy filings in China involve small firms with
virtually no assets left at the time of filing. These cases tend to be closed shortly after
filing with no payments to creditors. The bankruptcy professionals we interviewed for
this paper confirmed that this type of cases are less likely to be reported by judges and
bankruptcy administrators in the online platform, which instead tend to focus on larger
cases where the insolvent firm has positive assets at filing. In this sense, our sample
is likely skewed towards larger companies and companies characterized by higher asset
tangibility, as these are more likely to preserve their asset value at the time of bankruptcy.
This is consistent with the stylized facts presented in Table 1, which shows that around
one third of cases in our sample are of firms with at least 50 employees, and more than 60
  21
     In fact, out of the 980 cases that reached conclusion by the time we extracted the data, only 34 were
closed before 2016 (all of them between 2013 and 2015).
  22
     Including year of acceptance fixed effects also helps us dealing with the right-censoring of the data,
an issue that we discuss in more detail in section 4.


                                                    17
percent of cases are of firms operating in industries characterized by relatively high asset
tangibility, such as the manufacturing, construction, real estate, and utilities.
   Despite the selection issues described above, we think of this new dataset as a unique
and extremely valuable source of information. First, because it allows to shed light on
several aspects of bankruptcy proceedings in China, an area thus far unexplored by aca-
demic research due to the lack of data. Second, we think that the identification strategy
presented in section 4.1 mitigates selection bias concerns.


3.1    Data on Specialized Courts

   We obtained the exact dates of introduction and the location of all the 97 courts
specialized in bankruptcy operating in China as of 2019 from the Ministry of Justice. Since
the location and introduction dates of these courts is not reported in official documents,
to validate the information that we received from the Ministry of Justice we conducted
several rounds of interviews with Supreme Court judges, local court judges, trustees,
lawyers, and accountants that were involved in major bankruptcy cases.
   Figure 6 shows the number of prefecture-level cities that introduced their first special-
ized court by quarter. For each city, we use the earliest introduction date of a specialized
court. As shown, all specialized courts were introduced between 2007 and 2017. Some
cities introduced their first specialized courts right after the bankruptcy reform of 2007. In
particular, 5 courts where introduced in 2007 and 2008. However, the majority of courts
where introduced starting from May of 2012 and up to December of 2017. Figure 6 shows
that the number of cities introducing their first specialized court increased substantially
after the official guidelines on this matter that were issued by the Supreme Court in 2014,
and then again in 2017. Our case level data on bankruptcy cases covers the years 2011
to 2019. Thus, the relevant variation in our empirical analysis comes from the specialized
courts introduced between 2012 and 2017.

                                       [Figure 6 here]

   Figure 7 reports the number ­ and share ­ of bankruptcy cases in our dataset that
were filed in traditional civil courts versus specialized courts by year. As shown, the share

                                             18
of bankruptcy cases filed in specialized courts increased from around 5 percent of filed
cases in the years 2011-2012 to approximately 40 percent of the cases at the end of our
sample in 2019.


                                            [Figure 7 here]


       It is important to underline here that, even after the introduction of the first specialized
court in a given prefecture-level city, not all bankruptcy cases in that city are processed by
the newly introduced specialized courts. Figure 8 reports the average share of bankruptcy
cases filed in specialized courts among all bankruptcy cases filed in a given city, relative
to the quarter of introduction of the first specialized court in that city. The share of
cases filed in specialized courts is zero in the quarters before the introduction of the first
specialized court, and increases to an average of around fifty percent within a year after its
introduction.23 In short, our data shows that specialized courts were not able to absorb all
bankruptcy cases filed in a given city. This is a characteristic of the Chinese system that
we will exploit for identification purposes in the empirical analysis described in section 4.
In section 4.1 we also discuss and explore in the data the drivers of the allocation of cases
between traditional and specialized courts within the same city.


                                            [Figure 8 here]



4        Empirical Analysis

4.1        Identification Strategy

       In this section we present the main estimating equations used to study the effect of
specialized courts on the outcomes of interest. We start by presenting the specification
used to study the effect of specialized courts on judicial outcomes. Judicial outcomes
include outcomes at the case level ­ such as time in court to close a bankruptcy case,
or education of the judges assigned to the case ­ and at the court level ­ such as total
  23
     There are, on average, 2.5 courts dealing with bankruptcy cases in every prefecture level city in
China. This number increases to 4.3 for cities that will eventually introduce a specialized court (as these
cities tend to be larger).


                                                    19
number of bankruptcy cases filed in a given court. We start from the following equation
at case-level:


                     yicjt = t + c +  1(SpecializedCourt)ct + icjt                       (1)

where i indexes a case, c indexes the court in which the case was filed, j indexes the
prefecture level city where the court is located and t indexes the year of acceptance of
the case. The variable 1(SpecializedCourt)ct is a dummy equal to one when the court in
which the case is accepted has introduced a specialized tribunal for bankruptcy cases as
of year t, and zero otherwise. This specification includes both court fixed effects and year
of acceptance fixed effects. We can estimate court fixed effects because, as discussed in
section 2.2, courts specialized in bankruptcy cases are not brand new courts, but existing
civil courts that introduce a tribunal specialized in bankruptcy proceedings within the
court itself.
   A first concern with this specification is that the coefficient  might be capturing
differences in the type of firms going bankrupt in cities where specialized courts are
introduced versus those where they are not, rather than that the differential effect of court
specialization on case outcomes. To deal with this concern, we augment our specification
at case level by adding city fixed effects interacted with "year of acceptance" fixed effects
(jt ), as shown in what follows:




       yicjt = jt + c +  1(SpecializedCourt)ct + industryF Ei + sizeF Ei + icjt          (2)


   Notice that, in equation (2), the coefficient  captures differences in judicial outcomes
between cases filed in different courts within the same city and in the same year. As
shown in Figure 8, courts that introduce a tribunal specialized in bankruptcy cases do not
absorb all bankruptcy cases filed in a city. In fact, in cities that introduced specialized
courts, both traditional courts and specialized courts operate in parallel, each dealing
with roughly 50 percent of the filed cases. This feature of the Chinese institutional


                                             20
setting allows us to exploit variation across courts that are subject to the same city-level
shocks.24
       Even within a given city and year, the allocation of cases across courts is not random.
In particular, there could be selection in the type of cases handled by specialized versus
non-specialized courts. To investigate the extent of this concern, we report a balance test
comparing characteristics of cases handled by specialized courts vs traditional courts in
the same city and year. The results are reported in Table 5. In this table we restrict our
sample to cities with specialized courts and try to predict case allocation to specialized
courts using a large set of firm and case characteristics including firm size, sector of
operation, and case type (reorganization vs liquidation). These characteristics should
account for potential differences in the type of company and the level of complexity of
different cases. As shown, none of the observable characteristics reported in Table 5
significantly predict case allocation to specialized courts within a city and year. Still, in
the empirical analysis we augment our specification with industry fixed effects and firm
size category fixed effects and show that the magnitude of our estimates is stable when
adding such controls.
       Finally, let us briefly discuss the role of year of acceptance fixed effects in these spec-
ifications. Comparing cases that started in the same year is particularly important when
studying the effect of specialized courts on case length. Since many cases in our dataset
are still ongoing as of January 2020, and many specialized courts were introduced to-
wards the end of our sample, one concern is that cases filed in specialized courts are more
likely to be right censored. Controlling for year of acceptance fixed effects deals with this
concern by exploiting variation across cases that enter our sample at the same time.
       Equation (2) is our main estimating equation for case-level outcomes. For court level
outcomes we use a similar specification in which the outcome variables ­ for example,
number of cases filed ­ are at the court level. Similarly to equation (2), this specification
exploits variation across courts ­ traditional vs specialized ­ that are subject to the same
city-level shocks.
  24
    Notice that in equation (2) the year of acceptance fixed effects is absorbed by the city fixed effects
interacted with year of acceptance fixed effects.


                                                   21
   Next, we present a specification to study the effect of specialized courts on the local
economy, intended as the economy of a prefecture-level city. When we focus on city-level
outcomes, we can not rely on the same within-city variation described above. For this
specification we therefore rely solely on the timing of the staggered introduction of courts
specialized in bankruptcy across Chinese cities as a source of identification. Thus, our
main specification is as follows:


                   yjt = j + t +  1(SpecializedCourt)jt + Xjt + jt                        (3)

   In this specification, 1(SpecializedCourt)jt is a dummy equal to one in the period
in which the first specialized court was introduced in a given city j , and for all the
periods thereafter, and zero otherwise. Notice that this specification compares a city
that introduced a specialized court with all other cities ­ including those that will never
introduce a specialized court during the period under study.
   The main concern with this specification is that the decision to introduce a specialized
court in a given city ­ and the timing of introduction ­ are not random. In particular, the
decision might be driven by local economic conditions that are also correlated with the
outcomes of interest. For example, specialized courts might be introduced in cities that
are experiencing negative economic shocks and therefore are in need of such courts in order
to deal with an increasing number of insolvencies among local firms. Alternatively, spe-
cialized courts might be introduced first in cities where local politicians can "afford" to be
stricter with financially distressed firms because the local economy is growing fast and can
absorb eventual layoffs. This type of correlations with pre-existing and contemporaneous
economic trends would bias our estimates of the effect of the introduction of specialized
courts on local economic outcomes such as number of firms or capital productivity.
   To explore the extent of this concern, in Table 4 we estimate a discrete time hazard
model that studies whether differences in economic trends at city level predict the tim-
ing of introduction of specialized courts across cities. We measure city-level economic
performance as the contemporaneous and lagged annual change in: Gross Regional Prod-
uct (GRP) per capita, number of firms, average size of firms (in employees) and share


                                             22
of manufacturing in local GDP. All changes in city-level observable characteristics are
standardized so to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. As shown,
contemporaneous and lagged changes in measures of local economic performance do not
predict the timing of court introduction.
       Although Table 4 eases the concern that the timing of introduction of specialized
courts is driven by the economic cycle, it cannot deal with potential unobservable city
characteristics that vary over time and may drive both the introduction of specialized
courts and the outcomes of interest. In the empirical analysis, we show that our results
are robust to augmenting equation (3) with city-level controls studied in Table 4. To
the extent that unobservable city-level characteristics are correlated with the observable
characteristics reported in Table 4, adding these controls to our specification should ease
this concern.

                                           [Table 4 here]

       In the last part of our analysis, we perform an event-study showing the evolution of
city-level outcomes around the introduction of the first specialized court in a given city.
Although this analysis is restricted ­ by construction ­ to cities that eventually introduced
a specialized court, it serves the purpose of documenting the timing of the city-level effects
and the absence of pre-existing trends in city-level outcomes.


4.2       Effect of Specialized Courts on Judicial Outcomes

       In this section we study the effect of the introduction of specialized courts on judicial
outcomes using case-level data. We start by presenting some basic stylized facts on case
length in Table 6. The table reports the average, median and standard deviation of case
duration measured from the day of acceptance to the closing date.25 The closing date
corresponds to the final approval of the reorganization plan in a reorganization, or the
closure of the case after (usually partial) repayment of creditors in a liquidation. These
statistics are computed based on the 1,039 cases that were closed as of January 2020.
  25
    There are 22 cases in our dataset for which the date of court acceptance is not available. For those
cases we use the date of filing as a proxy for the acceptance date. The median gap between filing date
and acceptance date in our data is 19 days.


                                                  23
   The average time in court for bankruptcy case in our sample is 594 days, or around
1.6 years. According to the World Bank Doing Business database, the average duration
of bankruptcy cases in the United States is around 1 year. There is large variation in
the data, with some cases being dealt with in under a month, while others take several
years (the case with longest duration in our sample is just under 8 years). On average,
reorganizations take around 25 percent less time in court than liquidations, while cases
transitioning from reorganization to liquidation (or vice versa) take on average more than
2 years. Average time in court is increasing with size of the debtor firm, with the only
exception of very large firms (above 5000 employees) which instead seem to emerge from
bankruptcy relatively quickly. Time in court is longer for manufacturing and construction
firms, while shorter for firms in the service sector such as hotels, restaurants and retail
firms. Bankruptcy cases of state owned firms and privately owned firms show similar
average duration.
   Table 6 also reports the average time in court for cases filed in traditional civil courts
versus specialized courts. As shown, the average time in traditional civil courts is 695
days, against the 337 in specialized courts. Of course, this difference in duration could be
driven by right-censoring in our data. Many specialized courts were introduced towards
the end of our sample. Thus, when we compare closed cases across courts, the average
duration in specialized courts is more likely to capture the selected sample of cases that
could be closed relatively quickly. In the empirical analysis that follows we will always
include year of acceptance fixed effects, which allow us to compare cases filed in different
courts in the same year, thus removing any confounding effect from right-censoring.
   Figure 9 reports the distribution of time in court for all cases in our sample (upper
graph) and then separately between cases filed in traditional civil courts and cases filed in
specialized courts (lower graph). The figure shows that the summary statistics reported
in Table 6 are not driven by extreme observations.

                                [Table 6 and Figure 9 here]

   After presenting summary statistics on the raw data, we study the effect of specialized
courts on judicial outcomes using the specifications presented in section 4.1. We start by

                                             24
focusing on the effect of the introduction of specialized courts on case duration. The results
are reported in Table 7. In column (1) we estimate an equation that only includes year of
acceptance fixed effects and a dummy capturing court specialization. As shown, cases in
specialized courts are closed around 78 days faster than cases entering in non-specialized
courts in the same year. This magnitude corresponds to 13 percent of the average case
duration in our sample. Because specialized courts are effectively a tribunal specialized in
bankruptcy cases that is added to an existing court, in column (2) we can add court fixed
effects to our specification, which capture any time invariant characteristics of each court.
This is the specification described by equation (1) in section 4.1. The coefficient on the
post-specialized court dummy reported in column (2) indicates that, after adjusting for
time invariant court characteristics and comparing cases started in the same year, we find
that the introduction of specialized courts decreases case duration by 174.2 days, around
30% of the average duration observed in our sample.26 In column (3) we show that this
result is robust to including firm observable characteristics such as size and sector, which
are meant to capture the level of complexity of the case.
       Next, in columns (4) and (5), we turn to the specification described in equation (2).
This specification includes city times year fixed effects, and thus allows us to compare cases
entering in the same year in different courts that are exposed to the same city-level shocks.
The coefficient on the post-specialized court dummy remains negative and significant, and
it increases in absolute value. After additionally controlling for firm characteristics, the
magnitude of the coefficient in column (5) indicates that cases dealt with by specialized
courts are closed around 210 days faster than those dealt with by non-specialized courts
in the same city and year. This corresponds to around 35% of the average case duration
observed in our sample.

                                           [Table 7 here]

       Next, we study whether the effect of specialization on case duration documented in
Table 7 is heterogeneous across types of cases ­ liquidations vs reorganizations ­ and for
  26
     Notice that the number of observations declines to 894, because many courts in our data only deal
with one bankruptcy case during the period under study and therefore get dropped adding court fixed
effects.


                                                 25
state-owned vs privately-owned firms. To this end, we estimate equations (1) and (2),
augmented with an interaction of the post-specialized court dummy with a dummy cap-
turing reorganizations in columns (1) and (2) and with a dummy capturing bankruptcies
of state-owned firms in columns (3) and (4), as well as the relative main effects.
   The results are reported in Table 8. Columns (1) and (2) show that the effect of intro-
ducing specialized courts on case duration is similar between liquidations and reorganiza-
tions. In particular, both types of cases experience a similar decline in duration following
the introduction of specialized courts, of the magnitude described in our discussion of
Table 7. On the other hand, the results reported in columns (3) and (4) indicate that
the effect of specialized courts on case duration is significantly larger for bankruptcies of
state-owned firms. In particular, our estimates indicate that bankruptcies of state-owned
firms handled by specialized courts take 506 days less than those handled by traditional
civil courts in the same city. For privately owned firms, the decline in case duration gen-
erated by specialized courts according to our estimates is of 198 days. This implies that
the introduction of specialized courts cut the average case duration for bankruptcies of
state-owned firms by 85 percent, while the decline for privately owned firms is 33 percent.
   Overall, the results presented in Tables 7 and 8 indicate that specialized courts are
significantly faster at resolving insolvency than traditional civil courts operating in the
same city and facing the same city-level shocks, especially when it comes to state-owned
firms. Quick resolution of SOE bankruptcies is consistent with specialized court judges
being less responsive to the political pressure of local party officials. The latter often tend
to delay the liquidation and keep in operation low-productivity and financially distressed
state-owned firms in order to contain unemployment, avoid social unrest and promote
their political careers.

                                        [Table 8 here]

   Next, we examine whether faster resolution of bankruptcies can be explained by the
improved human capital of judges appointed by specialized courts. To this end, we study
the effect of court specialization on judges' quality of education. The results are reported
in Table 9. The unit of observation in this table is a case-judge. Our main outcome

                                              26
variable to capture judge's quality of education is a dummy equal to one if the judge
has a master degree from an elite school, which include Project 985 universities and the
5 top professional law schools in China listed in section 3. We present results obtained
estimating equation (1) in columns (1) and (2), and equation (2) in columns (3) and
(4). All estimated coefficient on the post-specialized court dummy indicate that judges
hired in specialized courts are significantly more likely to be trained in elite schools. This
effect increases to almost 60 percent when we include city-times-year fixed effects and
firm-level controls in our most demanding specification in column (4). We also explore
potential heterogeneous effects in columns (5) to (8), though we find that judges with
higher education are equally likely to be assigned to reorganizations or liquidations, and to
bankruptcies of state-owned or privately owned firms. This suggests that, while specialized
courts select better-educated judges on average, there seems to be no ex-ante significant
differences in the educational background of the specialized judges handling SOE vs.
non-SOE bankruptcies.


                                           [Table 9 here]


    Finally, we study the effect of the introduction of specialized courts on the number of
bankruptcy filings by court. To this end, we create a balanced panel at court-year level
and estimate equation (2) at court-level.27 The results are reported in Table 10 and show
two main findings. First, courts that became specialized experience a relatively larger
increase in accepted bankruptcy cases relative to non-specialized courts. Notice that
our estimating equation controls for city fixed effects interacted with year fixed effects,
effectively comparing specialized to non-specialized courts subject to the same city-level
shocks. This is important to mitigate the potential concern that specialized courts are
introduced in cities that "expect" an increase in bankruptcy cases. The magnitude of the
estimated coefficient reported in column (1) indicates that the number of accepted cases
increased 23 percent faster in specialized courts than in non-specialized courts. Second,
  27
     For years in which no bankruptcy cases are recorded for a given court in our sample, we assign a
zero to the court-year observation. This explains the larger number of observations observed in Table 10
relative to Table 7.



                                                  27
we find that around two-thirds of the relative increase in accepted cases is driven by
liquidations, the remaining one-third by reorganizations.


                                            [Table 10 here]


4.3       The Effect of Specialized Courts on the Local Economy

       In section 4.2 we showed that the introduction of courts specialized in bankruptcy
had a positive effect on the efficiency of court enforcement and the average education
of judges in charge of resolving insolvency. In addition, we documented that specialized
courts are faster in dealing with bankruptcies of state-owned firms, which is consistent with
higher judicial independence from local governments. In this section we study whether
the introduction of specialized courts had an impact on the local economy, intended as
the economy of the prefecture level city. A more efficient bankruptcy system can promote
local development in several ways. First, by facilitating the liquidation of low-productivity
firms and favoring a quicker reallocation of their real assets and labor to other firms in
the economy. Second, faster bankruptcy resolution should increase the expected recovery
rate of creditors, promoting lending to firms that operate under specialized courts.
       In this section, we focus on three main real outcomes which are observable in our
data: firm entry, average firm productivity, and the local labor share in industries with
higher diffusion of "zombie" firms (or Z-industries). To study the effect of specialized
courts on city-level outcomes we estimate equation (3) discussed in section 4.1. In all
specifications we control for city and year fixed effects, as well as a large set of time-
varying characteristics capturing city size and economic development.28
       We start in Table 11 by presenting the results on firm entry and productivity. The
data to construct these outcomes is sourced from the China Statistical Yearbooks for
the period 2011 to 2017, and cover all industrial firms ­ including private and publicly-
traded firms ­ with annual sales above 20 million RMB operating in a given prefecture
level city.29 All regressions in this table are weighted by the number of firms observed
  28
     Controls include number of local firms, average number of employees in local firms, local GDP per
capita, labor share in manufacturing.
  29
     One limitation of the analysis of real effects is that the period for which data from the Statistical


                                                   28
in a city in the baseline year 2011. Column (1) shows that cities that introduced courts
specialized in bankruptcy experienced a faster increase in the entry of local industrial
firms. The magnitude of the coefficient indicates that entry was 3 percent faster in these
cities relative to those that did not introduce specialized courts. This correspond to 20
percent of a standard deviation in firm entry during the period under study.
    In columns (2) and (3) we focus on two crude proxies for average firm productivity
at city level: average product of capital as captured by the ratio of value added divided
by value of tangible assets (in logs) and return on assets (ROA), defined as firm profits
divided by value of total assets. Notice that our data reports the aggregate value of these
two variables at city-level, so these outcomes should be interpreted as a weighted average
of firm productivity. As shown, we find that cities that introduced courts specialized
in bankruptcy experience a 4.5 percent larger increase in average product of capital of
local firms relative to cities where insolvency is still resolved exclusively by civil courts.
The magnitude of the coefficient correspond to 8 percent of a standard deviation in the
outcome variable. Similarly, we find a large, positive and significant effect of specialized
courts on average return on assets. The magnitude of the estimated coefficient in column
(3) indicates that cities that introduced specialized courts experienced a 15.5 percent
larger increase in average profitability of local firms, which corresponds to around 20
percent of a standard deviation in the outcome variable.
    Next, in Table 12 we study the effect of specialized courts on the share of labor em-
ployed in "zombie" firms-intensive sectors. We define "zombie" firms following Caballero
et al. (2008). More specifically, we define a firm as zombie if two conditions are met.
First, the firm borrows at an interest rate that is 0.25 percentage points lower than the
hypothetical minimum interest rate it should pay given its debt structure.30 The second
condition is that the firm's productivity ­ as captured by Total Factor Productivity (TFP)
­ is below the median in its sector. Notice that both conditions need to be met for a firm
Yearbooks is available ends in 2017, while the case level data used in section 4.2 covers the period 2011
to 2019.
   30
      To construct the hypothetical minimum we use the minimum benchmark rate for each maturity class
set by the Central Bank of China (PBC) along with the amount of debt in each maturity class in the
firm's balance sheet.




                                                   29
to be defined as zombie. We source the information necessary to define zombie firms
from the China Stock Market and Accounting Research Database (CSMAR) dataset. Us-
ing this dataset ­ which only covers publicly-listed firms ­ we rank industries based on
the diffusion of zombie firms, and define industries above the median of this measure as
zombie-intensive industries, or Z-industries. Finally, we compute the city-level labor share
in Z-industries using data from the China Statistical Yearbooks, which cover employment
in both publicly listed and private firms.31
       The results are reported in Table 12. All regressions in this table are weighted by the
total number of workers observed in a city in the baseline year 2011. Column (1) shows
that cities that introduced courts specialized in bankruptcy experienced a 1.7 percentage
points larger decline in the share of local labor employed in Z-industries. This corre-
spond to around 18 percent of a standard deviation in the outcome variable. In column
(2) we exclude workers in agriculture when computing the labor share in Z-Industries,
because employment in agriculture tends to be poorly measured in the China Statistical
Yearbooks due to the high level of informality. In column (3) we restrict our attention
to non-financial (and non-agricultural) sectors. As shown, the magnitude of the point
estimates is very similar across columns, ranging between 1.5 and 1.7 percentage points,
and highly significant. The evidence presented in Table 12 indicates that a more efficient
and independent bankruptcy process favors a reallocation of labor from zombie-intensive
industries to the rest of the local economy.


                                        [Table 11 and 12 here]


       Finally, we perform an event-study exercise to show the evolution of city-level outcomes
around the introduction of the first specialized court in a given city. To this end, we use
the following specification:
  31
    Notice that the Statistical Yearbooks report information on employment across the 20 industrial
groups of the Chinese Sector Classification GB/T 4754-2002. Publicly listed firms instead are classified
based on the CSMAR industry classification system, which differentiates between 64 industries. We man-
ually matched the two classifications and aggregated the data from CSMAR by the 20 industry groups
used in the Statistical Yearbooks. Based on CSMAR data and the methodology to identify zombie firms
outlined above, the industries with higher than median share of zombie firms among publicly listed com-
panies are: finance, hotels and restaurants, construction, real estate, extractive industry, transportation,
water management and utilities.


                                                    30
                                                         +2
                                                                  k
                                    yjt = j + t +              k Djt + jt                                   (4)
                                                        k=-2

           k
    where Djt is a dummy equal to 1 if year t = k for city j , and captures the time relative
to the year of introduction of the first specialized court in city j , which we set at k = 0.
We include the 2 years prior to the introduction of the first specialized court and the 2
years after.32 The specification has calendar year and city fixed effects, denoted by t and
j , respectively, as well as the same set of time-varying city-level controls used in Tables
11 and 12. Standard errors are clustered at the city level. Notice that, differently from
Tables 11 and 12, this analysis is restricted ­ by construction ­ to cities that eventually
introduced a specialized court.33
    The objective of this exercise is to exploit the different timing of introduction of
specialized courts in different cities to document their impact on city-level outcomes in
a dynamic specification. The estimated coefficients k for all the outcomes studied in
Tables 11 and 12 are plotted in Figure 10. The results show that, within two years from
the introduction of the first court specialized in bankruptcy, cities experienced a relative
increase in firm entry and average capital productivity and profitability, and a relative
decline in the share of labor employed in Z-industries. The estimates are noisy due to the
small sample of cities introducing specialized courts used in this specification. However,
they provide suggestive evidence of a change in the trend in the outcomes of interest
after the introduction of the first specialized court. The effect is gradual for firm entry
and average product of capital, which become statistically significant at standard levels
two years after the introduction of the first specialized court. In the case of average
firm profitability and the labor share in Z-industries the effect is visible starting one year
after the introduction of the first court, potentially as a result of the swift liquidation of
  32
     We restrict our event study to this short window because many specialized courts are introduced
towards the end of the period for which data is available.
  33
     This is because the time relative to the introduction of the first specialized court can only be identified
for cities that introduced their first specialized court at some point within the period under study. Note
that in this type of specification there is no "pure" control group ­ intended as cities that never introduced
a specialized court ­ because all cities used in this event-study exercise are eventually treated within the
period under study.




                                                      31
unprofitable state-owned firms by the new courts.34
       Overall, the results presented in Tables 11, 12 and Figure 10 are consistent with
specialized courts fostering a faster liquidation of low-productivity state-owned firms,
which had a positive effect on entry and the average productivity of surviving firms.



5        Concluding Remarks

       In the last decade, China experienced a massive increase in corporate debt. Several
factors have contributed to this debt boom: the stimulus policies of 2009-2010 ­ which
fostered bank credit and promoted local government financing vehicles ­ , the development
of a corporate bond market, the fast growth of shadow banking.35 Academics and policy
makers have raised concerns about the risks associated with the Chinese credit boom and
the recent increase in insolvency.36 In addition, the Chinese central government expressed
concerns about the large number of "zombie" firms ­ low-productivity and often state-
owned companies kept in business by preferential credit lines ­ and recognized the lack
of efficient bankruptcy procedures that could facilitate their liquidation or restructuring.
Despite the increasing pressure on the Chinese insolvency resolution system, little is still
known about how bankruptcy works in China.
       This paper starts to close this gap in the literature by providing micro-based evidence
on bankruptcy resolution in China. First, it provides new stylized facts based on case-level
data on how firms go bankrupt in China. Second, it exploits the staggered introduction of
specialized bankruptcy courts and their co-existence with traditional civil courts in many
cities ­ to study their effect on judicial outcomes and the local economy. We find that
specialized courts select better trained judges which made insolvency resolution faster.
The effects are particularly strong for bankruptcies of state-owned firms, whose average
  34
      The different samples of cities used in Table 11 are Figure 10 explain why the magnitude of the
estimated coefficients reported in Table 11 does not correspond to the magnitudes that can be inferred
from the estimated coefficients plotted in Figure 10.
   35
      See, among others: Chong-en et al. (2016), Cong et al. (2019), Hachem and Song (2016), Chen et al.
(2020).
   36
      The corporate bond market experienced the first defaults by a privately owned firm in 2014, and by
a state-owned firm in 2015, followed by many others (Jin, Wang, and Zhang 2018). Local government
financing vehicles started to default on their loans (Gao, Ru, and Tang 2017).



                                                  32
duration was cut by 506 days (85%) with the introduction of specialized courts. At
city-level, we find that the introduction of specialized courts generated faster entry, an
increase in average capital productivity of surviving firms and a decline in the labor share
in industries characterized by higher presence of zombie firms. Our findings indicate that
the introduction of specialized courts made insolvency resolution in China more efficient,
professionally manged, and less influenced by local governments.




                                            33
References
(2007). "Corruption in Judicial Systems". In D. Rodriguez and L. Ehrichs (Eds.), Global
  Corruption Report. Washington D.C.: Transparency International, Cambridge Univer-
  sity Press.

Agarwal, S., G. Amromin, I. Ben-David, and S. Dinc (2018). The politics of foreclosures.
  The Journal of Finance 73 (6), 2677­2717.

Bernstein, S., E. Colonnelli, and B. Iverson (2019). Asset allocation in bankruptcy. The
  Journal of Finance 74 (1), 5­53.

Booth, C. D. (2008). The 2006 prc enterprise bankruptcy law: The wait is finally over.
  SAcLJ 20, 275.

Caballero, R. J., T. Hoshi, and A. K. Kashyap (2008). Zombie lending and depressed
  restructuring in Japan. The American Economic Review 98 (5), 1943­1977.

Carvalho, D. (2014). The real effects of government-owned banks: Evidence from an
  emerging market. The Journal of Finance 69 (2), 577­609.

Chen, Z., Z. He, and C. Liu (2020). The financing of local government in China: Stimulus
 loan wanes and shadow banking waxes. Journal of Financial Economics .

Chong-en, B., C.-T. Hsieh, and S. Z. Michael (2016). The long shadow of a fiscal expan-
 sion. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , 15­16.

Claessens, S. and L. Klapper (2005). "Bankruptcy around the World: Explanations of Its
  Relative Use". American Law and Economics Review 7 (1), 253­283.

Cong, L. W., H. Gao, J. Ponticelli, and X. Yang (2019). Credit allocation under economic
  stimulus: Evidence from China. The Review of Financial Studies 32 (9), 3412­3460.

Coviello, D., A. Ichino, and N. Persico (2014). Time allocation and task juggling. Amer-
  ican Economic Review 104 (2), 609­23.

Dakolias, M. (1999). "Court Performance around the World: a Comparative Perspective",
 Volume 23. World Bank Publications.

Djankov, S., O. Hart, C. McLiesh, and A. Shleifer (2008). "Debt Enforcement around the
  World". Journal of Political Economy 116 (6), 1105­1149.

Faccio, M. (2006). Politically connected firms. American economic review 96 (1), 369­386.

Faccio, M., R. W. Masulis, and J. J. McConnell (2006). Political connections and corpo-
  rate bailouts. The Journal of Finance 61 (6), 2597­2635.

Fan, J., J. Huang, and N. Zhu (2013). "Institutions, Ownership Structures, and Distress
  Resolution in China". Journal of Corporate Finance 23 (1), 71­87.

Fisman, R. (2001). Estimating the value of political connections. American economic
  review 91 (4), 1095­1102.



                                           34
Gao, H., H. Ru, and D. Y. Tang (2017). Subnational debt of China: The politics-finance
 nexus.

Hachem, K. C. and Z. M. Song (2016). Liquidity regulation and unintended financial
  transformation in China.

Henderson, K. (2007). "The Rule of Law and Judicial Corruption in China: Half-Way
  over the Great Wall". In D. Rodriguez and L. Ehrichs (Eds.), Global Corruption Re-
  port: Corruption in Judicial Systems. Washington D.C.: Transparency International,
  Cambridge University Press.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Z. M. Song (2015). Grasp the large, let go of the small: The transfor-
  mation of the state sector in China. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity .

Huang, Y., M. Pagano, and U. Panizza (2016). Public debt and private firm funding:
 Evidence from Chinese cities.

INSOL (2018). Prc enterprise bankruptcy law and practice in China. Technical report.

Iverson, B. (2017). Get in line: Chapter 11 restructuring in crowded bankruptcy courts.
  Management Science 64 (11), 5370­5394.

Iverson, B. C., J. Madsen, W. Wang, and Q. Xu (2018). Learning by doing: Judge
  experience and bankruptcy outcomes. Available at SSRN 3084318 .

Jin, S., W. Wang, and Z. Zhang (2018). The value and real effects of implicit guarantees.

Khwaja, A. I. and A. Mian (2005). Do lenders favor politically connected firms? Rent
 provision in an emerging financial market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (4),
 1371­1411.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1997). "Legal Determinants
  of External Finance". Journal of Finance 52 (3), 1131­1150.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1998). "Law and Finance".
  Journal of Political Economy 106 (6), 1113­1155.

Mian, A., A. Sufi, and F. Trebbi (2010). The political economy of the US mortgage default
 crisis. American Economic Review 100 (5), 1967­98.

M¨
 uller, K. (2019). Busy bankruptcy courts and the cost of credit. Working Paper .

Ng, S. and W. Zhou (2019). "China Embraces Bankruptcy, U.S.-Style, to Cushion a
  Slowing Economy". The Wall Street Journal , November 6.

Ponticelli, J. and L. S. Alencar (2016). Court enforcement, bank loans, and firm in-
  vestment: evidence from a bankruptcy reform in Brazil. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131 (3), 1365­1413.

Rodano, G., N. Serrano-Velarde, and E. Tarantino (2011).         "The Causal Effect of
  Bankruptcy Law on the Cost of Finance". Mimeo .

Safavian, M. and S. Sharma (2007). "When Do Creditor Rights Work?". Journal of
  Comparative Economics 35 (3), 484­508.

                                           35
Sapienza, P. (2004). The effects of government ownership on bank lending. Journal of
  financial economics 72 (2), 357­384.

Vig, V. (2013). Access to Collateral and Corporate Debt Structure: Evidence from a
  Natural Experiment. Journal of Finance 68 (3), 881­928.

Visaria, S. (2009). "Legal Reform and Loan Repayment: The Microeconomic Impact
  of Debt Recovery Tribunals in India". American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics 1 (3), 59­81.

Wang, H., H. Wang, L. Wang, and H. Zhou (2016). Shadow banking: China's dual-track
 interest rate liberalization.




                                        36
Figures and Tables

           Figure 1: Number of bankruptcy cases (2011-2019)


                                500
                                400
                                300
                   # of Cases
                                200
                                100
                                0




                                      2011   2012   2013   2014        2015   2016   2017   2018   2019




Notes: Number of bankruptcy cases by year of acceptance, 2011 to 2019. Source: authors' calculations using data from
the "National Corporate Bankruptcy Information Disclosure Platform".




                                                                  37
         Figure 2: Number of bankruptcy cases by year and case or firm characteristics (2011-2019)
                                                     (a) by case type                                                                                                                     (b) by firm size




                                                                                                                                                        100
                       100




                                                                                                                                                        80
                       80




                                                                                                                                                        60
                       60




                                                                                                                                                      Pct
                 Pct




                                                                                                                                                        40
                       40




                                                                                                                                                        20
                       20




                                                                                                                                                        0
38




                       0




                              2011    2012            2013       2014                 2015       2016             2017   2018                  2019               2011     2012          2013     2014        2015        2016         2017     2018    2019


                                                             Liquidation                        Reorganization                                                      below 50          50 - 100    100 - 500           500 - 1000        1000 - 5000    above 5000



                                                        (c) by sector                                                                                                                   (d) by ownership
                       100




                                                                                                                                                            100
                       80




                                                                                                                                                            80
                       60




                                                                                                                                                            60
                 Pct




                                                                                                                                                      Pct
                       40




                                                                                                                                                            40
                       20




                                                                                                                                                            20
                       0




                             2011    2012            2013       2014                2015        2016              2017   2018                 2019
                                                                                                                                                            0




                                     Manufacturing           Construction and RE                        Others           Wholesale & retail
                                                                                                                                                                    2011       2012        2013    2014        2015        2016        2017     2018     2019

                                     Mining                  Electricity, gas, & water supply           Finance          Hotel & restaurants
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Non-SOE                 SOE



     Notes: Number of bankruptcy cases by year of acceptance, 2011 to 2019. Source: authors' calculations using data from the "National Corporate Bankruptcy
     Information Disclosure Platform". In panel (a), cases switching between types are classified based on their initial filing.
       Figure 3: Geographical distribution of bankruptcy cases




                                                       Number of cases
                                                           (57,776]
                                                           (46,57]
                                                           (24.5,46]
                                                           (12.5,24.5]
                                                           [3,12.5]
                                                           no cases




Notes: The Figure shows the total number of bankruptcy cases filed in each Chinese province between 2011 and 2019.
Source: authors' calculations using data from the "National Corporate Bankruptcy Information Disclosure Platform".




  Figure 4: Bankruptcy cases and number of firms, by province

                                                                                                                                                 Jiangsu
                                                       4




                                                                                                                                                     Zhejiang
                   Log of Avg. Number of Case per yr
                                                       3




                                                                                                                                        Guangdong


                                                                                                   Shanxi

                                                                                                                          Hubei                            Chongqing
                                                       2




                                                                                                                                      Fujian                Tianjin    Shanghai
                                                                                                                        Anhui
                                                                                                                   Sichuan
                                                                                                                                          Shandong
                                                                                                Yunnan                     Liaoning
                                                                                                                           Henan
                                                                                                           Jilin                                        Beijing
                                                                                          Xinjiang Guangxi
                                                                                                    Guizhou

                                                                                      Ningxia                   Jiangxi  Hebei
                                                       1




                                                                                                 Heilongjiang
                                                                                                    Inner Mongolia    Hunan

                                                                         Hainan
                                                                                                         Shannxi

                                                                                     Qinghai


                                                                                  Gansu
                                                       0




                                                           4                                   6                      8                                                      10
                                                                                           Log of Avg. Number of Firm per yr



Notes: The Figure shows in a scatterplot the correlation between the average number of firms and the average number
of bankruptcy cases observed in each province. Source: China Statistical Yearbooks (number of firms) and the "National
Corporate Bankruptcy Information Disclosure Platform" (number of bankruptcies).




                                                                                                               39
               Figure 5: Number of bankruptcy cases in China


                                     10000
                    Number of bankruptcy cases, accepted
                     2000     4000   0  6000       8000




                                                                    1990    1995       2000         2005     2010   2015



Notes: The Figure shows the total number of bankruptcy cases accepted in Chinese courts between 1989 and 2017 according
to the aggregate statistics of the China Supreme Court (INSOL 2018).




         Figure 6: Introduction of specialized courts over time
                                     7
                                     6
                    Numbeer of Courts
                     3    4      5   2
                                     1
                                     0




                                                           2007q1      2009q1      2011q1        2013q1    2015q1   2017q1



Notes: The Figure shows the number of new courts specialized in bankruptcy introduced in each quarter between 2007Q1
and 2017Q4. We only count the first specialized court introduced in each city (for cities that introduced more than one).




                                                                                            40
Figure 7: Cases in traditional vs specialized courts (2011-2019)



                                   100
                                   80
                    Pct of Cases
                                   60
                                   40
                                   20
                                   0




                                                      2011   2012     2013      2014        2015     2016      2017       2018   2019


                                                                                       Traditional Court
                                                                                       Specialized Court




Notes: The Figure shows the percentage of total bankruptcy cases entering in traditional civil courts vs specialized courts
by year between 2011 and 2019.




Figure 8: Allocation of cases around introduction of specialized
courts
                                          .8
                                          .6
                                    share of cases
                                          .4
                                          .2
                                          0




                                                     -10             -5                    0                    5                10
                                                               quarter relative to first specialized court introduction



Notes: The Figure shows that average share of cases allocated to specialized courts in each city, by quarter relative to the
introduction of the first specialized court in that city (which we set as t = 0).




                                                                                       41
                       Figure 9: Distribution of Time in Court
                                  .15
                                  .1
                           Fraction
                                  .05
                                  0




                                        0         2                 4                  6         8
                                                          Time in court (years)
                                  .4
                                  .3
                           Fraction
                              .2  .1
                                  0




                                        0        2                 4                   6         8
                                                 Time in Court (red: specialized courts)



Notes: The Figure shows the distribution of the variable "time in court", which captures the duration of each case in years.
Panel (a) pools all closed cases in our sample. Panel (b) differentiates between cases initiated in traditional civil courts vs
specialized courts.




                                                               42
Figure 10: Average Firm Productivity Relative to Court Intro-
duction - Event Study
                                                      (a) Firm entry                                                           (b) log (Output/Capital)

                                                                                                                   .15
                                          .1
           Coefficient estimates and 90% CI




                                                                                    Coefficient estimates and 90% CI
                                                                                                                   .1
                                          .05




                                                                                                                   .05
                                          0




                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                   -.05
                                          -.05




                                                 -2   -1      0        1   2                                              -2        -1      0      1      2



                                                      (c) log ROA                                                         (d) L share in Z-industries
                                          .15




                                                                                                                   .01
           Coefficient estimates and 90% CI




                                                                                    Coefficient estimates and 90% CI
                                          .1




                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                   -.01
                                          .05




                                                                                                                   -.02
                                          0




                                                                                                                   -.03
                                          -.05




                                                 -2   -1      0        1   2                                              -2        -1      0      1      2




Notes: This figure reports the point estimates and confident intervals obtained estimating equation (4). The sample is
restricted to cities that introduced specialized courts at some point between 2011 and 2017.




                                                                               43
Table 1: Total number of cases by case type and firm character-
istics
                                                              Num of Cases                                Percent
                                                                                   Case Type
 Liquidation                                                       1550                                     76.69
 Reorganization                                                     323                                     15.98
 Both                                                               148                                      7.32
                                                                                   Firm Type
 Number of Employees:
 Below 50                                                          1374                                     67.99
 50 - 100                                                          265                                      13.11
 100 - 500                                                         294                                      14.55
 500 - 1000                                                         54                                       2.67
 1000 - 5000                                                        23                                       1.14
 Above 5000                                                         11                                       0.54
 Ownership:
 Non-SOE                                                           1882                                     93.12
 SOE                                                                139                                      6.88
 Sector:
 Mining                                                              56                                      2.77
 Manufacturing                                                      927                                     45.87
 Electricity, gas, & water supply                                    56                                     2.77
 Construction                                                       100                                     4.95
 Wholesale & retail                                                 156                                      7.72
 Hotel & restaurants                                                 45                                      2.23
 Finance                                                             53                                      2.62
 Real Estate                                                        255                                     12.62
 Small sectors(<2%)                                                 165                                     8.16
 Others                                                             208                                     10.29
 Total number of cases: 2,021
 Notes: Source: authors' calculations using data from the "National Corporate Bankruptcy Information Disclosure Plat-
form". Two cases have missing employment information in the raw data.




                                                        44
                          Table 2: Applicants by case type
                                                                              (1)

Applicant                                       Percent(%)                                         # of cases

                                                                         Liquidation
Creditor
  Non-Bank                                         63.53                                               627
  Bank                                              7.50                                                74
Debtor                                             28.98                                               286
Total                                                                                                  987

                                                                        Reorganization
Creditor
  Non-Bank                                         34.21                                               65
  Bank                                              6.32                                               12
Debtor                                             59.47                                               113
Total                                                                                                  190

                                                                             Both
Creditor
  Non-Bank                                         38.89                                               42
  Bank                                              5.56                                                6
Debtor                                             55.56                                                60
Total                                                                                                  108
  Notes: Source: authors' calculations using data from the "National Corporate Bankruptcy Information Disclosure
  Platform".




                                 Table 3: Recovery Rates


Creditors:                                          Average Recovery Rate                          # of cases

  Secured creditors                                          88.9%                                     94
  Labor claims                                               94.7%                                     94
  Tax authority claims                                       82.0%                                     94
  Ordinary unsecured creditors                               13.3%                                     94
  Notes: Source: authors' calculations using data from the "National Corporate Bankruptcy Information Disclosure
  Platform".




                                                     45
Table 4: Introduction of Specialized Courts and City-level Char-
acteristics
City-level characteristics:
                                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)

 log (GRP per capita)t             -0.014
                                  (0.098)
 log (GRP per capita)t-1                      -0.112
                                             (0.110)
 log (N Firms)t                                           -0.165
                                                         (0.119)
 log (N Firms)t-1                                                    0.005
                                                                    (0.153)
 log (Average Firm Size)t                                                       0.096
                                                                               (0.184)
 log (Average Firm Size)t-1                                                                -0.112
                                                                                          (0.153)
 (Manuf GDP share)t                                                                                    -0.088
                                                                                                      (0.094)
 (Manuf GDP share)t-1                                                                                             -0.039
                                                                                                                 (0.099)

Observations                       1,889      1,887       1,897      1,884      1,896      1,850       1,891      1,889
Notes: Cox model with time-varying observable city characteristics. Significance level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         46
Table 5: Case allocation Across Specialized vs
Traditional Courts
                                                              (1)
 Case and firm characteristics                1(Case Filed in Specialized Court)

 Case type:
 1(Reorganization)                                            0.00112
                                                              (0.0341)
 Firm size dummies:
 50-99,                                                         0.117
                                                               (0.118)
 100-499                                                       -0.0365
                                                              (0.0390)
 500-999                                                        0.0541
                                                              (0.0754)
 1000-4999                                                       0.240
                                                               (0.201)
 Above 5000                                                    -0.0136
                                                              (0.0321)
 Firm sector dummies:
 Mining                                                        -0.0494
                                                              (0.0772)
 Manufacturing                                                  0.0269
                                                              (0.0362)
 Electricity, gas, & water supply                              -0.0804
                                                              (0.0846)
 Construction                                                  -0.0718
                                                              (0.0573)
 Wholesale & retail                                             0.0334
                                                              (0.0493)
 Transport & storage                                           -0.0204
                                                              (0.0967)
 Hotels & restaurants                                          -0.0472
                                                              (0.0764)
 Information technology                                        -0.0155
                                                              (0.0826)
 Finance                                                       -0.0669
                                                              (0.0676)
 Real Estate                                                  0.00554
                                                              (0.0467)
 Business services                                               0.121
                                                               (0.190)
 Research & technical services                                  0.0220
                                                              (0.0825)
 Public facilities management                                    0.137
                                                               (0.136)
 Education                                                       0.209
                                                               (0.375)
 Culture, sport and entertainment                               0.0539
                                                               (0.113)
 Sector code not reported                                      -0.0182
                                                               (0.110)

 Observations                                                   1,336
 R-squared                                                      0.467
 Notes: The outcome variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the case was filed in a specialized
court. The sample is restricted to cities that have both specializd and traditional courts.
Regression includes year and city fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent (Huber-
                                         47 Significance level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05,
White) standard errors reported in brackets.
* p<0.1
Table 6: Time in Court by Case, Firm and Court Characteristics

                                      Mean       Median   Std Dev     1%     99%    # of non-missing ob
 Time Interval                        594.3       440        491       10    2071          1039
                                                                 By Case Type
 Liquidation                          599.6        429       512        9    2115           771
 Reorganization                       445.0        363       291       10    1322           152
 Both                                 754.5        675       503      128    2357           116
                                                       By Firm Size (number of employees)
 Below 50                             518.6        362       472      10     1990           698
 50 - 100                             750.0        699       458       29    1793           142
 100 - 500                            766.9        626       508       10    2511           160
 500 - 1000                           886.8        866       625        3    2194            17
 1000 - 5000                          634.3        458       521      174    2149            15
 Above 5000                           246.7        303       142       71     460             7
                                                                 By Firm Sector
 Mining                           611.0            486       469      82     1840            19
 Manufacturing                    631.6            505       498      30     1990           540
 Electricity, gas, & water supply 590.9            396       530       69    2357            34
 Construction                     630.5            437       514        1    2149           44
 Wholesale & retail               434.2            342       382       9     1548            84
 Hotel & restaurants              450.6            234       442      49     1553            16
 Finance                          493.3            338       429      77     1575            22
 Real Estate                      624.3            458       486      13     2880            89
 Small sectors(<2%)               669.4            487       558        4    2511            77
 Others                           485.6            363       457       21    2071           114
                                                                    By Court
 Traditional                          695.6        596       510       29    2149           745
 Specialized                          337.7        249       320        4    1548           294
                                                                 By Ownership
 POE                                  594.3        443       490       17    2071           973
 SOE                                  594.9        369       519        3    2149            66
 Notes: Time in court captures the time from case acceptance by the court to case closing (in days). Sample restricted
to cases that were closed as of December 2019. Source: authors' calculations using data from the "National Corporate
Bankruptcy Information Disclosure Platform".




                                                         48
                Table 7: Time in Court for Bankruptcy Cases

 outcome:                                                       Case duration (in days)
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)

 1(Specialized Court)               -78.25***         -174.2***        -161.8***         -219.2***        -210.7***
                                     (21.08)           (53.49)          (54.66)           (66.37)          (67.94)

 Observations                          1,039             894               887              810               802
 R-squared                             0.512            0.719             0.728            0.730             0.734
 Year Accept FE                          y                y                 y                n                 n
 Court FE                                n                y                 y                y                 y
 Sector FE                               n                n                 y                n                 y
 Firm size FE                            n                n                 y                n                 y
 City FE × Year Accept FE                n                n                 n                y                 y
 Notes: The unit of observation is a case. The time period is 2011 to 2019. Heteroskedasticity-consistent (Huber-White)
standard errors reported in brackets. Significance level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                         49
Table 8: Time in Court for Bankruptcy Cases: Heterogeneous
Effects by Case Type and Firm Ownership

 outcome:                                                               Case duration (in days)
                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)

 1(Specialized Court)                                -166.4***         -213.2***        -147.0***         -197.6***
                                                      (55.01)           (68.68)          (54.61)           (67.57)
 1(Specialized Court) × 1(Reorganization)              120.0             109.8
                                                      (106.8)           (140.9)
 1(Reorganization)                                     -90.33            -59.14
                                                      (65.21)           (71.79)
 1(Specialized Court) × 1(SOE)                                                           -282.0**          -308.2*
                                                                                          (110.2)          (162.6)
 1(SOE)                                                                                    59.14            55.07
                                                                                          (88.62)          (141.3)

 Observations                                           887               802               887               802
 R-squared                                             0.729             0.735             0.730             0.736
 Year Accept FE                                          y                 n                 y                 n
 Court FE                                                y                 y                 y                 y
 Sector FE                                               y                 y                 y                 y
 Firm size FE                                            y                 y                 y                 y
 City FE × Year Accept FE                                n                 y                 n                 y
 Notes: The unit of observation is a case. The time period is 2011 to 2019. Heteroskedasticity-consistent (Huber-White)
standard errors reported in brackets. Significance level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                         50
                                                          Table 9: Judge Education

      outcome:                                                                                1(Elite Law School)
                                                        (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)

      1(Specialized Court)                           0.310***     0.308***      0.592***     0.590***     0.584***     0.582***      0.591***     0.589***
                                                     (0.0328)     (0.0326)      (0.0465)     (0.0478)     (0.0474)      (0.0486)     (0.0466)     (0.0480)
      1(Specialized Court) × 1(Reorganization)                                                             0.0877        0.0652
                                                                                                          (0.0977)       (0.108)
      1(Reorganization)                                                                                   -0.115**     -0.143***
                                                                                                          (0.0521)      (0.0528)
      1(Specialized Court) × 1(SOE)                                                                                                   0.0643         0.0679
                                                                                                                                     (0.0927)      (0.0961)
      1(SOE)                                                                                                                          -0.0103       -0.0265
                                                                                                                                     (0.0735)      (0.0730)

      Observations                                     1,255        1,249         1,127        1,122        1,127        1,122         1,127        1,122
51




      R-squared                                        0.176        0.206         0.530        0.537        0.533        0.542         0.530        0.537
      Year Accept FE                                     y            y             y            y            y            y             y            y
      Sector FE                                          n            y             n            y            n            y             n            y
      Firm size FE                                       n            y             n            y            n            y             n            y
      City FE                                            n            n             y            y            y            y             y            y
      City FE × Year Accept FE                           n            n             y            y            y            y             y            y
      Notes: The unit of observation is a judge-case. The time period is 2011 to 2019. Heteroskedasticity-consistent (Huber-White) standard errors reported in
     brackets. Significance level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                    Table 10: Number of Cases at Court Level

 outcome:                                                           log (1 + number of cases)
                                              all cases                liquidations                 reorganizations
                                                 (1)                        (2)                           (3)

 1(Specialized Court)                        0.229***                    0.183***                        0.0665*
                                             (0.0660)                    (0.0600)                        (0.0374)

 Observations                                  3,285                       3,285                          3,285
 R-squared                                     0.598                       0.619                          0.381
 Court FE                                        y                           y                              y
 City FE × Year Accept FE                        y                           y                              y
 Notes: The unit of observation is a court. The time period is 2011 to 2019. Heteroskedasticity-consistent (Huber-White)
standard errors reported in brackets. Significance level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                          52
Table 11: Real Effects: Firm Entry, Average Capital Productiv-
ity, and ROA

 outcome:                               Firm Entry                     log(Output/Capital)                        log(ROA)
                                            (1)                                (2)                                    (3)

 1(Specialized Court)                     0.0310**                             0.0449**                           0.155***
                                          (0.0137)                             (0.0181)                           (0.0357)

 Observations                               1,989                                 1,989                              1,915
 R-squared                                  0.691                                 0.892                              0.771
 Year FE                                      y                                     y                                  y
 City FE                                      y                                     y                                  y
 City-level controls                          y                                     y                                  y
 Notes: The unit of observation is a city. The time period is 2011 to 2017. Observations weighted by number of firms
operating in each city in the baseline year 2011. Standard errors clustered at the city-level reported in brackets. Significance
level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




          Table 12: Labor Share in Zombie-intensive industries
                                             (1)                          (2)                          (3)
                                     L share Z-Industries        L share Z-Industries         L share Z-Industries
      sectors:                                all                   ex: agriculture          ex: agriculture, finance

      1(After Special Court)               -0.0174***                  -0.0150***                    -0.0168***
                                            (0.00476)                   (0.00458)                     (0.00516)

      Observations                            1,941                       1,933                         1,932
      R-squared                               0.906                       0.904                         0.907
      Year FE                                   y                           y                             y
      City FE                                   y                           y                             y
      City-level controls                       y                           y                             y
     Notes: The unit of observation is a city. The time period is 2011 to 2017. Observations weighted by number
    of workers in each city in the baseline year 2011. Standard errors clustered at the city-level reported in brackets.
    Significance level: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                              53
