                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE SENSITIVITY OF CASH SAVINGS TO THE COST OF CAPITAL

                                       Viral V. Acharya
                                         Soku Byoun
                                         Zhaoxia Xu

                                      Working Paper 27517
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27517


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We thank Heitor Almeida for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Viral V. Acharya, Soku Byoun, and Zhaoxia Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Sensitivity of Cash Savings to the Cost of Capital
Viral V. Acharya, Soku Byoun, and Zhaoxia Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 27517
July 2020
JEL No. G32,G35

                                         ABSTRACT

We show theoretically and empirically that in the presence of a time-varying cost of capital
(COC), firms have a hedging motive to reduce the overall COC over time by saving cash when
COC is relatively low. The sensitivity of cash savings to COC is especially pronounced with
respect to the cost of equity and for firms with greater correlation between COC and financing
needs for future investments. Both financially constrained and unconstrained firms respond to
low COC by saving cash out of external capital issuance in excess of current financial needs.


Viral V. Acharya                                Zhaoxia Xu
Stern School of Business                        School of Banking and Finance
New York University                             UNSW Business School
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65                  Sydney NSW Australia 2052
New York, NY 10012                              zhaoxia.xu@unsw.edu.au
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Soku Byoun
Hankamer School of Business
Baylor University
One Bear Place #98004
Waco, TX 76798
USA
soku_byoun@baylor.edu
1.       Introduction
Capital market frictions make external capital costlier than internally generated funds, which

may lead to suboptimal investment decisions (Myers (1984)). While the literature has sug-

gested that firms mitigate such external financing constraints by saving cash from internal

cash flows, cash savings from external capital are underexplored.1 Yet, we find that firms in

the United States save 35 cents from each dollar of equity capital raised compared to 20 cents

from each dollar of internal cash flows. Moreover, external equity issuance alone explains

16%, while internal cash flows explain only 4%, of corporate cash savings. Intuitively, with

time-varying cost of capital (COC), firms are likely to benefit from issuing external capi-

tal and saving when COC is relatively low. However, how COC affects firms' cash savings

behavior is not well understood.

      In this paper, we show that a firm's cash saving is sensitive to COC, and that this

sensitivity is driven by the firm's need to hedge against raising external capital at a higher

cost for future investments (hedging motive). Firms save to lower the overall COC in the

presence of time-varying COC. Our theoretical model suggests that firms respond to presently

low levels of COC by issuing excess external capital and hoarding cash if they anticipate

external financing needs for future investments. Saving cash by raising external capital is

costly. Nonetheless, firms choose their optimal savings to balance the current COC and the

expected COC for future investments. In particular, firms save more when (i) the current

COC is low and (ii) they face high correlation between COC and financing needs for future
  1
   See, among others, Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004), Acharya et al. (2007), Han and Qiu (2007),
Bates et al. (2009), Chang et al. (2014), and Qiu and Wan (2015).



                                                   1
investments.

       To test these predictions, we estimate COC by the weighted average cost of capital. The

cost of equity (COE) is estimated by the implied cost of capital which is the internal rate of

return obtained by equating the stock price to the present value of future cash flow forecasts

by analysts and the cost of debt (COD) by actual yield on the debt carried by the firm.2 We

show that the average cash holdings of firms are negatively associated with the average COC

over the 35-year sample period (Figure 1). Moreover, firms save significantly more when

the COC is lower relative to its historical average (Figure 2) and when they expect greater

future investments (Figure 3). The empirical results also show that firms save significantly

more from external capital when their COC decreases.

       We measure a firm's hedging motive as the correlation coefficient between COC and its

external finance dependence based on the standard proxies used in the literature. A high

correlation indicates that the firm faces higher COC when it needs more external capital.

Consistent with the predictions of our model, the results show that firms' cash savings from

external capital are more sensitive to COC when their hedging needs are greater. Firms with

greater hedging needs issue significantly more external capital in excess of current financial

needs when COC is relatively low. Future investment needs also influence the sensitivity of

cash savings to COC, especially for those with high hedging motives. These findings support

our perspective on corporate hedging that firms save to hedge their future investments against

high COC.
   2
    Claus and Thomas (2001) and Fama and French (2002) use the implied cost of capital (ICC) to measure
equity premium; Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) and Lee, So, and Wang (2020) use the ICC to predict
stock market return; Burgstahler, Hail, and Leuz (2006), Botosan and Plumlee (2005), Hughes, Liu, and Liu
(2009) Frank and Shen (2016), Xu (2020), and Byoun, Ng, and Wu (2016) use the ICC to estimate the cost
of equity.


                                                   2
   When comparing the relative importance of equity and debt as sources of external capital,

we find that firms save cash significantly more from equity issues (35 cents from each dollar

of equity raised) relative to debt issues (6 cents from each dollar of debt raised). Moreover,

firms' cash savings are much more sensitive to COE than COD.

   Our results are robust to alternative COC measures and to adjustments for potential

measurement errors. To address the endogeneity concern that cash savings may affect COC,

we adopt an identification strategy that uses Regulation Fair Disclosure (Reg FD) effective

in 2000 as an exogenous shock to COC and conduct the difference-in-difference analysis.

Reg FD reduces COC by leveling the information playing field, especially for firms with

high market-to-book ratios or high R&D expenditures relative to other firms as shown in

Chen et al. (2010). By exploiting the cross-sectional variation in the impact of Reg FD

on COC, we show that an increase in the sensitivity of cash savings to external capital for

firms experiencing a larger decline in COC compared to firms with a smaller decline in COC

following Reg FD.

   We then investigate whether financial constraints explain the sensitivity of cash savings

to COC. We find that both financially constrained and unconstrained firms save more in

response to low COC and they both save more from external capital than from internal cash

flows. Almeida et al. (2004) suggest that financially constrained firms save from cash flows

to mitigate underinvestment due to financial constraints. Our findings suggest that firms

save not just from cash flows to mitigate the effect of financial constraints, but from external

capital to hedge against higher financing costs for future investments. Saving from external

capital when COC is relative low reduces underinvestment due to higher COC in the future.


                                               3
   We also explore alternative theories that might explain the sensitivity of cash savings to

COC. The most plausible alternative is the market timing motive which suggests that firms

save from equity issue proceeds to take advantage of overvalued stock (Alti (2006), Kim

and Weisbach (2008), Bates, Kahle, and Stulz (2009), and Hertzel and Li (2010)). External

finance dependent firms are known to be particularly sensitive to market timing for their

equity issuance decisions (Lamont et al. (2001) and Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003)). Thus,

according to the market timing hypothesis, external finance dependent firms are more likely

to save from equity issue proceeds when COC is lower. Using several proxies for external

finance dependence, we do not find support for the market timing motive in explaining our

results.

   Keynes (1936) suggests that the main purpose of precautionary cash savings is to in-

sulate the firm from external finance by saving from internal cash flows. Thus, the pre-

cautionary motive of Keynes does not predict that firms save cash out of external capital

issuance when the COC is low as we document. However, McLean (2011) shows that the

precautionary motive--measured as R&D, cash flow volatility, dividend payout, and their

principal component--explains cash savings from equity issue proceeds. Accordingly, we

examine whether firms with greater precautionary motives save more from external capital

when COC is relatively low. Although the precautionary motive has a positive effect on

cash savings, it does not account for the sensitivity of cash savings to COC. The effects of

hedging motive remain significant for both high and low precautionary motive firms.




                                             4
2.      Related Literature
Previous empirical studies raise challenges for existing theories of corporate cash holdings.

DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Stulz (2010) argue that the vast majority of firms with attractive

market-timing opportunities fail to issue stocks and many mature firms issue stocks without

apparent financial difficulties. Moreover, Dittmar et al. (2019) suggest that the existing

theories fail to explain the bulk of the within-firm variation of cash savings. We show that

firms save to reduce the overall COC by transferring financial resources to future states with

higher COC. Accordingly, the market timing (to take advantage of overvalued stock) and

the precautionary motive (to meet uncertain contingencies) are not sufficient conditions for

firms to save from external capital because firms will not issue external capital to save if they

have no expected capital needs or if they can meet their future capital needs at low COC.

Our findings suggest that COC has a significant and independent impact on corporate cash

saving decisions and that external capital is an important source of cash savings for firms

with greater hedging needs.

     We also extend the literature on the effects of financial constraints on cash savings.

Almeida et al. (2004) suggest that the cash flow sensitivity of cash captures the effect of

financial constraints. Riddick and Whited (2009) challenge this interpretation by showing

that financially constrained firms' cash savings and cash flows can be negatively related

because firms reduce cash to increase investment after receiving positive cash flow shocks.

In the financial constraint models, constrained firms trade off between current and future

investments to save from cash flows. In our model, firms trade off not only between current



                                               5
and future investments but also between current COC and future COC to hedge against

higher financing costs for future investments. The hedging motive drives the sensitivity of

cash savings to COC for both financially constrained and unconstrained firms. Our empirical

results also show that cash savings of both financially constrained and unconstrained firms

increase approximately by 9% relative to the mean when there is one percentage point

decrease in COC. With the hedging motive, firms save not only from internal cash flows but

also (and especially) from external capital to lower the overall costs of COC, which in turn

improves firms' overall investment efficiency.

   Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) show that financially constrained firms' prefer-

ence for cash savings over preserving debt capacity using internal funds depends on their

needs to hedge investment opportunities against income shortfalls. Our hedging motive dis-

tinguishes itself from their study in that we deal with cash savings from both internal cash

flows and external capital (especially equity) in response to COC. More importantly, both

financially constrained and unconstrained firms save from external capital at relatively low

COC to lower the overall COC for future investments.

   Our study also complements Azar, Kagy, and Schmalz (2016) who suggest that the cost

of carry for cash holdings is an important factor explaining the time trend of corporate cash

holdings. Gao, Whited, and Zhang (2020), however, find a hump-shaped relation between

cash holdings and interest rates. They rationalize this relationship in a model where firms'

precautionary cash demand correlates with interest rates nonmonotonically. They suggest

that interest rates are not likely to explain the recent rise in corporate cash. We add to the

literature by explaining that the hedging motive is an important determinant of corporate


                                                 6
cash savings and that corporate cash savings are closely related to COC, particularly to the

cost of equity.



3.        Hypothesis Development
3.1       A Model for Cash Savings with External Financing Costs

We develop a two-period model to illustrate how cash savings are affected by the time-varying

cost of external finance. The intuition from the analytical solution to the two-period model

can also apply to a dynamic model as shown in Appendix 4.

       We consider a firm, endowed initially with Wt , that faces a two-period investment and

financing decisions with zero discount rate. The cash flow from investment at t is given by

         (It ) =  (It ) + zt ,                                                                               (1)

where It is investment at the beginning of t which depreciates by the end of the period,  (It )

is the expected cash flows with I > 0 and II < 0, and z is i.i.d. with zero mean.3

       The firm maximizes the current shareholder wealth which is given as



         Vt =      max {Wt - Ct - It - 1(Xt >0) t (Xt ) + Et Vt+1 }                                          (2)
                 (It ,Ct ,Xt )

                     subject to Xt = It + 1(Xt >0) t (Xt ) + Ct - Wt           and Ct  0,

                 where Vt+1 =         max {(It+1 ) - It+1 - 1(Xt+1 >0) t+1 (Xt+1 )},
                                   (It+1 ,Xt+1 )




where Ct is cash saving at t which returns the same amount at t + 1, and Et is expectation

given information at t, Xt is external finance. The external financing decision is made
   3
     fx and fxx denote first and second derivatives, respectively, of f (x) with respect to x, and "i.i.d" stands
for independent and identically distributed across firms and over time.


                                                       7
at the beginning of each period, and there are external finance costs arising from market

frictions such as agency and asymmetric information problems. The net proceeds from

external finance is reduced from the gross proceeds by the cost of external finance. The

external finance cost is represented by 1(Xt >0) t (Xt ) where 1(Xt >0) is an indicator which is

1 when X > 0 with 0 < t (Xt ) < 1 and zero otherwise. The external finance cost function

implies that the marginal external finance cost increases with the amount of external capital

raised and cannot be greater than its proceeds. The firm's needs for external capital at t is

determined by the sum of investment, cash saving, and external financing costs minus initial

endowment. The firm pays out funds without costs if Xt is negative.

   To explore the optimal cash saving, financing, and investment decisions in (2), we solve

the model backwards, starting with the second-period decisions.


        Vt+1 =        max {(It+1 ) - It+1 - 1(Xt+1 >0) t+1 (Xt+1 )}                           (3)
                   (It+1 ,Xt+1 )

                      subject to Xt+1 = It+1 + 1(Xt+1 >0) t+1 (Xt+1 ) - (It ) - Ct .



The external capital raised by the firm at t + 1 depends on the cash flow generated from

investment and cash saved at t. The first-order conditions with respect to the firm's optimal

decisions on It+1 and Xt+1 are

                                                  t+1 (Xt+1 )
      I (It+1 ) = 1 + µt+1         and µt+1 =                   ,                             (4)
                                                1 - t+1 (Xt+1 )

where µt+1 is the Lagrangian for the constraint on Xt+1 . These conditions imply that the

optimal level of investment is below the first-best level (It+1 ), satisfying I (It+1 ) = 1 if the

firm raises external capital and pays the financing cost. The first-best level of investment can


                                                     8
be achieved when the firm generates sufficiently large cash flow from its initial investment

in addition to cash saving at t (It+1  (It ) + Ct ). If the cash flow and saved cash are not

sufficient to cover the investment, the firm has to rely on external capital and the investment

                                                       ^t+1 )] > 1. Thus, the firm will invest
                                  ^t+1 ) = 1/[1 - t+1 (I
will be determined to satisfy: I (I

                                                                                ^  I  ). In the
less than the first-best level in the presence of the cost of external capital (I   t+1


presence of a fixed cost component of external finance, the firm may invest using the internal

cash flow and saved cash from t without raising external capital at t + 1 for some realization

          ^t+1 < It+1 < I  ).
of (It ) (I              t+1


   Based on the above observations we now have

                         

      Et Vt+1 =                         (It+1 ) +  (It ) + z + Ct - It+1 g (z )dz           (5)
                    -C - (I )
                  It +1 t  t
                        -C - (I )
                      It +1 t  t


                  +                    { (Ct +  (It ) + z )} g (z )dz
                    ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                    I
                      ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                      I

                  +                        ^t+1 ) - t+1 (Xt+1 ) g (z )dz,
                                          (I
                          -


                                                                             ^t+1 =  (It ) + z +
where g (z ) is the probability density function (PDF) of z . Note also that I

Ct + Xt+1 - t+1 (Xt+1 ).

   Moving back to the first period, the first order conditions (FOC) for the firm's maximiza-




                                                      9
tion problem with respect to It , Ct , and Xt are



          [1 + H ]I (It ) - 1 - µt = 0,                                                               (6)

          (1 + H ) - 1 - µt - t = 0,                                                                  (7)

          -t (Xt ) + µt [1 - t (Xt )] = 0,                                                            (8)



where µt and t is the Lagrangian for constraints on Xt and Ct , respectively, and

                -C - (I )
              It +1 t  t


      H =                       {I (Ct +  (It ) + z ) - 1} g (z )dz
             ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
             I
                  ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                  I

              +                          ^t+1 ) + t+1 (Xt+1 ) - 1 g (z )dz.
                                      I (I
                      -


Appendix 1 provides the details of the derivation of these first order conditions. Given

                              ^t+1 ) > I (It+1 ) > I (I  ) = 1 and hence H > 0. H
^t+1 < It+1 < I  , we have I (I
I              t+1                                     t+1


represents the expected loss from underinvestment due to external finance cost and lower

cash flow at t + 1. The FOCs suggest that H is an important consideration for investment

and cash saving decisions at t. In particular, when the firm relies on external finance, the firm

will choose the optimal investment where the marginal benefit of investment [1 + H ]I (It )
                                                  1
is equal to its marginal cost 1 + µt =          1-t (Xt )
                                                          .   Similarly, the optimal cash saving decision

with external finance is made where the marginal benefit of cash saving ((1 + H ) - t ) is
                                               1
equal to its marginal cost (1 + µt =         1-t (Xt )
                                                       ).   These conditions also imply that a lower cost

of external capital at t increases both investment and cash savings at t.

   If the firm is unconstrained at t in that it has sufficient initial endowment to make initial


                                                        10
investment and cash saving (t (Xt ) = 0 and µt = 0), the optimal cash saving will be set

where its marginal benefit is equal to the marginal cost ((1 + H ) - t = 1). In this case, the

firm's optimal investment is set at (1 + H )I (It ) = 1.

                                      ^t , external finance, X
Proposition 1 The optimal investment, I                      ^ t , and cash saving, C
                                                                                    ^t , at t

exhibit the following properties:

    ^t > 0
For X


      ^t
      I                   ^t
                          X     ^t
                                C
          = 0,      and       >     > 0.                                                   (9)
      t+1                 t+1   t+1


    ^t  0
For X


      ^t
      I                   ^t
                          X     ^t
                                C
          = 0,      and       =     > 0.
      t+1                 t+1   t+1


Proof: See Appendix 2.

   Proposition 1 suggests that when the firm expects to raise external capital at a higher

cost, the firm will raise additional external capital to save more. Even when the firm is not

constrained in that it has enough cash at hand to make its investment at t, it will increase

cash when expecting a higher cost of external capital. If the firm does not save at t, low

internal cash flow at t + 1 must result in an increase in the amount of external capital at a

higher cost and a reduction in the amount of investment at t + 1. Thus, whether constrained

or not, the firm's cash saving will be sensitive to the relative cost of external capital. When

constrained, however, the firm needs external capital at t more than cash savings to cover

the external finance cost. Cash saving will be particularly sensitive to COC when the firm


                                              11
expects greater future investment relative to internal cash flow. The optimal investment at

t, however, is not affected by the expected COC at t + 1 because the marginal return on

cash remains constant while that on investment is decreasing. Consequently, when the firm

expects higher cost of external finance at t + 1, it is more beneficial to save cash rather than

to increase investment at t, since cash saving helps the firm hedge against the higher future

cost of external finance at a lower cost. Thus, firms expecting higher external finance costs

are likely to increase cash savings by raising external capital beyond current investment, i.e.,

excess capital issuance. Together with the first order conditions at t, the proposition also

suggests that the firm will save more when it faces lower COC at t relative to COC at t + 1.

Cash saved at lower COC at t reduces the amount of external capital needs to be raised at

higher COC at t + 1, which reduces overall COC for the firm.


3.2    Hedging Needs

There should be greater hedging needs if negative shocks to the firm's cash flow make it

more costly for the firm to raise external capital (Froot et al. (1993)), especially when the

firm is expecting greater future investment. If this is the case, the firm will save more than

it otherwise would in order to fund its future investment while making less use of external

capital at higher costs.

   We formalize these hedging needs for cash savings by generalizing the external finance

cost function to be t+1 (Xt+1 ,  ), where  measures the strength of the correlation between

the cost of external finance  and external capital needs (It+1 - (It )). We now make the

following assumptions about the nature of t+1 (Xt+1 ,  ) to reflect that the effects of  on



                                              12
the marginal cost of external finance:


Assumption 1 The external finance cost function, , satisfies:

    ^ > 0,
for X


                 (X, ^ )
         (i)             =  (X,^  )  (0, 1);
                    X
                      ^ )
                  2 (X,
        (ii)              =  (X,^  ) > 0; and
                   X
                      ^ )
                  2 (X,
       (iii)              > 0;                                                            (10)
                    


    ^  0,
for X


                                  ^ )
                               2 (X,
            ^         ^
           (X,  ) =  (X,  ) =         = 0.
                                 


                                                                      ^ , whereas (ii) and
(i) implies that the marginal cost of external finance increases with X

(iii) imply that the firm faces higher marginal cost of external finance when the correlation

                                                                      ^  0 implies that
between external capital needs and COC is greater. The assumption for X

there is no cost when the firm does not raise external capital.

    Proposition 2 establishes the properties on the effects of the correlation between external

capital needs and external finance cost on the optimal decisions at t.

                                                ^t , external finance, X
Proposition 2 The optimal levels of cash saving C                      ^ t , and investment,

^t , exhibit :
I


            ^t
           2C              ^t
                          2X                       ^t
                                                  2I
               > 0;           > 0;        and         = 0; .
          t+1            t+1                     t+1 


                                                13
Proof: See Appendix 3.

   Proposition 2 suggests that the sensitivities of the optimal cash saving and external

finance decisions are magnified by the correlation between external capital needs and external

finance cost as measured by  . Thus, firms with high  face greater hedging needs. When

expecting higher COC at t +1, without cash savings the firm with greater hedging needs may

have to reduce future investments due to higher external finance cost. Alternatively, the firm

can issue external capital at time t at a lower cost and save for future investment, thereby

reducing the overall costs of external finance. Consequently, the amount of cash savings and

excess capital issuance should be larger when the firm expects greater investment but higher

COC in the future.

   Propositions 1 and 2 lead to the following hedging motive hypotheses:


Hypothesis 1a Firms with a high correlation between external capital needs and COC will

     save more when COC is relatively low.


Hypothesis 1b Firms with a high correlation between external capital needs and COC will

     issue more excess external capital when COC is relatively low.


Hypothesis 1c Firms with greater future expected investments will save more when COC

     is relatively low.




                                             14
4.      The Data and Variables
4.1     The Sample

     The initial sample consists of all U.S. firms from the annual Compustat files for the period

of 1981­2015. We require that firms have positive values for assets, equity, cash holdings

and net sales. Financial firms (SIC codes 6000-6799) and regulated utilities (SIC codes

4900-4999) are excluded from the sample. Observations with missing net income and stock

issuance proceeds are also excluded. Stock price information is from the Center for Research

in Security Prices (CRSP), the nominal GDP growth rates from the Bureau of Economic

Analysis, and the interest rates from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

     To estimate the implied cost of capital, we obtain analysts' earnings and growth forecasts

from I/B/E/S. We require non-missing data for the prior year's book value, earnings, and

dividends. When explicit forecasts are unavailable, we obtain forecasts by projecting the

long-term growth rate on the prior year's earnings forecast.


4.2     Cost of Capital

     We estimate the COE using the implied cost of capital approach with three different

models proposed by Claus and Thomas (2001), Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001),

and Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013). The implied cost of capital is the discount rate

that equates a stock's present value of expected cash flows to its current price. Detailed

procedures are provided in Appendix 6. Given that firms are required to file their financial

statements within 90 days of the fiscal year end, we estimates COE using earliest forecasts



                                                15
available after three months of the prior fiscal year end. The reported results are based on

the Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) approach and are robust to alternative COE estimates.

   We estimate the COC as follows:

                 Debti,t                               Debti,t
      COCi,t =            CODi,t (1 - T axRate) + (1 -          )COEi,t ,                      (11)
                 M V Ai,t                              M V Ai,t
                                                                             Debtit
where COCi,t is the weighted average cost of capital for firm i in year t.   M V Ait
                                                                                       is the market

leverage ratio. CODi,t is COD for firm i in year t, measured as the actual yield on the debt

carried by the firm, as in Frank and Shen (2016).


4.3    Hedging Motive Measures

   We measure hedging motive by the correlation coefficient between external capital needs

and COC. Three proxies are used to capture firms' needs for external capital: KZ index,

External Finance Dependence, and Financial Deficit. Following Baker, Stein, and Wurgler

(2003), we use the KZ index to measure external finance dependence as follows:

      KZ = -1.002CF - 39.368DIV - 1.315CASH + 3.139LEV ,                                       (12)

where CF is operating cash flow divided by net property, plant and equipment at the be-

ginning of the period (PPE); DIV is cash dividend divided by PPE; CASH is cash and

equivalents divided by PPE; and LEV is long-term debt divided by long-term debt plus

total equity.

   Following Rajan and Zingales (1998), external finance is measures by:

      External = (CapEx - OCF )/CapEx,                                                         (13)

where CapEx is capital expenditures; and OCF is operating cash flow.



                                              16
     We also follow Shyam-Sunder and Myers (1999), Frank and Goyal (2003), and Byoun

(2008) to define financial deficit as follows:

       Def icit = (Div + Acq + Inv - ICF 1)/T A,                                        (14)

where Div is cash dividend; Acq is acquisitions; Inv is net investments; ICF 1 is income

before extraordinary items plus depreciation and amortization; and T A is total assets at the

beginning of the period.

     We use the industry median External and Def icit based on the 2-digit SIC code and

the firm-level KZ as proxies for external capital needs. To measure hedging needs, we

obtain annual external capital needs measures and compute their correlation coefficients

with individual firms' COCs. Based on the correlation coefficients, we define firms in the

top 30 percent as high hedging-needs firms and those in the bottom 30 percent as low

hedging-needs firms, dropping the middle 40 percent. Hedging motives 1-3 below are based

on External, Def icit, and KZ , respectively.



5.      Empirical Analysis
5.1     Univariate Analysis

     The summary statistics of firm characteristic variables and COC are reported in Table 1

Panel A. The average cash holding is 14% of total assets and the cash saving rate is about

1.75% of total assets. The average COC is 9.41% with the average cost of equity (COE)

of 9.89% and the average cost of debt (COD) of 8.43%. Panel B shows the decomposition

of standard deviation of COC across firms and over time. As expected, COD exhibit less

variation than COE cross-sectionally and over time.

                                                 17
Table 1

   Figure 1 plots average annual cash holdings relative to average COC, COE, and COD

over the sample period. The striking symmetry of the two series suggests that firms increase

(decrease) cash when COC is low (high). Thus, COC appears to be an important driver

of corporate cash holding behavior over time as well. Notably, COC has been declining

significantly until early 2000s, which may explain the increasing trend in cash holdings over

the same period documented by Bates et al. (2009).

Figure1

   To further examine how relatively low COC drives corporate cash savings, we obtain a

firm's COC minus its historical average for firms with a minimum of 3-year data. Figure

2 plots cash savings across deciles of the deviation of COC from the historical average for

the sample period of 1981-2015 and the subsample periods of 1981-1998 and 1999-2015.

The downward-sloping graphs indicate that firms save more when COC is lower than the

historical average.

Figure 2

   Figure 3 plots current year cash savings across future investment deciles. The figure

shows that firms with greater future investment save more cash in the current year, which

is consistent with the hedging motive of cash savings.

Figure 3




                                             18
5.2       Sensitivities of Cash Savings to Cash Sources

      Firms may save cash from internal or external capital. To examine how cash savings are

associated with cash sources in a multivariate setting, we run the following regression:

        Cashit = 0 + 1 ExCapitalit + 2 ICFit + 3 Xit-1 + fi + it                                    (15)

where Cashit is the change in cash and equivalents for firm i in year t; ICFit is internal

cash flow; ExCapitalit is the sum of net equity issue and net debt issue. Each variable is

divided by total assets at the beginning of the period. Xit-1 is a vector of control variables

and fi is firm fixed effects. Following Opler et al. (1999) and Bates et al. (2009), we include

the following control variables: M/Bit-1 , market-to-book asset ratio; Cashit-1 , lagged cash-

to-asset ratio; V ol, cash flow volatility; Leverageit-1 , leverage ratio; Sizeit-1 , the logarithm

of total assets; N W Cit , net working capital excluding cash and equivalents divided by total

assets at t - 1; CapExit , capital expenditures divided by total assets at t - 1; Acquisitionsit ,

acquisitions divided by total assets at t - 1; Divdendit , cash dividend divided by total assets

at t - 1; T billt , the one-year treasury bill rate; Spreadt , the credit spread between the 10-

year BBB bond yield and maturity-matched treasury bond yield.4 We also include indicator

variables, D90 and D00, allowing the intercept to change in the 1990s and the 2000s (2000-

2014). We winsorize all variables except for T bill, Spread, and dummy variables, at 2 and

98 percentiles in order to mitigate the effects of outliers.

      We first estimate the model without firm fixed effects. The results are reported in Ta-

ble 2. The coefficient estimate of external capital (ExCapital) is 0.2897 and significant,
  4
      The T-bill rate and the bond yields are published by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.



                                                     19
whereas that of internal cash flows (ICF ) is 0.2340 and significant. To evaluate the rela-

tive importance of external capital to internal cash flows, we estimate the standardized beta

coefficients. Column 3 of Table 2 shows that the standardized beta coefficient of external

capital is much larger than that of internal cash flow (0.5502 vs. 0.2476), which indicates

that external capital is the major source of firms' cash savings.

Table 2

   When we include firm fixed effects (column 2), the coefficient estimates of the cash sources

remain positive and significant. The estimates also show that M/B, T-bill rate and credit

spread have positive effects, while lagged cash, dividend, leverage, firm size, net working

capital, capital expenditures, and acquisitions have negative effects. The positive coefficients

on D00 indicate that the later years (2000s) are associated with more cash savings.


5.3    Cost of Capital and Cash Savings

To test whether firm's cash savings are sensitive to COC, we include COC and its interac-

tions with external capital (ExCapital) and internal cash flows (ICF ) in equation 15. The

estimation results are reported in Table 3. For brevity, we do not report estimates on control

variables. The negative and significant coefficient estimates of COC suggest that firms save

less when COC is high. The economic magnitude of the impact is also significant. One

percentage point decrease in COC is associated with approximately 9% increase in cash sav-

ings relative to the mean. The negative coefficient estimates of its interaction with external

capital indicate that firms save significantly more from external capital when COC is lower.

The coefficient estimates of the interaction between COC and ICF are also negative but



                                              20
marginally significant, which suggests that firms may also save more from internal cash flows

when the COC is relatively low.

Table 3



6.      Hedging Motive
Our model suggests that in the presence of time-varying cost of capital, cash savings enable

firms to transfer resources from the low cost state to the high cost state. Moreover, firms with

a high correlation between their COC and external financing needs (high hedging motive)

have more incentives to do so. We test these predictions in this section.


6.1     Hedging Needs and Cash Savings

To test hypothesis 1a that firms with high hedging motives will save more when COC is

relatively low, we examine whether the sensitivity of cash savings to COC is more pronounced

for firms with high hedging needs. We split the sample into high and low hedging needs firms

based on the hedging motive measures and report the results in Table 4. Hedging Motives

1 to 3 represent the correlation coefficients between COC and each of the three measures of

external capital needs (External, Def icit, and KZ ), respectively. The coefficient estimates

of the interaction terms between external finance proceeds and COC (ExCapital × COC )

are significant and negative only for high hedging needs firms, indicating that firms with

greater hedging motives save more from external capital when the COC is relatively low.

The results are consistent with hypothesis 1a.

      Table 4



                                              21
6.2     Hedging Needs and Excess Capital Issuance

Hypothesis 1b predicts that firms with greater hedging needs issue excess capital when COC

is relatively low. To test this prediction, we define excess capital issuance as net external

capital issue proceeds minus financial deficit, which represents the portion of external capital

that is saved as cash. Panel A of Table 5 reports the results for high and low hedging needs

firms based on three hedging motive measures. The coefficient estimates of COC are negative

and significant only for firms with high hedging needs. These results are consistent with

hypothesis 1b, indicating that firms with high hedging needs issue excess external capital to

save as cash when the COC is lower.

Table 5


6.3     Future Investment and Cash Savings

We now test hypothesis 1c which predicts that firms save cash to fund future investments

with the following regression:

  Cashit = 0 + 1 F Investit + 2 ICCit + 3 F Investit × ICCit + 4 Xit-1 + fi + it                       (16)

where F Investit is future investment at time t for firm i, defined as the average of investments

in subsequent two years scaled by lagged total assets.5 The same set of control variables as

in equation 15 are included. We expect firms to save more when they expect greater future

investment (1 > 0) because firms' realized future investment will be positively correlated

with managers' ex ante expected investment. We estimate model 16 separately for firms with
   5
   The use of realized future investment is in line with the use of future stock returns in previous studies
(Baker et al. (2003) and DeAngelo et al. (2010)).



                                                    22
low and high hedging needs. Since the incentive to save cash for future expected investment

will be greater when facing relatively low COC, we expect a negative sign for 3 , especially

for firms with greater hedging needs.

   Panel B in Table 5 reports the results for high and low hedging needs firms based on

three hedging motive measures. The coefficient estimates of future investment are positive

and significant only for high hedging needs firms. Moreover, the coefficient estimates of the

interaction term between future investment and COC are all negative and significant only

for high hedging needs firms. These findings provide support for hypothesis 1c that firms

save cash at a low cost for future investments.


6.4    Debt vs Equity

Thus far, our results show that firms save cash from external capital and this saving be-

havior is affected by COC. As equity and debt are two main sources of external capital,

we investigate their relative importance for firms' cash savings. We first run a simple re-

gression for each of the cash sources. The results are reported in Table 6 Panel A. The

coefficient estimate of net equity issues (EIssue) is 0.3462 and significant with adjusted R2

of 16.19%. The coefficient estimate of debt issues (DIssue) is mere 0.0567 and the adjusted

R2 is 0.6%. The estimated coefficient of internal cash flows (ICF ) is 0.2030 and statistically

significant with the adjusted R2 of 4.37%. When we include all cash sources along with

control variables (column 4) and firm fixed effects (column 5), coefficient estimates of all the

cash sources remain positive and significant. Overall, equity is the most important source

for cash savings.



                                              23
   We then examine the relative importance of COE and COD for firms' cash savings by

including the interaction terms of COE (COD) with net equity issue proceeds (net debt

issue proceeds) and internal cash flows into our regression model. As shown in Table 6

Panel B, the coefficient estimates of COE are mostly negative and significant, while the

coefficient estimates of COD are mostly insignificant. For all firms in Column (1), the

coefficient estimates of both Eissue × COE and ICF ×COE are negative and significant.

The coefficient estimate of Dissue × COD is also negative and significant but that of ICF ×

COD is insignificant. These results suggest that firms cash savings from equity issuance and

internal cash flows are both sensitive to COE, whereas cash savings from internal cash flows

show little sensitivity to COD.

   When the sample is split into high and low hedging needs firms in the remaining columns,

we find that the coefficient estimates of both Eissue × COE and ICF ×COE are significant

and negative only for high hedging needs firms. Thus, COE appears to be an important

consideration in firms' cash saving decisions particularly for high hedging needs firms.


6.5    Exogenous Shock to Cost of Capital

An endogeneity concern may arise if firms' cash savings affect their cost of capital. To

ease this concern and buttress our results for the causal effects of COC on cash savings,

we exploit an exogenous event that affects firms' COC. In particular, we use Regulation

Fair Disclosure (Reg FD) as a shock to COC and investigate whether firms experiencing

a greater reduction in COC in the post-Reg FD period save more from external capital

than firms experiencing a smaller reduction in COC. Reg FD, effective on October 23, 2000,



                                             24
prohibits selective disclosure of material information to a subset of market participants, such

as analysts and institutional investors, without simultaneously disclosing it to the public. By

curtailing selective disclosure, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) believed that

Reg FD would encourage continued widespread investor participation in capital markets,

enhancing market efficiency and liquidity, and more effective capital raising. As a result, the

Reg FD lowered COC for firms with selective disclosure before Reg FD (Chen et al. (2010)).

   Following Chen et al. (2010), we use market-to-book ratios (M/B) and R&D as firm

characteristics indicative of selective disclosure and classify firms into treated and control

groups. Specifically, treatment and control firms are defined as top and bottom 30% of

M/B or as top 50% of R&D-to-Sales ratio among positive R&D firms and zero-R&D firms,

respectively. We set the P ost dummy as one for 2000-2002 and zero for 1997-1999.

   Columns (1) and (2) in Table 7 show the results for M/B- and R&D-based measures of

selective disclosure, respectively. For both measures, the coefficient estimates of the triple

interaction term T reated × ExCapital × P ost are positive and significant, which suggests

that cash savings from external capital have significantly increased for firms with a larger

reduction in COC relative to firms with a smaller reduction in COC following the legislation.

We also conduct placebo tests based on fictitious event years of 2006 and 2011. The results

of placebo tests reported in columns (3)-(6) show that none of the coefficient estimates of

T reated × ExCapital × P ost are significant. Thus, the results appear to be unique around

the Reg FD and are less likely due to other confounding factors. These findings boost our

confidence that COC has a causal impact on corporate cash savings from external capital.




                                              25
6.6    Robustness

Even though we have shown that COC has a significant impact on cash savings in the natural

experimental setting, there can be an endogeneity concern due to measurement errors in

COC. As another remedy for measurement errors in COC, we estimate the model using the

high-order cumulants as suggested by Erickson et al. (2014). Table A1 in Appendix 7 reports

the estimation results. The coefficient estimates of the interaction of external capital and

COC in Columns (1) and (2) are negative and significant for high hedging motive firms,

whereas it is insignificant for lower hedging motive firms. The results are consistent with our

main estimations. We also examine whether our results are robust to alternative measures

of COC using the Claus and Thomas (2001) and Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001)

approaches as specified in Appendix 6. The results in Columns (3)-(6) remain robust to

these alternative COC measures.



7.    Financial Constraints and Other Measures of Hedg-

      ing Motives
7.1    Financial Constraints

Since financial constraint is an important consideration for firms' cash saving decisions

(Almeida et al. (2004)), it is possible that our results simply reflect financial constraints.

To investigate this possibility, we examine whether financial constraints explain the cash

saving behavior observed in Table 3. Following the previous studies, we use credit rating,

the WW (Whited and Wu (2006)) index, and the HP (Hadlock and Pierce (2010)) index

                                              26
to define financially constrained and unconstrained firms. Financially constrained (uncon-

strained) firms are defined as those without (with) credit ratings or in the top (bottom) 30

percent of the WW index or the HP index.

Table 8

      The results in Table 8 Panel A show that both financially constrained and unconstrained

firms save more when COC is relatively low. In terms of economic magnitude, one percentage

point decrease in COC is associated with approximately 9% increase in cash savings relative

to the mean for both constrained and unconstrained firms.6 Moreover, the results suggest

that external capital is a more important source of cash saving than internal cash flows for

both constrained and unconstrained firms.

      The estimated coefficients of ExCapital × COC are negative and significant for both

constrained and unconstrained firms. Firms' cash savings from external capital in response

to COC are also economically significant for both financially constrained and unconstrained

firms. When ExCapital × COC decreases by one standard deviation, cash savings of finan-

cially unconstrained (constrained) firms increase by 17% (12%). The estimated coefficients

of ICF × COC are also negative and significant for both constrained and unconstrained

firms based on bond ratings, but significant only for financially constrained firms based on

WW and HP indexes. The results indicate that cash savings from internal cash flows are

more sensitive to COC for financially constrained firms.

      We further test whether financial constraints help explain firms' excess capital issuance

in response to low COC and the effects of future investments on cash savings. To this
  6
      The average cash saving ratio of constrained and unconstrained firms is 2.06% and 0.83%, respectively.




                                                     27
end, we partition firms with high (low) hedging motives into financially constrained and

unconstrained firms. The unreported tables show that both financially constrained and

unconstrained firms with high hedging motives raise external capital in excess of current

financial needs when COC is relatively low.7 The estimated coefficients of F Invest × COC

are negative and significant for both constrained and unconstrained firms with high hedging

motives, while the coefficients are insignificant for both constrained and unconstrained firms

with low hedging motives. Overall, these results suggest that financial constraints cannot

fully explain the sensitivities of cash savings to COC.


7.2       Acharya, Almeida, and Campello (2007) Hedging Measure

Acharya et al. (2007) (AAC, henceforth) suggest that financially constrained firms save cash

to hedge investment opportunities against income shortfalls, while unconstrained firms do

not have a propensity to save cash out of cash flows. They measure a firm's hedging needs

by the correlation between the firm's cash flow from current operations and its industry-level

median R&D expenditures. We investigate whether their hedging needs measure explains

the sensitivity of cash savings to COC.

      We conduct tests based on our hedging motive and AAC hedging needs measures for

financially constrained and unconstrained firms. We report the results of high hedging motive

firms in Panel B of Table 8. The coefficient estimates of ExCapital × COC are negative and

significant for both constrained and unconstrained firms when our hedging motive measure

is used. These results are consistent with the finding in Panel A that both financially

constrained and unconstrained firms save from external capital when COC is relatively low.
  7
      The tables are available upon request.


                                               28
When the AAC measure is used, however, the coefficient estimate of ExCapital × COC are

insignificant for both financially constrained and unconstrained firms, whereas the coefficient

estimate of ICF × COC is negative and significant for constrained firms. The results are

consistent with the finding of Acharya et al. (2007) that financially constrained firms save

from internal funds when their hedging needs against cash flow shortage are high.



8.     Alternative Explanations
8.1    Market Timing Motive

The market timing hypothesis suggests that firms may time the market and issue equity

when it is overvalued. Mispricing in the stock market may be driven by non-fundamental

components of the stock price such as investor sentiment which affects COC directly but not

cash flows (Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho, 2010). When such mispricing drives current

COC lower relative to the expected COC, the firm may see an opportunity to issue external

capital and save. Such cash savings, however, are not motivated by future investments

(Bolton, Chen, and Wang, 2013). If market timing is the motive for firms' cash saving

behavior, the effect should be captured by the sensitivity of excess capital to COC for firms

that depend more on external finance (Baker et al., 2003). These arguments lead to the

following market timing hypotheses:


Hypothesis 2a External finance dependent firms save more from external capital when

      COC is relatively low than do less external finance dependent firms.


Hypothesis 2b External finance dependent firms issue more excess external capital when



                                              29
     COC is relatively low than do less external finance dependent firms.


   We conduct a series of tests to investigate whether the marketing timing motive can

explain our results. To test for the market timing hypothesis 2a, we estimate the regression

models for firms with high and low external finance dependence based on three external

finance dependence measures. As shown in Table 9 Panel A, the coefficient estimates of

ExCapital × COC are negative and significant for low external finance dependent firms, but

insignificant for high external finance dependent firms. The results are inconsistent with the

market timing hypothesis 2a. Thus, the market timing motive does not fully explain the

sensitivity of cash savings to COC.

Table 9

   In Panel C, we test the market timing hypothesis 2b on excess external capital. The

results show that the coefficient estimates of COC are negative and significant for both low

and high external finance dependence, ruling out the possibility that excess capital issues

are mainly driven by the market timing motive.

   We also investigate whether the market timing motive explains the effects of future

investment on cash savings by estimating model (16) separately for high and low market

timing firms. In Panel D, the coefficient estimate of F Invest × COC is insignificant for

firms with high market timing motive, but significant for firms with low market timing

motive. Thus, the market timing motive does not explain firms' sensitivities of cash savings

to COC when expecting future investments.




                                             30
8.2    Precautionary Motive

The precautionary motive argues that firms can avoid external financing by saving cash

from internal cash flows (Fazzari et al. (1998), Almeida et al. (2004), Opler et al. (1999),

and Bates et al. (2009)). Taking advantage of relatively low COC is not considered as the

main reason for precautionary cash savings. In particular, Keynes (1936) argues that the

quantity of cash demanded for precautionary purposes is not too sensitive to changes in COC

because it is mainly determined by the general activity of the economic system and the level

of income. Nevertheless, given the recent finding that firms save from equity issuance for

the precautionary motive (McLean, 2011), we examine whether cash savings of firms with

greater precautionary motives are more sensitive to COC. Specifically, we test the following

precautionary motive hypotheses:

Hypothesis 3a Firms with greater precautionary motives save more when COC is relatively

      low than do firms with less precautionary motives.


Hypothesis 3b Firms with greater precautionary motives issue more excess external capital

      when COC is relatively low than do firms with less precautionary motives.

   We then test whether the precautionary motive explains the sensitivity of cash savings to

COC. Following the previous studies, we use R&D spending, cash flow volatility, and non-

dividend payout as measures of precautionary motives which represent unforeseen opportu-

nities and contingencies requiring sudden expenditures. Cash flow volatility is the 10-year

standard deviation of average industry cash flow based on the 2-digit SIC code. We pay par-

ticular attention to the precautionary measure of McLean (2011) based on the first principal

                                            31
component of R&D spending and cash flow volatility. For R&D spending, cash flow volatility

and their first principal component, we define the top 30% of firms as high precautionary

firms and the bottom 30% as low precautionary firms. We also treat non-dividend-paying

firms as high precautionary firms and dividend-paying firms as low precautionary firms. Ta-

ble 9 Panel B shows that the estimated coefficients of ExCapital × COC are all negative

and significant for both low and high precautionary firms. The results provide no support

for the precautionary hypothesis 3a.

     We test the precautionary hypothesis 3b on excess external capital and find that the

coefficient estimates of COC are negative and significant for both low and high precautionary

motive firms (Panel C). The results are inconsistent with hypothesis 3b, indicating that

capital issues in excess of current financial needs are not mainly driven by the precautionary

motive.

     We also examine whether the precautionary motive explains the effects of future invest-

ment on cash savings. As shown in Panel D, the coefficient estimates of F Invest × COC

are both insignificant for firms with high or low precautionary motives. Thus, there is no

supportive evidence that the precautionary motive explain the effects of future investments

on firms' sensitivities of cash savings to COC.



9.      Conclusions
We develop a theoretical model showing that in the presence of time-varying COC, firms

channel funds into future states of high COC by saving cash from external capital when

current COC is relatively low. In particular, when a firm expects a higher COC for future


                                             32
investments, it will increase cash savings from external capital at a low cost to lower the

overall cost of capital. Cash savings and excess external financing of firms with greater

hedging needs are more sensitive to COC.

   Consistent with the theoretical predictions, we find that both financially constrained and

unconstrained firms save more cash from external capital than from internal cash flows.

Cash savings of firms with greater hedging needs are particularly sensitive to their COC.

Moreover, firms with greater hedging needs tend to issue excess external capital when COC

is relatively low. Our findings cannot be fully explained either by the precautionary motive

or by the market timing motive. Our study illustrates that firms' hedging motive to transfer

funds from the states of low COC to the states of higher COC through cash savings is an

important consideration for corporate cash saving policies.




                                             33
References
Acharya, V., Almeida, H., Campello, M., 2007. Is cash negative debt? a hedging perspective
  on corporate financial policies. Journal of Financial Intermediation 16, 515­554.
Almeida, H., Campello, M., Weisbach, M. S., 2004. The cash flow sensitivity of cash. Journal
  of Finance 59, 1777­1804.
Alti, A., 2006. How persistent is the impact of market timing on capital structure. Journal
  of Finance 61, 1681­1710.
Azar, J., Kagy, J.-F., Schmalz, M. C., 2016. Can changes in the cost of carry explain the
  dynamics of corporate `cash' holdings? Review of Financial Studies 29, 2194­2240.
Baker, M., Stein, J., Wurgler, J., 2003. When does the market matter? stock prices and the
  investment of equity-dependent firms. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 969­1006.
Bates, T. W., Kahle, K. M., Stulz, R. M., 2009. Why do U.S. firms hold so much more cash
  than they used to? Journal of Finance 64, 1985­2021.
Bolton, P., Chen, H., Wang, N., 2013. Market timing, investment, and risk management.
  Journal of Financial Economics 109, 40­62.
Botosan, C. A., Plumlee, M. A., 2005. Assessing alternative proxies for the expected risk
  premium. Accounting Review 80, 21­53.
Burgstahler, D. C., Hail, L., Leuz, C., 2006. The importance of reporting incentives: Earnings
  management in european private and public firms. The Accounting Review 81, 983­1016.
Byoun, S., 2008. How and when do firms adjust their capital structures toward targets?
  Journal of Finance 63, 3069­3096.
Byoun, S., Ng, D., Wu, K., 2016. Corporate financing, investment and the implied cost of
  capital. Cornell University working paper.
Campbell, J. Y., Polk, C., Vuolteenaho, T., 2010. Growth or glamour? Fundamentals and
  systematic risk in stock returns. Review of Financial Studies 23, 305­344.
Chang, X., Dasgupta, S., Wong, G., Yao, J., 2014. Cash-flow sensitivities and the allocation
 of internal cash flow. Review of Financial Studies 27, 3628­3657.
Chen, Z., Dhaliwal, D. S., Xie, H., 2010. Regulation fair disclosure and the cost of equity
 capital. Review of Account Studies 15, 106­144.
Claus, J., Thomas, J., 2001. Equity premia as low as three percent? Evidence from analysts'
  earnings forecasts for domestic and international stock markets. The Journal of Finance
  56, 1629­1666.
DeAngelo, H., DeAngelo, L., Stulz, R. M., 2010. Seasoned equity offerings, market timing,
  and the corporate lifecyle.
Dittmar, A., Duchin, R., Harford, J., 2019. Corporate cash holdings: A review of the em-
  pirical research. University of Michigan working paper.

                                             34
Erickson, T., Jiang, C. H., Whited, T. M., 2014. Minimum distance estimation of the errors-
  in-variables model using linear cumulant equations. Journal of Econometrics 183, 211­221.
Fama, E. F., French, K. R., 2002. Testing tradeoff and pecking order predictions about
  dividends and debt. Review of Financial Studies 15, 1­33.
Fazzari, S. M., Hubbard, R. G., Petersen, B., 1998. Financing constraints and corporate
  investment. Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141­155.
Frank, M. Z., Goyal, V. K., 2003. Testing the pecking order theory of capital structure.
  Journal of Financial Economics 67, 217­248.
Frank, M. Z., Shen, T., 2016. Investment and the weighted average cost of capital. Journal
  of Financial Economics 119, 300­315.
Froot, K., Scharfstein, D., Stein, J., 1993. Risk management: Coordinating corporate invest-
  ment and financing policies. The Journal of Finance 48, 1629­1658.
Gao, X., Whited, T. M., Zhang, N., 2020. Corporate money demand. Review of Financial
 Studies forthcoming.
Gebhardt, W. R., Lee, C. M. C., Swaminathan, B., 2001. Towards an ex-ante cost of capital.
 Journal of Accounting Research 38, 135­176.
Gomes, J. F., 2001. Financing investment. American Economic Review 91, 1263­1285.
Gomes, J. F., Yaron, A., Zhang, L., 2006. Asset pricing implications of firms financing
 constraints. Review of Financial Studies 19, 1321­1356.
Hadlock, C. J., Pierce, J. R., 2010. New evidence on measuring financial constraints: Moving
  beyond the KZ index. Review of Financial Studies 23, 1909­1940.
Han, S., Qiu, J., 2007. Corporate precautionary cash holdings. Journal of Corporate Finance
  13, 43­57.
Hertzel, M. G., Li, Z., 2010. Behavioral and rational explanations of stock price performance
  around seos: Evidence from a decomposition of market-to-book ratios. Journal of Financial
  and Quantitative Analysis 45 (4), 1­24.
Hughes, J., Liu, J., Liu, J., 2009. On the relation between expected returns and implied cost
 of capital. Review of Accounting Studies 14, 246­259.
Keynes, J., 1936. The general theory of employment, interest and money.
Kim, W., Weisbach, M., 2008. Motivations for public equity offers: An international per-
  spective. Journal of Financial Economics 87, 281­307.
Lamont, O., Polk, C., Saa-Requejo, J., 2001. Financial constraints and stock returns. Review
  of Financial Studies 25, 529­554.
Lee, C., So, E. C., Wang, C. C., 2020. Evaluating firm-level expected-return proxies: Impli-
  cations for estimating treatment effects, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Li, Y., Ng, D. T., Swaminathan, B., 2013. Predicting market returns using aggregate implied
  cost of capital. Journal of Financial Economics 110, 419­436.

                                             35
McLean, R. D., 2011. Share issuance and cash savings. Journal of Financial Economics 99,
 693­715.
Myers, S. C., 1984. The capital structure puzzle. Journal of Finance 39, 575­592.
Opler, T., Pinkowitz, L., Stulz, R., Williamson, R., 1999. The determinants and implications
 of corporate cash holdings. Journal of Financial Economics 60, 4­46.
Qiu, J., Wan, C., 2015. Technology spillovers and corporate cash holdings. Journal of Finan-
  cial Economics 115, 558­573.
Rajan, R. G., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial development and growth. American Economic
 Review 88, 393­410.
Riddick, L. A., Whited, T. M., 2009. The corporate propensity to save. Journal of Finance
  64, 1729­1766.
Shyam-Sunder, L., Myers, S. C., 1999. Testing static trade-off against pecking order models
  of capital structure. Journal of Financial Economics 51, 219­244.
Whited, T., Wu, G., 2006. Financial constraints risk. Review of Financial Studies 19, 531­
 559.
Whited, T. M., 1992. Debt, liquidity constraints, and corporate investment: Evidence from
 panel data. Journal of Finance 47, 1425­1460.
Xu, Z., 2020. Economic policy uncertainty, cost of capital, and corporate innovation. Journal
 of Banking and Finance 111, forthcoming.




                                             36
Figure 1: Cash Holdings versus Cost of Capital
This figure plots firms' average cash holdings relative to the level of the cost of capital (COC,
COE, COD) from 1981 to 2015. Cash is cash and equivalents divided by total assets.
Panel A: Cash Holdings vs. COC

           18%                                                                                                                                        15%

           17%
                                                                                                                                                      14%

           16%
                                                                                                                                                      13%
           15%

                                                                                                                                                      12%
           14%
Cash Holdings




                                                                                                                                                            COC
           13%                                                                                                                                        11%

           12%
                                                                                                                                                      10%

           11%
                                                                                                                                                      9%
           10%

                                                                                                                                                      8%
                9%

                8%                                                                                                                                    7%
                      1981

                             1983

                                    1985

                                           1987

                                                  1989

                                                         1991

                                                                1993

                                                                       1995

                                                                               1997

                                                                                      1999

                                                                                              2001

                                                                                                     2003

                                                                                                            2005

                                                                                                                   2007

                                                                                                                          2009

                                                                                                                                 2011

                                                                                                                                        2013

                                                                                                                                               2015
                                                                              Cash           COC



Panel B: Cash Holdings vs. COE

                18%                                                                                                                                   15%

                17%
                                                                                                                                                      14%

                16%
                                                                                                                                                      13%
                15%
Cash Holdings




                                                                                                                                                      12%
                14%




                                                                                                                                                            COE
                13%                                                                                                                                   11%

                12%
                                                                                                                                                      10%

                11%
                                                                                                                                                      9%
                10%

                                                                                                                                                      8%
                9%

                8%                                                                                                                                    7%
                      1981

                             1983

                                    1985

                                           1987

                                                  1989

                                                         1991

                                                                1993

                                                                       1995

                                                                               1997

                                                                                      1999

                                                                                              2001

                                                                                                     2003

                                                                                                            2005

                                                                                                                   2007

                                                                                                                          2009

                                                                                                                                 2011

                                                                                                                                        2013

                                                                                                                                               2015

                                                                              Cash           COE


Panel C: Cash Holdings vs. COD
           18%

           17%                                                                                                                                        14%

           16%
                                                                                                                                                      12%
           15%
Cash Holdings




           14%
                                                                                                                                                      10%
                                                                                                                                                            COD




           13%

           12%
                                                                                                                                                      8%
           11%

           10%                                                                                                                                        6%

                9%

                8%                                                                                                                                    4%
                      1981

                             1983

                                    1985

                                           1987

                                                  1989

                                                         1991

                                                                1993

                                                                       1995

                                                                               1997

                                                                                      1999

                                                                                              2001

                                                                                                     2003

                                                                                                            2005

                                                                                                                   2007

                                                                                                                          2009

                                                                                                                                 2011

                                                                                                                                        2013

                                                                                                                                               2015




                                                                              Cash           COD



                                                                                      37
Figure 2: Cost of Capital and Cash Savings
The figure presents firms' cash savings across deciles of the deviation of cost of capital (COC)
from its historical average for firms with a minimum of three-year observations for the sample
period of 1981-2015 and the subsample periods of 1981-1998 and 1999-2015. Cash savings is
the changes in cash and equivalents divided by total assets at the beginning of the year.




           2.60%


           2.40%


           2.20%


           2.00%
Cash Savings




           1.80%


           1.60%


           1.40%


           1.20%


           1.00%
                   -3.34%   -1.96%   -1.33%   -0.85%   -0.42%   0.01%     0.49%     1.08%   1.99%   4.32%
                                                 Deviation from Average COC
                                     1981-2015         1981-1998        1999-2015
Figure 3: Cash Savings versus Future Investment
This figure plots firms' cash savings relative to future investment deciles. Future investment is
defined as the two subsequent year average of capital expenditures plus acquisitions and R&D
divided by lagged total assets. Cash saving is the current year change in cash and equivalents
divided by lagged total assets.

                    45%
                                                                                         5%

                    40%
                                                                                         4%

                    35%
                                                                                         4%
Future Investment




                    30%




                                                                                              Cash Savings
                                                                                         3%
                    25%
                                                                                         3%
                    20%

                                                                                         2%
                    15%

                                                                                         2%
                    10%


                    5%                                                                   1%


                    0%                                                                   1%
                          1   2   3      4       5        6      7         8   9   10
                                         Future Investment Deciles
                                      Future Investment     Cash Savings




                                                     39
Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table reports the summary statistics of firm characteristics (Panel A) and standard deviation of
cost of capital cross firms and over time (Panel B). Cash is the change in cash and equivalents (Cash)
divided by total assets at the beginning of the year. ExCapital and ICF are external capital and
internal cash flow, respectively. N W C is net working capital excluding cash and equivalents. M/B is
market-to-book asset ratio. V ol is cash flow volatility. CapEx is capital expenditures. COE is cost of
equity. COD is cost of debt. COC is weighted average of cost of capital. Detailed variable definitions
are provided in the Appendix.


                                               Panel A: Summary Statistics
                                 Mean             Median          Standard Deviation
       Cash                      0.0175            0.0027                0.0912
       Cash                      0.1394            0.0793                0.1547
       ExCapital                 0.0423            0.0011                0.1761
       ICF                       0.0655            0.0623                0.0940
       Size                      6.4990            6.3408                1.8776
       M/B                       1.8535            1.4849                1.1855
       Vol                       0.0180            0.0153                0.0103
       Dividend                  0.0145            0.0042                0.0239
       Leverage                  0.2118            0.1974                0.1710
       NWC                       0.1079            0.0925                0.1709
       CapEx                     0.0709            0.0514                0.0976
       Acquisitions              0.0433            0.0000                0.1190
       R&D                       0.0334            0.0000                0.0610
       COE                       0.0989            0.0939                0.0330
       COD                       0.0843            0.0762                0.0315
       COC                       0.0941            0.0904                0.0283

                                    Panel B: Decomposition of Standard Deviation
                                    Cross-section                 Time-series
           COE                         0.0267                        0.0254
           COD                         0.0260                        0.0229
           COC                         0.0231                        0.0217




                                                  40
Table 2: Sensitivities of Cash Savings to Cash Sources
This table reports the sensitivities of cash savings to external capital and internal cash flows. The
dependent variable is the change in cash and equivalents divided by total assets at the beginning of
the year. ExCapital and ICF are external capital and internal cash flow, respectively. Control vari-
ables include Leverage, leverage ratio; Size; N W C , net working capital excluding cash and equivalents;
M/B , market-to-book asset ratio; V ol, cash flow volatility, CapEx, capital expenditures; Acquisitions;
Divdend; Cash; T bill, the one-year treasury bill rate; Spread, the credit spread; and D90 and D00,
dummy variables for 1990s and 2000s. Standardized beta coefficients are reported in Column (3). De-
tailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level
and corrected for heteroscedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels,
respectively.

                                          (1)                      (2)                   (3)
         ExCapital                    0.2897***                0.2959***               0.5502
                                       [0.0064]                 [0.0071]
         ICF                          0.2340***                0.2277***               0.2476
                                       [0.0082]                 [0.0095]
         Cash                        -0.0651***               -0.1937***              -0.1159
                                       [0.0037]                 [0.0067]
         M/B                          0.0051***                0.0048***               0.0741
                                       [0.0006]                 [0.0007]
         Vol                          0.2667***                0.3529***               0.0312
                                       [0.0346]                 [0.0590]
         Dividend                    -0.3706***               -0.3902***              -0.1006
                                       [0.0169]                 [0.0303]
         Leverage                    -0.0239***                  0.0006               -0.0457
                                       [0.0022]                 [0.0042]
         Size                        -0.0017***               -0.0115***              -0.0361
                                       [0.0002]                 [0.0008]
         NWC                         -0.0280***                0.0582***              -0.0522
                                       [0.0026]                 [0.0063]
         CapEx                       -0.1722***               -0.1959***              -0.1849
                                       [0.0068]                 [0.0089]
         Acquisitions                -0.2717***               -0.2764***               -0.362
                                       [0.0072]                 [0.0080]
         R&D                          0.1142***                  0.0166                0.0791
                                       [0.0082]                 [0.0274]
         Tbill                       0.1479***                   0.0252                0.0536
                                       [0.0188]                 [0.0219]
         Spread                       0.8222***                0.5981***               0.0607
                                       [0.0605]                 [0.0624]
         D90                          0.0052***                0.0107***               0.0278
                                       [0.0012]                 [0.0014]
         D00                          0.0143***                0.0309***               0.0814
                                       [0.0016]                 [0.0021]
         Fixed Effects                    No                      Yes                    No
         Observations                   60,003                   59,353                60,003
         Adj. R2                        0.2669                   0.3196                0.2669
Table 3: Cost of Capital and Cash Savings
This table reports the sensitivities of cash savings to cost of capital and sources of cash. The dependent
variable is the change in cash and equivalents divided by total assets at the beginning of the year.
COC is weighted average cost of capital. ExCapital and ICF are external capital and internal cash
flow, respectively, divided by total assets at the beginning of the year. Detailed variable definitions are
provided in the Appendix. The coefficient estimates of the control variables are not reported for brevity.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate
the 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.


                   (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
COC           -0.1257*** -0.1454*** -0.1192*** -0.1790*** -0.1860*** -0.1611***
                [0.0141]   [0.0157]   [0.0157]   [0.0177]   [0.0191]   [0.0193]
ExCapital     0.3407*** 0.2898*** 0.3407*** 0.3513*** 0.2942*** 0.3509***
                [0.0149]   [0.0064]   [0.0150]   [0.0155]   [0.0070]   [0.0155]
ICF            0.2342*** 0.2490*** 0.2492*** 0.2270*** 0.2699*** 0.2678***
                [0.0082]   [0.0259]   [0.0260]   [0.0095]   [0.0269]   [0.0271]
ExCapital×COC -0.5630***            -0.5630*** -0.6378***            -0.6330***
                [0.1520]              [0.1521]   [0.1546]              [0.1541]
ICF×COC                    -0.1528    -0.1528              -0.4336*   -0.4155*
                           [0.2206]   [0.2224]              [0.2278]   [0.2302]
Controls          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Fixed Effects      No         No         No        Yes        Yes         Yes
Observations     60,003     60,003     60,003     59,353     59,353     59,353
       2
Adj. R           0.2695     0.2686     0.2695     0.3229     0.322       0.323




                                                     42
Table 4: Hedging Motive
This table compares the impacts of cost of capital on the sensitivities of cash savings to external capital
between firms with high and low hedging motives. The dependent variable is the change in cash and
equivalents divided by total assets at the beginning of the year. ExCapital and ICF are external capital
and internal cash flow, respectively, divided by total assets at the beginning of the year. High and
low hedging-need firms are defined as those in the top 30 percent and those in the bottom 30 percent,
respectively based on the correlation between industry-level external finance and COC (Hedging Motive
1), the correlation between financial deficit and COC (Hedging Motive 2), and the correlation between
KZ index and COC (Hedging Motive 3). Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix.
Firm fixed effects are controlled. The coefficient estimates of the control variables are not reported for
brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity. ***, **, and
* indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.


                 Hedging           Motive 1           Hedging    Motive 2          Hedging Motive 3
                  High                 Low             High          Low            High      Low
                   (1)                  (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)       (6)
COC           -0.1092***           -0.1969***      -0.1109***    -0.1872***     -0.3948*** 0.0397
                [0.0361]             [0.0376]        [0.0349]      [0.0375]       [0.0417]  [0.0330]
ExCapital      0.3798***            0.2990***       0.3559***     0.3169***      0.3902*** 0.2647***
                [0.0257]             [0.0284]        [0.0261]      [0.0299]       [0.0271]  [0.0274]
ICF            0.2834***            0.2096***       0.2538***     0.2555***      0.2637*** 0.1836***
                [0.0546]             [0.0405]        [0.0502]      [0.0416]       [0.0572]  [0.0394]
ExCapital×COC -0.8291***             -0.2064       -0.7168***      -0.1893      -0.9471*** -0.0296
                [0.2484]             [0.2938]        [0.2503]      [0.3070]       [0.2665]  [0.2633]
ICF×COC         -0.5681               0.1698         -0.4671       -0.0515        -0.7487*   0.319
                [0.4535]             [0.3672]        [0.4079]      [0.3803]       [0.4471]  [0.3477]
Controls          Yes                  Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes      Yes
Fixed Effects     Yes                  Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes      Yes
Observations     17,410               17,418          17,379        17,430         17,430    17,494
Adj. R2          0.3405               0.3205          0.3293        0.3365         0.3596    0.2995




                                                    43
Table 5: Excess Capital Issuance and Future Investment
This table compares the sensitivities of excess capital issuance to cost of capital (Panel A) and the
sensitivities of cash savings to future investment (Panel B) between firms with high and low hedging
motives. The dependent variable in Panel A is excess capital issues. COC is weighted average cost of
capital. The dependent variable in Panel B is the change in cash and equivalents divided by total assets
at the beginning of the year. F Invest is future investment defined as the average of two subsequent
years of capital expenditures plus acquisitions plus R&D divided by lagged total assets. High and low
hedging-need firms are defined as those in the top 30 percent and those in the bottom 30 percent,
respectively based on the correlation between industry-level external finance and COC (Hedging Motive
1), the correlation between financial deficit and COC (Hedging Motive 2), and the correlation between
KZ index and COC (Hedging Motive 3). Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. The
coefficient estimates of the control variables are not reported for brevity. Standard errors are clustered
at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10%
significance levels, respectively.
                                               Panel A: Excess Issuance
                       Hedging Motive 1            Hedging Motive 2      Hedging Motive 3
                        High      Low               High       Low        High      Low
                         (1)       (2)               (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
COC                 -0.7991***   0.0277         -0.9412*** -0.0404 -1.3122*** 0.2517***
                      [0.0633]  [0.0639]          [0.0698]   [0.0610]   [0.0800]  [0.0566]
Controls                Yes       Yes               Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
Fixed Effects           Yes       Yes               Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations           17,379    17,430            17,410     17,418     17,430    17,494
Adj. R2                0.2709    0.2442            0.2610     0.2457     0.2793    0.2537


                                    Panel B: Future Investment
                 Hedging Motive 1        Hedging Motive 2       Hedging Motive 3
                  High       Low          High        Low        High      Low
                   (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)
FInvest       0.0935***     0.0163     0.0769***     0.0327   0.1025***   0.0074
                [0.0278]   [0.0265]     [0.0267]    [0.0269]   [0.0288]  [0.0266]
FInvest× COC -0.8049***     0.1511      -0.5442*     0.1088  -0.8223*** 0.2661
                [0.2942]   [0.2727]     [0.2834]    [0.2834]   [0.3047]  [0.2758]
COC           -0.2794*** -0.2262*** -0.2479*** -0.2328*** -0.6819*** 0.0900**
                [0.0507]   [0.0498]     [0.0465]    [0.0516]   [0.0553]  [0.0456]
Controls          Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
Fixed Effects     Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes
Observations     17,410     17,418       17,379      17,430     17,430    17,494
Adj. R2          0.1558     0.1466       0.1583       0.143     0.1761    0.1486




                                                   44
Table 6: Cash Savings: Equity vs Debt
This table compares cash savings from equity issues versus debt issues versus internal cash flows (Panel
A) and the sensitivities of cash savings to sources of cash and cost of capital between firms with high and
low hedging motives (Panel B). The dependent variable is the change in cash and equivalents divided
by total assets at the beginning of the year. High and low hedging-need firms are defined as those in
the top 30 percent and those in the bottom 30 percent, respectively based on the correlation between
industry-level external finance and COC (Hedging Motive 1), the correlation between financial deficit
and COC (Hedging Motive 2), and the correlation between KZ index and COC (Hedging Motive 3).
Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. The coefficient estimates of the control
variables are not reported for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for
heteroscedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.

                                                      Panel A: Equity vs Debt
                                 (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)                   (5)
    Eissue                   0.3462***                                     0.3967***             0.4039***
                              [0.0076]                                      [0.0085]              [0.0096]
    Dissue                                    0.0567***                    0.1985***             0.2091***
                                               [0.0051]                     [0.0075]              [0.0081]
    ICF                                                      0.2030***     0.2246***             0.2145***
                                                              [0.0076]      [0.0079]              [0.0092]
    Controls                      No              No             No           Yes                   Yes
    Firm Fixed Effects            No              No             No            No                   Yes
    Observations                64,405          64,405         64,405        60,003                59,353
    Adj. R2                     0.1619          0.0060         0.0437        0.2791                0.3289


                                        Panel B: Cost of Equity vs Cost of Debt
                                  Hedging Motive 1       Hedging Motive 2       Hedging Motive 3
                         All        High         Low          High          Low         High         Low
                         (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)
   COE             -0.1207***   -0.0775***   -0.1362***   -0.0737***   -0.1439***   -0.2688***      0.0133
                     [0.0143]     [0.0275]     [0.0273]     [0.0245]     [0.0280]     [0.0314]     [0.0242]
   COD               -0.0453*      0.0102    -0.1626***     -0.0419      -0.0746*     -0.0433      -0.0374
                     [0.0231]     [0.0413]     [0.0428]     [0.0385]     [0.0435]     [0.0447]     [0.0402]
   Eissue           0.4452***   0.5161***    0.4072***     0.4695***    0.4229***   0.5278***     0.3339***
                     [0.0253]     [0.0428]     [0.0465]     [0.0197]     [0.0455]     [0.0421]     [0.0462]
   Dissue          0.2635***    0.2686***    0.2341***    0.2100***     0.3015***    0.2534***   0.2635***
                     [0.0149]     [0.0280]     [0.0260]     [0.0158]     [0.0266]     [0.0275]     [0.0262]
   ICF              0.2884***   0.3285***    0.2018***     0.3154***    0.2766***   0.3150***     0.1874***
                     [0.0281]     [0.0574]     [0.0423]     [0.0261]     [0.0423]     [0.0582]     [0.0453]
   Eissue×COE        -0.4789*   -1.1845***      0.0021    -0.8090***      -0.0402   -1.2565***      0.4166
                     [0.2560]     [0.4246]     [0.4764]     [0.2040]     [0.4644]     [0.4327]     [0.4437]
   Dissue×COD      -0.6275***    -0.6317**    -0.5259**     -0.0818    -1.0319***     -0.4384    -0.8728***
                     [0.1500]     [0.2694]     [0.2593]     [0.1656]     [0.2591]     [0.2784]     [0.2396]
   ICF×COE         -0.5976***    -0.8045**     -0.1334    -0.6262***      -0.3149   -0.9764***      0.0469
                     [0.1863]     [0.3664]     [0.2935]     [0.1718]     [0.3116]     [0.3614]     [0.2898]
   ICF×COD            -0.1728     -0.2947       0.1952     -0.5977**       -0.173     -0.3566       0.0789
                     [0.1972]     [0.3628]     [0.3245]     [0.2353]     [0.3273]     [0.3513]     [0.3449]
   Controls             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
   Fixed Effects        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes
   Observations       59,353       17,410       17,418       17,379        17,430      17,430       17,494
   Adj. R2             0.3322      0.347        0.3392       0.3388       0.3492       0.3722       0.3143
Table 7: The Effect of Exogenous Shock to Cost of Capital on Cash Savings
This table reports the effects of exogenous shocks to cost of capital on cash savings for firms with high
hedging motive. We use Regulation Fair Disclosure of 2000 (Reg FD) (Columns 1 and 2) as a shock to
cost of capital. We set the P ost dummy as zero for 1997-1999 and one for 2000-2002. The remaining
columns report placebo tests based on fictitious event years of 2006 (Columns 3 and 4) and 2011 (Columns
5 and 6). In columns 1, 3, and 5, treated firms are the top 50% of R&D-to-Sales ratio among positive
R&D firms and control firms are zero-R&D firms. In columns 2, 4, and 6, treated and control firms are
defined as top and bottom 30% of book-to-market ratio, respectively, measured in the event year. The
dependent variable is the change in cash and equivalents divided by total assets at the beginning of the
year. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix. The coefficient estimates of the control
variables are not reported for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for
heteroscedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.


                                       Reg FD   Placebo 1                                 Placebo 2
                            (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)                             (5)         (6)
Post                     0.0227   0.0215* -0.0173 -0.0071                           -0.0121*     -0.0180
                        [0.0162]  [0.0126] [0.0128] [0.0095]                        [0.0062]    [0.0142]
Treated×Post            -0.0422*   0.0212   0.0001    0.0024                         -0.0006     -0.0013
                        [0.0251]  [0.0136] [0.0148] [0.0127]                        [0.0135]    [0.0112]
ExCapital×Post           -0.0703  0.0689* 0.1919      0.0533                          0.0680      0.0304
                        [0.0623]  [0.0409] [0.1566] [0.0389]                        [0.0490]    [0.0373]
ICF×Post               -0.5139** 0.0817     0.0357   -0.0140                       0.2382** 0.1041**
                        [0.2361]  [0.0856] [0.2758] [0.0933]                        [0.0962]    [0.0522]
Treated×ExCapital×Post 0.2748** 0.2236*** -0.1430 -0.0254                            -0.1241     -0.0145
                        [0.1116]  [0.0750] [0.1655] [0.0864]                        [0.0902]    [0.0861]
Treated×ICF×Post        0.6021*   -0.1281   0.0441    0.0534                        -0.2385*     -0.0915
                        [0.3209]  [0.1249] [0.2879] [0.1328]                        [0.1356]    [0.1223]
Treated×ExCapital        0.0741    0.0756 0.2064* 0.1066                              0.0704    0.1489**
                        [0.0864]  [0.0583] [0.1213] [0.0769]                        [0.0813]    [0.0620]
Treated×ICF              -0.0275   0.0932  -0.0631 -0.0730                          0.1927*     0.1505*
                        [0.1747]  [0.1212] [0.2072] [0.1223]                        [0.0991]    [0.0832]
ExCapital              0.2388*** 0.2059*** 0.1355 0.2835***                        0.3440*** 0.2967***
                        [0.0753]  [0.0327] [0.0993] [0.0510]                        [0.0467]    [0.0424]
ICF                     0.2741* 0.2025** 0.1694 0.3079***                             0.0374 0.1483***
                        [0.1466]  [0.0822] [0.2040] [0.0828]                        [0.0595]    [0.0455]
Controls                    Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes                             Yes         Yes
Fixed Effects               Yes      Yes      Yes       Yes                             Yes         Yes
Observations               1,161    2,169    1,614     2,603                           1,540       2,426
Adj. R2                   0.4966   0.4119   0.2954    0.3031                          0.4017      0.3717




                                                   46
     Table 8: Constrained vs Unconstrained Firms
     This table compares the sensitivities of cash savings to cost of capital and sources of cash between financially constrained and unconstrained
     firms (Panel A). Constrained and unconstrained firms are defined as firms that do not have a credit rating and firms that have a credit
     rating (Columns 1 and 2), top and bottom 30% of WW index (Whited and Wu (2006)) (Columns 3 and 4), top and bottom 30% of
     HP index (Hadlock and Pierce (2010)) (Columns 5 and 6), respectively. The dependent variable is the change in cash and equivalents
     divided by total assets at the beginning of the year. ExCapital and ICF are external capital and internal cash flow, respectively, divided
     by total assets at the beginning of the year. Panel B compares cash saving from external capital and internal capital for financially
     constrained and unconstrained firms with high hedging motive using our hedging measure and using the Acharya et al. (2007) measure.
     The reported results are based on WW index and Hedging Motive 1 measure. Detailed variable definitions are provided in the Appendix.
     The coefficient estimates on the control variables are not reported for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected
     for heteroscedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.

                                                               Panel A: Cash Savings and Cost of Capital
                                             Rating                           WW Index                                 HP Index
                                Unconstrained        Constrained      Unconstrained       Constrained       Unconstrained       Constrained
                                      (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)




47
         COC                     -0.0826***          -0.1889***        -0.0750***         -0.1822***         -0.1377***         -0.1754***
                                   [0.0227]            [0.0262]          [0.0246]           [0.0382]           [0.0251]           [0.0422]
         ExCapital                0.2883***           0.3683***         0.2685***          0.3748***          0.2652***          0.3794***
                                   [0.0311]            [0.0180]          [0.0316]           [0.0292]           [0.0345]           [0.0235]
         ICF                      0.2270***           0.2860***        0.2313***           0.3421***          0.1730***          0.3168***
                                   [0.0423]            [0.0326]          [0.0388]           [0.0402]           [0.0476]           [0.0439]
         ExCapital×COC           -0.9598***          -0.5716***        -0.8544***          -0.6891**          -0.7893**           -0.4032*
                                   [0.2951]            [0.1791]          [0.3058]           [0.2728]           [0.3091]           [0.2330]
         ICF×COC                  -0.8359**            -0.4532*          -0.5761          -1.0025***            0.0104           -0.7275**
                                   [0.3831]            [0.2697]          [0.3857]           [0.3528]           [0.4455]           [0.3476]
         Controls                    Yes                  Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes
         Fixed Effects               Yes                  Yes              Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes
         Observations               19,386              39,560            17,479             16,920             17,738             16,894
         Adj. R2                    0.2307              0.3393            0.1997             0.3379              0.193             0.3865
                            Panel B: Compare with AAC Measure
                    High Hedging Motive             High AAC Measure
                Unconstrained   Constrained   Unconstrained   Constrained
                      (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
COC                -0.0443       -0.1465**       -0.0512      -0.1741***
                  [0.0511]        [0.0602]      [0.0444]        [0.0533]
ExCapital        0.3039***       0.3911***     0.2435***       0.3482***
                  [0.0532]        [0.0504]      [0.0494]        [0.0366]
ICF                0.0994        0.3435***     0.2512***       0.3626***
                  [0.0855]        [0.0604]      [0.0611]        [0.0635]
ExCapital×COC     -0.7974*       -1.1449**       -0.6358        -0.4136
                  [0.4689]        [0.4723]      [0.4872]        [0.3427]
ICF×COC            0.2981        -1.3072**       -0.8785       -1.1528**
                  [0.8058]        [0.5080]      [0.6448]        [0.5497]
Controls              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Fixed Effects         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
Observations         4,033          5,276          7,933          8,715
Adj. R2             0.2371         0.3293         0.1956         0.3463




                                  48
Table 9: Alternative Motives
This table reports the test results of alternative motives for cash saving: market timing and precautionary
Motive. The dependent variable is the change in cash and equivalents divided by total assets at the
beginning of the year. Panel A compares the impacts of cost of capital on the sensitivities of cash savings
to external capital between high and low external finance dependent firms. We use F inancial Def icit
(EFD 1), External F inance (EFD 2), and KZ Index (EFD 3) to measure external finance dependence.
For each measure, we define firms in the top 30 percent as high external finance dependent firms and
those in the bottom 30 percent as low external finance dependence firms, dropping the middle 40 percent.
Panel B compares the impacts of cost of capital on sensitivities of cash savings to equity issues between
firms with high and low precautionary motives. Firms with high (low) precautionary motives are defined
as those without (with) dividend payments, those in the top 30 percent (bottom 30 percent) based on
R&D expenditures, the industry-level median cash flow volatility (CF Risk ), and a precautionary motive
measure (P recaution), respectively. ExCapital and ICF are external capital and internal cash flow,
respectively, divided by total assets at the beginning of the year. Panel C and D test whether market
timing or precautionary motive explains the sensitivities of excess capital issuance to cost of capital and
the sensitivities of cash savings to future investment. Firm fixed effects are controlled. Detailed variable
definitions are provided in the Appendix. The coefficient estimates of the control variables are not
reported for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level and corrected for heteroscedasticity.
***, **, and * indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels, respectively.

                                              Panel A: Market Timing Motive
                               EFD 1                       EFD 2                  EFD 3
                         High           Low          High         Low        High        Low
                          (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)
COC                  -0.1686***     -0.3399*** -0.1503*** -0.3098*** -0.0740*** -0.2304***
                       [0.0374]       [0.0664]     [0.0267]     [0.0707]   [0.0228]   [0.0478]
ExCapital            0.2723***       0.4533*** 0.2832*** 0.4374*** 0.2250*** 0.3996***
                       [0.0230]       [0.0364]     [0.0260]     [0.0301]   [0.0252]   [0.0294]
ICF                   0.0972**      0.4190***       0.0202    0.4373*** 0.2206*** 0.2337***
                       [0.0381]       [0.0579]     [0.0359]     [0.0619]   [0.0376]   [0.0472]
ExCapital×COC          -0.2593      -1.2515***      -0.3331   -1.0502***   -0.0616    -0.5948*
                       [0.2137]       [0.3687]     [0.2365]     [0.3164]   [0.2351]   [0.3163]
ICF×COC                -0.0318        -0.1128       0.3196       0.0252    -0.2502     -0.0542
                       [0.3092]       [0.5629]     [0.2928]     [0.5819]   [0.3702]   [0.3970]
Controls                 Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
Fixed Effects            Yes            Yes           Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
Observations            15,966         16,651       16,042       17,520     17,021     17,010
$Adj.$ $R^2$            0.3421         0.3792       0.2935       0.3955     0.3172     0.3399




                                                    49
                                          Panel B: Precautionary Motive
                     Dividend               R&D                   CFSD                Precaution
                  High       Low       High        Low       High        Low       High        Low
                   (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
COC           -0.1296*** -0.2281*** -0.1898*** -0.1328*** -0.1667*** -0.1125*** -0.1608*** -0.1479***
                [0.0222] [0.0341] [0.0293] [0.0238] [0.0333] [0.0435] [0.0337] [0.0423]
ExCapital     0.2579*** 0.3876*** 0.3932*** 0.2688*** 0.4045*** 0.2964*** 0.3981*** 0.2971***
                [0.0213] [0.0202] [0.0225] [0.0199] [0.0258] [0.0294] [0.0272] [0.0306]
ICF            0.2312*** 0.2897*** 0.2416*** 0.3087*** 0.3390*** 0.2939*** 0.3532*** 0.2827***
                [0.0301] [0.0376] [0.0371] [0.0389] [0.0354] [0.0608] [0.0328] [0.0608]
ExCapital×COC -0.5456*** -0.5720*** -0.4763** -0.5133*** -0.5195** -0.5752** -0.4959** -0.6242**
                [0.1898] [0.2107] [0.2333] [0.1797] [0.2451] [0.2869] [0.2515] [0.2940]
ICF×COC         -0.1545 -0.6961** -0.1377 -0.8652*** -0.6259* -0.8060 -0.7711** -0.5483
                [0.2689] [0.3170] [0.3135] [0.3279] [0.3274] [0.5392] [0.3002] [0.5546]
Controls          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Fixed Effects     Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Observations     33,016    25,676     29,336     29,837     17,433     16,980     17,293     16,619
Adj. R2          0.2173    0.3588     0.3692     0.2608     0.3616     0.3223     0.3472     0.3293


                                                 Panel C: Excess Issuance
                                    Market Timing                         Precautionary
                               High               Low                High                Low
                                (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)
    COC                    -0.4578***         -0.5428***         -0.2746***          -0.3855***
                             [0.0598]           [0.0710]           [0.0560]            [0.0704]
    Controls                   Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
    Fixed Effects              Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
    Observations              15,966             16,651             17,293              16,619
    Adj. R2                   0.2152             0.3626             0.2493              0.3049


                                                Panel D: Future Investment
                                    Market Timing                          Precautionary
                               High               Low                 High                Low
                                (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
    FInvest                   0.0297           0.1249***           0.0579**              0.0536
                             [0.0249]           [0.0318]            [0.0247]            [0.0326]
    FInvest× COC             -0.1944           -0.8801**            -0.2982             -0.1924
                             [0.2633]           [0.3501]            [0.2579]            [0.3320]
    COC                    -0.2582***         -0.3851***          -0.2156***          -0.2462***
                             [0.0503]           [0.0627]            [0.0480]            [0.0511]
    Controls                   Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes
    Fixed Effects              Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes
    Observations              15,966             16,651              17,293              16,619
    Adj. R2                   0.1901             0.2026              0.1364               0.188
                                              50
Appendix 1: The first-order conditions

For Xt > 0, the Lagrangian for the maximization problem (2) at t can be written as follows:

      Lt (It , Ct , Xt ) = [Wt - Ct - It - t (Xt )] + µt [Xt - It - t (Xt ) - Ct + Wt ] + t Ct
                                         

                             +                         (It+1 ) +  (It ) + z + Ct - It+1 g (z )dz
                                 -C - (I )
                               It +1 t  t
                                    -C - (I )
                                  It +1 t  t


                             +                      { (Ct +  (It ) + z )} g (z )dz.
                               ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                               I
                                  ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                                  I

                             +                          ^t+1 ) - t+1 (Xt+1 ) g (z )dz.
                                                       (I
                                        -

where µt and  are Lagrange multipliers for the constraints in (2). Applying Leibnitz integral

rule, the first order conditions for It , Ct , Xt , and µt , respectively, are
                                                                      
                                                      
      Lt
         = -1 - µt + I (It )                                   g (z )dz +  (It+1 )
                                                                                  
      It
                                              -C - (I )
                                            It +1 t  t
                                   -C - (I )
                                                                                                             
                                 It +1 t  t


                 +I (It ) 
                                                                                                 ^t+1 )
                                                  {I (Ct +  (It ) + z )} g (z )dz -  (It+1 ) +  (I     
                              ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                              I
                                                                                                                 
                                 ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                                 I

                 +I (It ) 
                                                                         ^t+1 ) - 1(X >0) t+1 (Xt+1 )) 
                                                      ^t+1 )g (z )dz -  (I
                                                   I (I                              t+1               
                                     -
                                                       -C - (I )
                                          
                                                     It +1 t  t


             = -1 - µt + I (It ) 1 +                                   {I (Ct +  (It ) + z ) - 1} g (z )dz
                                 

                                                    ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                                                    I
                                                                                       
                     ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                     I

                 +                         ^t+1 ) + t+1 (Xt+1 ) - 1 g (z )dz 
                                        I (I                                 
                         -

             = [1 + H ]I (It ) - 1 - µt = 0

                                                                                                                (A.1)


                                                             51
      Lt
         = H - µt - t = 0
      Ct
      Lt
         = -t (Xt ) + µt [1 - t (Xt )] = 0
      Xt
      Lt
         = Xt - It - t (Xt ) - Ct + Wt = 0
      µt

If the firm is financially unconstrained with sufficient initial endowment to make the initial

investment and cash saving decisions (Wt  Ct + It or Xt  0), we have t (Xt ) = 0 and the
Lagrangian for the maximization problem (2) at t can be written as follows:

      Lt (It , Ct , Xt ) = [Wt - Ct - It ] + µt [Xt - It - Ct + Wt ]
                                    

                          +                       (It+1 ) +  (It ) + z + Ct - It+1 g (z )dz
                              -C - (I )
                            It +1 t  t
                                -C - (I )
                              It +1 t  t


                          +                    { (Ct +  (It ) + z )} g (z )dz.
                            ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                            I
                              ^t+1 -Ct - (It )
                              I

                          +                        ^t+1 ) - t+1 (Xt+1 ) g (z )dz.
                                                  (I
                                  -

and the first order conditions for It , Ct , Xt , and µt , respectively, are

      Lt
             = [1 + H ]I (It ) - 1 = 0
      It
      Lt
             = H - t = 0
      Ct
      Lt
             = µt = 0
      Xt
      Lt
             = Xt - It - Ct + Wt = 0
      µt




                                                      52
Appendix 2: Proof of Proposition 1

From the first order conditions of the optimization problem at t for Xt > 0 satisfying
^t = I
X    ^t + t (X
             ^t) + C
                   ^t - Wt , we differentiate each condition with respect to t+1 .

                                      ^                 ^
                                                 ^t )  Ct + Ht+1 I (I
                               ^t )}  It + HC I (I
            ^t ) + (1 + H )II (I
     {HI I (I                                                         ^t ) = 0
                                    t+1              t+1
                                               I^t          C^t
                                            HI       + HC        + Ht+1 = 0
                                               t+1         t+1
                                       I ^t    C^t                   ^t
                                                                     X
                                    -       -        + [1 - t (Xt )]       = 0
                                      t+1 t+1                        t+1

where
                    -C
                  It    ^t - (It )
                     +1


         HC =                           ^t +  (I
                                    II (C      ^t ) + z )g (z )dz < 0,   and
                 ^t+1 -C
                 I     ^t - (I
                             ^t )

                 ^t )HC < 0,
         HI = I (I
                                     ^t+1 -C
                                     I     ^t - (I
                                                 ^t )
                     ^ t+1 )
                t+1 (X
     Ht+1     =                                     g (z )dz > 0.
                 t+1
                                         -

HI and HC represent the marginal reduction in underinvestment at t + 1 due to increased

investment and cash saving at time t, respectively, whereas Ht+1 represents the effects of

external finance cost on underinvestment, ceteris paribus.

   The determinant of the Jacobian matrix of the derivatives is
                ^t ) + (1 + H )II (I
          HI I (I                  ^t ) HC I (I ^t )     0
     D =               HI                    HC          0
                       -1                    -1      1 - t (Xt )
       = [1 -  (Xt )]HC (1 + H )II (I  ^t ),


By the implicit function theorem and Crammer's rule we get
                         ^t ) HC I (I
                -Ht+1 I (I          ^t )     0
                  -Ht+1         HC           0
        ^t
        I           0           -1       1 - t (Xt )
              =                                      = 0,
        t+1                    D


                                                        53
                    ^t ) + (1 + H )II (I
              HI I (I                  ^t ) -Ht+1 I (I
                                                     ^t )     0
                           HI                 -Ht+1           0
      ^t
      C                    -1                   0         1 - t (Xt )   -Ht+1
            =                                                         =       > 0,
      t+1                                  D                             HC

and
                ^t ) + (1 + H )II (I
          HI I (I                  ^t ) HC I (I
                                              ^t ) -Ht+1 I (I
                                                            ^t )
                       HI                 HC         -Ht+1
 ^t
 X                     -1                 -1           0               -Ht+1
        =                                                        =                 > 0,
 t+1                                  D                            [1 - t (Xt )]HC
              ^t = I
   For Xt  0, X    ^t + C
                        ^t - Wt and differentiating each FOC with respect to t+1 yields

                                       ^                ^
                                ^t )}  It + HC I (I
             ^t ) + (1 + H )II (I
      {HI I (I                                    ^t )  Ct + Ht+1 I (I^t ) = 0
                                     t+1              t+1
                                               I ^t        C ^t
                                            HI        + HC      + Ht+1 = 0
                                               t+1         t+1
                                                   I ^t    C^t    X  ^t
                                               -        -       +          = 0
                                                 t+1 t+1 t+1

The determinant of the Jacobian matrix of the derivatives is
          HI I (I^t ) + (1 + H )II (I
                                    ^t ) HC I (I
                                               ^t ) 0
      D =               HI                 HC       0
                        -1                 -1       1
        = HC (1 + H )II (I ^t ),


By the implicit function theorem and Crammer's rule we get
                       ^t ) HC I (I
              -Ht+1 I (I          ^t ) 0
                -Ht+1         HC       0
      ^t
      I           0           -1       1
            =                            = 0,
      t+1                  D

                    ^t ) + (1 + H )II (I
              HI I (I                  ^t ) -Ht+1 I (I
                                                     ^t ) 0
                           HI                 -Ht+1       0
      ^t
      C                    -1                   0         1   -Ht+1
            =                                               =       > 0,
      t+1                          D                           HC


                                            54
and
                      ^t ) + (1 + H )II (I
                HI I (I                  ^t ) HC I (I
                                                    ^t ) -Ht+1 I (I
                                                                  ^t )
                             HI                 HC         -Ht+1
        ^t
        X                    -1                 -1           0           -Ht+1
              =                                                        =       > 0.
        t+1                                 D                             HC

Appendix 3: Proof of Proposition 2
                      ^ t+1 ) replaced by t+1 (X
For Xt > 0, with t+1 (X                        ^ t+1 ,  ) and using the results from Appendix

2, we have the following:
          ^t
         2I
             = 0,
        t+1 
          ^t
         2C       Ht+1
             = -       >0
        t+1        HC
          ^t
         2X       -Ht+1 [1 - t (Xt ,  )] - Ht+1 t (Xt ,  )
             = -                                           > 0,
        t+1                [1 - t (Xt ,  )]2 HC

where
                                     ^t+1 -C
                                     I     ^t - (I
                                                 ^t )
                     2  ^ t+1 ,  )
                   t+1 (X
        Ht+1    =                                   g (z )dz > 0,   and
                   t+1 
                                         -
                     2    ^ t+1 ,  )
                     t+1 (X
      t (Xt ) =                      > 0.
                     Xt+1 




                                                  55
Appendix 4: A Dynamic Model

We build upon the models of Whited (1992), Whited and Wu (2006) and Gomes et al. (2006)
to consider the effects of time-varying cost of external capital on cash savings in a dynamic

setting. The firm maximizes the expected discounted value of future cash flows:
                                            
        Vt =          max              Et          Mt,t+j {dt+j - t (Xt ,  )} ,             (A.2)
               (It ,Kt+j ,Ct+j )j =0
                                            j =0
where Et is the expectation operator conditional on information at time t, Mt,t+j is the
discount factor at time t for cash flows at t + j , and dt+j is cash flow at time t + j given as:

        dt =  (Kt , St ) - (Kt , It ) - It + Xt + Ct - Ct+1 ,                               (A.3)

where Kt is the capital stock at time t; It is investment between t and t + 1; Xt is the

amount of external finance at t;  (Kt , St ) is the cash flow at time t from production with the

first partial derivative with regard to K given as K > 0; St is an exogenous state variable;

(Kt , It ) is the cost of adjustment, with the partial derivatives satisfying I > 0, II > 0

and K < 0;8 Ct is the liquid asset called "cash" at time t. Thus, the model allows firms

to invest in two distinctive assets with possibly different returns: capital stock Kt and cash

Ct . The external finance cost function, t (Xt ,  ), is time-varying, which may arise from

market frictions such as asymmetric information.  is a measure of the strength of the

correlation between the external capital needs and the cost of external capital. We also
assume t (Xt ) > 0 and t (Xt ) > 0 for Xt > 0 whereas t (Xt ) = 0 for Xt  0, which implies

that the marginal external financing cost increases with the amount of external capital raised
(see Gomes (2001)).
      Capital accumulation follows the rule:

        Kt+1 = (1 -  )Kt + It ,                                                             (A.4)

where  is the depreciation rate,   (0, 1). The dividend constraint is

        dt  d ,                                                                             (A.5)
  8
      These conditions imply a convex adjustment cost with economies of scale.


                                                                 56
This constraint on d has the same effect as a restriction on external capital as in financial
constraint models.
   The Lagrangian function conditional on the information set at time t is
                                                  
      Vt =              max                  Et          Mt,t+j {(1 + µt+j )dt+j - t+j (Xt+j ,  )    (A.6)
             (It+j ,Kt+j ,Ct+j ,Xt+j )j =0
                                                  j =0
                                                          -qt+j [Kt+1+j - (1 -  )Kt+j - It+j ]}

where qt and µt are Lagrange multipliers for constraints (A.4) and (A.5), respectively. The
first-order conditions for maximizing the firm value at t with respect to It , Kt+1 , Ct+1 , and

Xt+1 , respectively, are given as follows:

         Vt
            = - (1 + µt ) [I (Kt , It ) + 1] + qt = 0;                                               (A.7)
         It
      Vt
           = Et Mt,t+1 (1 + µt+1 ) [K (Kt+1 , St+1 ) - K (Kt+1 , It+1 )] + (1 -  )qt+1
      Kt+1
                       -qt = 0;                                                                      (A.8)
      Vt
           = Et {Mt,t+1 (1 + µt+1 )} - (1 + µt ) = 0;                         and                    (A.9)
      Ct+1
      Vt
           = 1 + µt - t (Xt ,  ) = 0.                                                               (A.10)
      Xt

Equation (A.7) suggests that a firm's optimal investment is determined where the product

of the opportunity cost of external financing and the marginal cost of adjustment is equal to

the marginal rate of return on investment at t. Clearly, the firm's investment in the presence
of the external financing costs will be less than the optimal.
   Without time-varying external financing costs (t = t+1 ), condition (A.9) also implies

that saving cash today does not affect the firm value. In the presence of time-varying costs
of external capital, however, the firm's investment and cash saving decisions depend on the
relative (in an inter-temporal sense) costs of external capital. To see this, note that we




                                                                57
obtain the following equations from equations (A.7) - (A.9):

                                     1 + t+1 (Xt ,  )
      I (Kt , It ) + 1 = Et Mt,t+1                       1 + K (Kt+1 , St+1 )             (A.11)
                                      1 + t (Xt ,  )

                  -K (Kt+1 , It+1 ) + (1 -  ) I (Kt+1 , It+1 ) + 1     ;   and

                                                    1 + t+1 (Xt ,  )
                                        Et Mt,t+1                          = 1.           (A.12)
                                                     1 + t (Xt ,  )

The relative costs of external finance, t ( ) = (1 + t+1 (Xt ,  ))/(1 + t (Xt ,  )), in equations
(A.11) and (A.12) represent the effect on investment and savings decisions of inter-temporal

variation in costs of external finance and the correlation between the expected cost of external

capital and the future capital needs.

   Given Assumption 1 for the two-period model regarding the external finance cost func-

tion, it is straightforward to see that t ( ) is an increasing function of  for t < t+1 :

i.e., the effect of intertemporal costs of external capital is magnified for firms with a greater

correlation between the expected cost of capital and future external capital needs.




                                               58
Appendix 5: Definitions of Variables
The following are variable definitions used in this study. Items in parentheses are variable
names as used in the Compustat annual database.
Acquisitions = acquisitions (aqc) / lagged total assets (at)
Cash Flow (CF ) = operating income before depreciation (oibdp)/lagged plant and equip-
    ment (ppent)
Cash = cash and cash Equivalents (che) / total assets (at)
Cost of Capital (COC ) = weighted average cost of capital
Cash = change in cash and cash Equivalents (chech) / lagged total assets (at)
Cost of Debt (COD) = whichever is the greater: interest expense (xint) divided by the
     average of total debt at the beginning and the end of the year; or AAA-rated bond
     yield
Cost of Equity (ICC ) = Implied Cost of capital
Credit Spread (Spread) = difference in yield between maturity matched Treasury yield
    and AAA-rated corporate bonds
Dividend = cash dividend (dv) / lagged total assets (at)
D90 = 1 if fiscal year between 1991 and 2000; 0 otherwise
D00 = 1 if fiscal year after 2000; 0 otherwise
External Capital (ExCapital) =Net Equity Issuance (EIssue) + Net Debt Issuance (DIssue)
External Finance (External) = [capital expenditures (capx) - internal cash flow (ibc+dp)]/capx
External Finance Dependence (KZ ) = -1.002CF -39.368DIV -1.315CASH +3.139LEV
Excess Issuance = Net Equity Issuance (EIssue) + Net Debt Issuance (DIssue) - Fi-
    nancial Deficit (Def icit)
Financial Deficit (Def icit) = [dividends + acquisitions + net investment - internal cash
    flow]/ lagged total assets (at)9
Future Investment (F Invest) = the average of two subsequent years of [capital expen-
    ditures (capx) + acquisitions (acq) + R&D]/ lagged total assets (at)
HP index = -0.737Size + 0.043Size2 - 0.04Age, where Size is the natural logarithm of
    total assets capped by $4.65 billion and Age is the number of years since the firm's
    initial offering capped by 37
Internal Cash Flow (ICF ) = [income before extraordinary items (ibc) + depreciation
     and amortization (dpc)] / lagged total assets (at)
   9
    We follow Rajan and Zingales (1998) to include the change in the non-financial components of net working
capital as part of funds from operations in defining the financial deficit and external finance dependence.

                                                    59
Leverage = [short-term debt (dlc) + long-term debt (dltt)] / total assets (at)
M/B = market value of assets / total assets (at), where market value of assets is given by
   total assets (at) - common equity (ceq) + market value of common equity (common
   shares outstanding (csho) × share price (prcc))
Net Debt Issuance (DIssue) = [long-term debt issues (dltis) - long-term debt reduction
    (dltr) + change in current debt (dlcch)] / lagged total assets (at)
Net Equity Issuance (EIssue) = [sale of common and preferred stock (sstk) - purchase
    of common and preferred stock (prstkc)] / lagged total assets (at)
Net Investment (IN V ) = [increase in investment (invch) + capital expenditures (capx) +
     other use of funds (fuseo)- sales of property and plants (sppe) - sales of investment (siv)
     - short-term investment change (ivstch) -other investment activities (ivaco)]/lagged
     total assets (at)
Net Working Capital N W C = [current assets (act) - Current Liabilities (lct) - Cash
    (che)] / total assets
Operating Cash Flow (OCF ) = operating income before depreciation (oibdp)
P recaution = the first principal component of firm-level R&D and 2-digit industry cash
      flow volatility (CF Risk ).
R&D = research and development expense (xrdq) / Sales
Size = logarithm of total assets (at)
Tax Rate (T axr) =whichever is the lower: tax payment (txt) divided by pretax income
    (pi) or the statutory maximum tax rate
V ol (Cash Flow Volatility)] = standard deviation of 2-digit SIC industry average cash flow
      (ICF ) for the prior ten years
T bill = 3-month T-bill rate (annual average of monthly observations)
WW index = -0.091ICF-0.062 Div+0.021LTD-0.044Size+0.102ISG-0.035SG, where Div
  is an indicator for dividend; LTD is long-term debt ratio; ISG is industry sales growth
  rate; and SG is the firm's sales growth rate
Yield Spread (Spread) = BBB-bond yield - AAA-bond yield (annual average of monthly
     observations)




                                              60
Appendix 6: Estimation procedure for the COE

The Claus and Thomas (2001) model is based on the economic profit for shareholders as in
the following equation:
                      5
                            F Et+k - ICCt × BEt+k-1 (F Et+5 - ICCt × BEt+4 )(1 + gt )
     Pt = BEt +                                    +                                  (A.13)
                     k=1
                                   (1 + ICCt )k         (ICCt - gt )(1 + ICCt )5
where Pt is the current stock price and the growth rate after 5 years, gt , is estimated by

inflation rate. We obtain the initial forecast value of equity as BEt+1 = BEt + F Et+1 × bt+1 ,
where BEt is the book equity value per share at t; F Et+1 is forecasted earnings per share at
t + 1; and bt+1 is the retention ratio at t + 1.

   The Gebhardt, Lee, and Swaminathan (2001) model is based on the following equation:
                       12
                            (ROEt+k - ICCt )BEt+k-1 (ROEt+12 - ICCt )BEt+11
      Pt = BEt +                                   +                                      (A.14)
                      k=1
                                 (1 + ICCt )k          ICCt (1 + ICCt )12
where ROEt+k is the return on equity at t + k which is assumed to revert linearly to the

median industry ROE by year t + 12. The industry median ROE is for 48 Fama and French

industries based on past 10-year data, excluding firms with losses. The book value of equity

is estimated by BEt+k = BEt+k-1 + F Et+k × bt+k .

   The Li, Ng, and Swaminathan (2013) model is as follows:
                                                  gt
            15                          (bt+1 -
                                             ICCt
                                                       )
                  F Et+k × [1 - bt+1 +     15
                                                  × (k - 1)]      F Et+15 × (1 - bt )
     Pt =                                   k
                                                             +                           . (A.15)
            k=1
                                 (1 + ICCt )                   (ICCt - gt )(1 + ICCt )15
The model has two parts: 1) the present value of cash flows up to year (t + 15); and 2) the

present value of cash flows beyond year t + 15. For the first two years' earnings, we use the
median forecasts by analysts and forecast earnings F Et+k from year t + 3 to year t + T + 1
                                    g
as F Et+k = F Et+2 × (1 + gt+3 exp{gt × (k - 2)}). We assume that the earnings growth rate

gt+3 will mean-revert exponentially to steady-state values by year t + T + 2. The assumption
                       g                  g
implies that gt+3 exp{gt × 15} = gt with gt being the growth rate of growth rate gt+2 , which
        g            gt
yields gt = ln      gt+2
                            /15. For gt+3 , we use the median long-term growth rate forecast of

analysts. If the long-term growth rate forecast is not available, we estimate it using the first



                                                           61
                                       F Et+2
two years' forecast earnings: gt+3 =   F Et+1
                                                - 1. The steady-state earning growth rate (gt ) is
assumed to be a rolling average of annual GDP growth rate.
   We construct the stream of dividends as Dt+k = F Et+k × (1 - bt+k ) for 1  k  15. The

initial retention ratio is estimated as bt+1 = [1- Cash Dividendt /Net Incomet ]. For years
                                                                                      g
                                                                                      t )
                                                                            (bt+1 - ICC
t + 2 to t + T + 1, we estimate the retention rate as bt+k = bt+1 -              15
                                                                                          t
                                                                                              × (k - 1).
                                                                                           gt
The retention rate is assumed to revert linearly to a steady-state rate bt =              ICCt
                                                                                                 by year

t + T + 1. After terminal year, we estimate the terminal value of remaining cash flows using
the Gordon growth model: F Et+15 × (1 - bt )/(ICCt - gt ).




                                                  62
Appendix 7: Robustness Check

 Table A1: Hedging Motive: Robustness

 This table reports the robustness of the impacts of cost of capital on the sensitivities of cash
 savings to external capital between firms with high and low hedging motives. The dependent variable is
 the change in cash and equivalents divided by total assets at the beginning of the year. ExCapital and
 ICF are external capital and internal cash flow, respectively, divided by total assets at the beginning of
 the year. High and low hedging-need firms are defined as those in the top 30 percent and those in the
 bottom 30 percent, respectively based on the correlation between industry-level external finance and
 COC. We use high order linear cumulants (Erickson et al. (2014)) to account for measurement errors
 in the cost of capital measure (Columns 1 and 2). Claus and Thomas (2001) (Columns 3 and 4) and
 Gebhardt et al. (2001) (Columns 5 and 6) are used as alternative COE measures. Detailed variable
 definitions are provided in the Appendix. Firm fixed effects are controlled. The coefficient estimates
 of the control variables are not reported for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level
 and corrected for heteroscedasticity. ***, **, and * indicate the 1%, 5%, and 10% significance levels,
 respectively.


                         High-Order   Cumulants    Gebhardt et   al. (2001)   Claus and Thomas (2001)
                            High          Low          High          Low          High        Low
                             (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
   COC                     0.0431        0.0536      -0.0284       -0.0293       0.0293     -0.0286
                          [0.0766]      [0.0774]     [0.0398]     [0.0367]      [0.0263]    [0.0283]
   ExCapital            0.3453***      0.2484***    0.2825***    0.2140***     0.2892***   0.2232***
                          [0.0217]      [0.0211]     [0.0231]     [0.0229]      [0.0197]    [0.0181]
   ICF                  0.3834***      0.4321***    0.5026***    0.1743***    0.2478***    0.1810***
                          [0.0351]      [0.0422]     [0.0388]     [0.0384]      [0.0299]    [0.0283]
   ExCapital×COC         -0.3646*        0.1681    -0.9373***      -0.1174    -0.4317***    -0.1074
                          [0.2042]      [0.1764]     [0.2467]     [0.2419]      [0.1609]    [0.1464]
   ICF×COC              -1.1091***    -1.7002***   -2.4779***     0.8630**     -0.5021**     0.2562
                          [0.2910]      [0.4078]     [0.3536]     [0.3759]      [0.2085]    [0.1869]
   Controls                 Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
   Fixed Effects             No            No          Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
   Observations            17,766        17,803       14,240       14,468        17,236      17,529
   Adj. R2                                            0.2720       0.2476        0.2581      0.2453




                                                    63
