                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TESTING THE THEORY OF COMMON STOCK OWNERSHIP

                                            Lysle Boller
                                         Fiona Scott Morton

                                        Working Paper 27515
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27515


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




This research had no special funding and the authors have no relevant financial relationships.
Support came from the authors' home institutions of Yale University and Duke University. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lysle Boller and Fiona Scott Morton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Testing the Theory of Common Stock Ownership
Lysle Boller and Fiona Scott Morton
NBER Working Paper No. 27515
July 2020
JEL No. G14,G34,L4,L41

                                         ABSTRACT

We test if an increase in common ownership changes future expected profits with an event study
method. We collect instances of a stock entering the S&P 500 index and identify its product
market competitors. We measure the change in institutional and common ownership (with
product market rivals) and find that entering stocks experience a significant increase in both. We
measure the stock returns of the entrant's product market rivals upon the entry news. We find that
increases in common ownership (driven by the whole vector of ownership similarity) cause
increases in stock returns, consistent with a hypothesis that common ownership raises profits.


Lysle Boller
Economics Dept
Duke University
Durham, NC
lysle.boller@duke.edu

Fiona Scott Morton
Yale School of Management
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520-8200
and NBER
fiona.scottmorton@yale.edu
1       Introduction

Large diversified institutional investors, sovereign wealth funds, and individuals often hold,
own, or manage significant stakes in companies that compete with one another in the product
market. For example, Vanguard holds stakes of over 5% in at least six U.S. domestic airlines
(Schmalz, 2018). This type of common owner is relatively new -- driven by the rise in
popularity of mutual funds and sovereign wealth funds -- and, as we will discuss below,
prevalent in the United States. The problem that arises when an owner holds stakes in
two or more firms that compete with each other in the product market is that incentives
for competition may be reduced. Consider a diversified owner who holds a portfolio of
investments in airlines ­ Delta, American, Southwest and United. This owner is impacted
by aggressive competition differently than an undiversified owner, e.g. an owner who only
invests in Delta stock. The undiversified Delta owner may benefit when Delta steals market
share away from United or Southwest. By contrast, the diversified investor may find that
the profits lost by United and Southwest offset some or all of the gains to Delta. Thus, the
incentives to promote vigorous competition are weaker for a diversified owner when compared
to an undiversified owner.

The theoretical threat to competition from widespread common ownership has motivated
new research in Industrial Organization to determine if an empirical effect can be measured
(see Backus et al. (2018), Azar et al. (2018a), Azar et al. (2016) for a few examples). The
existing literature examines particular outcomes such as specific prices or entry decisions in
individual industries using different identification strategies. There are also economy-wide
studies that examine price cost margins, accounting profits and so forth. We take a different
approach, testing for an impact of increased common ownership on future expected profits
using the associated changes in a stock prices. We collect instances where Standard & Poor's
selects a firm to be listed on the S&P 500 index between 2000 and 2017 and show that this
announcement increases both institutional ownership and common ownership between the
entrant and its product market rivals. It is well known that an entering stock experiences
a demand shock with index inclusion, which increases its stock price. We contribute to this
literature by showing that this effect is strongly related to the magnitude of the underlying
shift in ownership. The main focus of this paper, however, is on the reaction of stocks of the
product market rivals of the entering firms. The rivals do not experience increased demand
for their stock because they are already in the index.1 We can therefore isolate the effect of

    1
     In fact, demand may actually decrease as the weight of index incumbents tends to decrease after changes
to index membership.

                                                     2
ownership on competition in the product market by studying how the stock price of rivals
responds to the entry of a firm into the index.

The key theoretical IO insight that drives the concern about the impact of common ownership
is the well-established result that competition drives down profits. A single owner of all
the firms in an industry will achieve higher profits than the standalone firms because it
can replicate the monopoly outcome; and this outcome, by definition, delivers maximum
profit. This insight is the reason that mergers of competitors are subject to regulatory
review. Common ownership is analogous to a merger, only weaker due to the (typically) lower
ownership shares involved. Common owners, therefore, have incentives to soften competition
in a way that brings industry outcomes such as prices, quantities, capacity, or new product
introductions closer to the levels a monopolist would choose. A perfectly diversified common
owner is, additionally, indifferent to the allocation of those profits across particular firms.
When there are a variety of common owners that are not perfectly symmetric, as well as
undiversified owners, the intuition carries through if the common owners cause softened
competition that benefits all firms in the industry. With softer competition and higher
profits for every firm, the undiversified owner will benefit from common owners who alter
the competitive environment.

The legal role and arrangements of the parties typically vary across the institutional investor
category. A fund may hold the stock, while the investor is the legal owner of the shares.
Meanwhile, an investment management company hired by the fund (and often sharing a
name) chooses the stocks in which the fund invests. Individual funds are typically separate
legal entities, but belong to a "fund family" that often governs and votes its shares in a bloc.
We will treat all such fund families - along with their management companies - as unitary
actors and refer to them in the text as "a fund." Also of concern to competition are sovereign
wealth funds and individual owners such as Warren Buffet who may have yet different legal
arrangements to hold stocks. Because this paper is about the economic effects of common
institutional investors, the particular legal arrangements of institutional investors will not be
necessary for our analysis, so we will abstract from them. Throughout the paper "funds" or
"owners" are the agents taking action, and we will describe them as "owning" or "holding"
stock and "voting" those shares.

Fund investment managers as well as ultimate owners generally benefit when current or fu-
ture profits rise. Higher current profits will be paid out as dividends or retained to invest
in projects that make the company more valuable. The expectation of higher profits in the
future leads to higher current stock prices. When stock prices rise, an individual investor,

                                               3
sovereign wealth fund, or diversified mutual fund experiences positive returns and their port-
folios grow in value. For mutual funds, high returns may attract investors from competing
savings products or competing mutual funds. Managers of mutual funds are often compen-
sated for returns, assets under management, and on the flow of investment into the fund.
Index funds are slightly different. They generate value to investors by tracking a diversified
index of assets, such as the S&P 500. Index funds care about their tracking error, or how
much they deviate from the performance of the index itself. While this may be goal in the-
ory, in practice, the range of tracking errors among S&P mutual funds is quite significant.
Regardless of tracking error, if the stocks forming an index fund grow in value, this will tend
to attract more capital into the segment and increase assets under management for the index
fund. Thus, managers of all investment vehicles weakly prefer that the value of their assets
grow, and most actively gain from higher profits and stock prices.

Secondly, a large mutual fund, sovereign wealth fund, or individual has the ability to affect
competition in an industry if it engages in effective corporate governance. It has long been
recognized in the corporate finance literature that the separation of ownership and control
generates an agency problem for a firm's top management, who may not want to exert costly
effort. This combination of incentive (higher returns) and ability (corporate governance) to
soften competition by large diversified institutional investors, sovereign wealth funds, or
individual owners raises the concern that product market competition may be harmed.

Whether common ownership is a problem deserves serious empirical study and policy atten-
tion because any harm could potentially be extremely large. Yet it is difficult to come up
with a clean empirical test that can be applied to multiple industries due to the many kinds
of market structures, cost structures, and dimensions of competition that characterize US
industries. As remarked by Backus et al. (2019a) among others, what is needed for empir-
ical research on this question is a setting where there is an exogenous change in common
ownership. We exploit the fact that a stock entering the S&P 500 from outside the S&P
index family experiences a sharp increase in institutional ownership as well as common own-
ership. We use the exogenous change in ownership of the security to examine the stock price
responses of the entering security itself and its competitors. We exploit the same setting
as He and Huang (2017) do except they focus on the context of unexpected acquisitions by
blockholders. In our setting of index entry, the entering security experiences more demand
from institutional investors, many of whom track indices with varying levels of precision,
which drives up its price. Secondly, their increased holdings generate more overlap between
that security and its product market competitors that are already in the S&P 500. Critically,


                                              4
S&P 500 securities that compete with the entrant in the product market do not experience
increased demand because they are already in the index, but do share the increase in com-
mon ownership. We find that these rival stocks experience an economically and statistically
significant increase in abnormal returns when their rival enters the S&P 500, which reflect
an expectation of higher future profits.

A number of assumptions are required for our empirical tests to be determinative of the
effect of increased common ownership on profits. When the stock enters the index the sudden
jump in common ownership will cause a change in expected future profits if, first, common
ownership softens competition, second, if the particular increase in common ownership caused
by the index entry is sufficient to change the product market equilibrium, and third, all of
this is known to investors. We will explain below why the first assumption is well supported
by economic theory. The second assumption may not hold in all markets, and for this reason
our empirical work is conservative. For example, it could be that the change in common
ownership caused by index entry is too small to warrant a change in product market behavior
in a particular industry. Or, it could be too small to change corporate governance incentives
due to the distribution of ownership in that industry, and would therefore have no impact on
competitive behavior. We assume, as does much of the finance literature, that stock prices
incorporate all available public information about future profits. If increases in common
ownership do indeed allow an industry to soften competition and earn higher profits, this
will cause the stock price to increase at the moment that informed traders learn that common
ownership will increase. In our setting, this corresponds to the date that S&P announces
the impending change to the index. Investors understand that an increase in institutional
ownership will cause an increase in expected profits going forward, and therefore bid up the
stock of competitors in that industry.

Our findings are several fold. First, we demonstrate that on average the institutional own-
ership of a security rises sharply by several percentage points when it enters the S&P 500
index from outside the S&P index family. Consistent with previous literature, we find that
the stock prices of index entrants increase at the time of entry likely due to both demand and
common ownership effects, and we provide evidence that the size of this increase is linked to
the size of the change in institutional ownership that results from index entry. Most strik-
ingly, we find that competitors who are themselves index incumbents incur higher abnormal
returns upon the entry of their rivals when compared with non-incumbent competitors. This
finding is supported by a null result for two control groups. Entrants that do not experience
an increase in institutional ownership do not generate similar spillover effects to their rivals,


                                               5
and competitors that are not index incumbents do not incur higher abnormal returns.

The second part of the paper correlates abnormal returns with measures of common owner-
ship. There are a number of such measures that have been proposed by different researchers.
We show that only vector similarity measures (Cosine similarity and Bray-Curtis similarity)
are correlated with returns. These two measures predict higher stock price returns at a
diminishing rate. We also examine whether an increase in "kappa," a primitive that summa-
rizes the competitive incentives of common ownership, explains returns and find that it does.
Following (Backus et al., 2019b), we exploit the fact that kappa may be decomposed into
a cosine similarity measure and a ratio of the relative ownership concentration of investors
of the entrant and the incumbent. An increase in cosine similarity predicts an increase in
returns, whereas more concentration on the part of owners of the entering security predicts
a slight decrease in returns. These results are consistent with the underlying theory, as we
explain in detail below.

Our experiment cannot directly shed direct light on the mechanism through which common
ownership generates higher profits. This is a major question for future research in corpo-
rate governance. However, the paper takes two steps forward. First, it demonstrates that
increases in common ownership lead to higher stock prices, and second, the results provide
support for some mechanisms and not others. For example, the increase in the total holdings
of the three largest funds does not predict higher future profits.

Our paper contributes to the common ownership literature by examining an alternative route
to an economy-wide analysis: the stock market event study. Our data allow us to measure
the impact of common ownership across many firms and industries. These analyses allow us
to draw a causal inference from our experiment. We conclude that the evidence is consistent
with an increase in common ownership that translates into higher future expected profits
and an increase in returns.



2     Literature Review

2.1    Theory of Common Ownership

The theoretical implications of growing common ownership on the unilateral incentives of
firms in the marketplace are straightforward. The intuition was first formalized in Rotem-


                                              6
berg (1984) and Bresnahan and Salop (1986). Suppose that a set of owners hold stakes in
competing firms in an industry and the goal of the owners of those firms is to maximize profit.
The common shareholders prefer the monopoly outcome and have the ability to engage in
corporate governance to affect the strategy of the company through voting, compensation,
communication, and other tools. Managers of these companies will therefore strive to attain,
or get closer to, the outcome that maximizes joint profits. If owners are not symmetric across
competitors then they will not agree on strategies that move profits between competitors.
However, each will benefit from a strategy that increases the profits of every competitor in
the market. These forces will tend to move industry outcomes towards monopoly prices,
quantities, or innovation levels. The mechanism through which owners transmit their incen-
tives to managers could range widely. Managers could be financially incentivized by common
owners who benefit from softer competition between rivals, owners could provide strategic
guidance, owners could vote in particular ways, and so forth. In general, focused owner-
ship, where owners have stakes in only one firm in an industry, will create more incentive
to compete relative to common ownership because in that setting every owner internalizes
only benefits to its own firm and places zero weight on the profits of rival firms. Common
ownership, by contrast, incentivizes owners to encourage firms to move from a competitive
equilibrium closer to the monopoly equilibrium.

O'Brien and Salop (2000) embed the ownership patterns generated by common ownership
into a Cournot model and show that average markups are equal to the inverse demand
elasticity multiplied by a modified Herfindahl-Hirshman Index (MHHI) that is equal to the
standard HHI plus a term that captures the additional incentives created by the additional
layer of owners, MHHI delta (MHHID). MHHI and MHHID were the first theoretical con-
structs taken to the data in the empirical literature described below. One interesting property
of MHHI is its sensitivity to ownership symmetry. If common owners are exactly symmetric
in holding the same percentage of the same set of companies, ownership is proportional to
control, and other owners (retail investors) are atomistic, then in this model the monopoly
outcome is achieved. This is true whether the common owners each hold 2% or 20% of
the competing companies. As discussed in Backus et al. (2019a), there are few models of
corporate governance that can speak to this assumption. It is reasonable, however, that
in the absence of other large stakeholders, common ownership could be effective even with
relatively low ownership stakes. While it is a useful construct, MHHI may be difficult to
interpret due to the fact that it is a function not only of ownership shares, but also of
endogenously determined market shares. Therefore MHHI can both affect the competitive
process, but is also likely an outcome of the competitive process. Ownership shares may


                                              7
react to product market shares, e.g. if a large fund decides that it wants to hold only the
top competitors in the industry. The fact that MHHI is endogenous has led to work deriving
simple unilateral effects metrics as in Backus et al. (2019b), who analyze a more general
model in which common ownership incentivizes firms to maximize their own profits as well
as a weighted average of rivals' profits. We provide an overview of that model in Section 5.1.

Static Nash competition in prices or quantities is a central element both in recent literature
as well as in earlier work by Bresnahan and Salop (1986) and O'Brien and Salop (2000).
These models do not incorporate tacit collusion. However, the possibility of common owners
enabling tacit collusion was made long ago in the literature (Malueg, 1992). Gilo et al.
(2006) explicitly consider the ability of common ownership to facilitate tacit collusion in a
supergame. The paper shows that the cross-holdings of common ownership expand the range
of discount factors for which tacit collusion can be sustained. In their framework, common
owners introduce incentives to increase the patience of managers who might otherwise deviate
from a collusive equilibrium. We adopt this perspective also. There are a number of ways
in which common owners could cause managers to be more patient. For example, Antón
et al. (2018a) empirically examines compensation contracts of top executives. The paper
shows that the sensitivity of executive wealth to performance falls when common ownership
rises, meaning that incentives to steal share or undercut rivals are less sharp. If common
owners support such contracts they may be able to make executives more patient. Another
mechanism that could make managers more patient is described by Schmalz (2018). He
notes that when activist investors want to take over a company in order to shake up an
industry and explicitly increase competitive pressure on competitors, institutional investors
often side with management against the activists. Maintaining long run profits for all firms
require turning down those opportunities to make profit in the short run that destroy the
profitable equilibrium. Ciliberto et al. (2019) demonstrates that when all airlines mention
"capacity discipline" in their earnings calls each supplies less seat capacity in the subsequent
quarter. A common owner could support the executives of each of its competing portfolio
firms that wish to engage in capacity discipline, and encourage that strategy rather than
urging them to break ranks and steal share.

We feel that softening competition through mechanisms such as those described, and no
doubt others, is an overlooked aspect of the common ownership debate. Many critics of
common ownership point out that different owners own different shares of the different
rivals. They will not in general be indifferent about where in the industry profits are earned,
therefore a strategy that favors one firm over another is unlikely to be adopted. However, a


                                               8
general softening of competition so that every firm competes less hard and earns more profit is
beneficial to every owner, including those that are entirely focused on holding one competitor.
Such an undiversified owner will accommodate the tacitly-collusive equilibrium if her firm
earns a higher present discounted value flow of profit than in a more vigorously-competitive
equilibrium. This will generally be true if profits rise due to the change in competition and the
owner values the future more than the gain from defection in the short run.2 These conditions
are more likely to hold in a more concentrated market structure. Generally, common owners
that have asymmetric stakes across competitors will prefer common ownership if it leads to
higher prices in the industry and higher PDV profits for every firm. Recent empirical work
has not considered this case, likely because economists have poor tools for either predicting
or measuring tacit collusion. It is interesting to observe that the higher airline prices found
by Azar et al. (2018a) are significant only in markets where the HHI is above about 2300.



2.2       Theory of Corporate Governance

As noted above, the corporate governance role of large owners is a natural, and indeed
expected, channel through which common owners might affect firm strategy. Corporate
governance is widely regarded as a force that can prevent managers from acting in their own
interests, rather than on behalf of shareholders. In our setting, the shareholders prefer less
vigorous competition. However, engaging in effective corporate governance is costly because
a shareholder must become informed about the products, costs, demand, and capabilities
of the company, determine best practices, and take time to monitor and communicate with
managers. Only large shareholders will find it in their financial interests to take these costly
steps. Indeed, strong corporate governance is one way in which large mutual funds claim to
add value as institutional investors. The excerpt below from Vanguard provides a typical
example.


         During the past 12 months, we conducted over 800 engagements with the man-
         agement or directors at companies of different types and sizes, encompassing
         nearly $1 trillion in Vanguard fund assets. Our engagement volume represents
         an increase of 19% over the previous 12-month period and 67% over the past
         three years. Though we engage with companies for a variety of reasons, we are
         most likely to engage because we are preparing to vote at the shareholder meet-

   2
       See Tirole (1988) for an extensive discussion of supergames.

                                                       9
       ing, an event has occurred at the company that could affect stock value, or our
       research has uncovered a specific governance concern that is not on the ballot.3


The fact that index funds, ETFs, and diversified mutual funds engage in corporate gov-
ernance is well established in the literature (Fink, 2018; Brav et al., 2018; Appel et al.,
2016). However, there is a striking lack of literature in the field of corporate governance
that discusses exactly how corporate governance works and which owners have what types
of influence. There is an old literature in this area (see, for example, Hart (1979)), however it
is quite abstract. Most models only go as far as to separate ownership (typically denoted  )
from control (typically denoted  ) and posit that they may not be equal.4 Measurement of
 is fairly straightforward because it represents the rights to profit share.  , however, mea-
sures how much influence a shareholder has on the management of the company and may, in
general, depend on both ordinal and cardinal size of the shareholder as well as reputation,
investment in information, and other factors. Papers such as Brito et al. (2018) present
theory models of managerial decision-making under these conditions. However, there is no
consensus we know of that establishes the relationship of  and  for larger shareholders or
gives guidance on how to take existing theories to the data.

Furthermore, there is a school of thought that argues managers are under-monitored due
to free-riding and other factors and thus there is not nearly enough corporate governance
to begin with (Bebchuk and Hirst, 2019). In this framework, existing corporate governance
is largely a passive, box-ticking kind of activity where the corporation is rated for having
outside directors, a split chair, or incentive-based compensation, for example, but nothing
substantive is reviewed. In such a world, managers are essentially unmonitored by their
owners. Should managers of most of American capital be unmonitored by the owners of
that capital, we would have a more serious problem for the fucntioning of capitalism than
any issue generated by common ownership. Our view is that this interpretation of corporate
governance is too pessimistic; we believe that large owners have substantive engagement
with management on costs, growth, and strategic direction of the company through effective
oversight. However, we know of no research in the corporate governance literature that helps
us to be more empirically precise on this question.


   3
      Vanguard,       Our     Engagement         Efforts     and     Proxy     Voting:           An     Update,
https://about.vanguard.com/vanguard-proxy-voting/update-on-voting/index.html (accessed November
28, 2016)
    4
      Violations of proportional control is particularly relevant when considering retail investors whose shares
are extremely small and who are likely to have effectively zero control of the corporation.

                                                      10
2.3       Empirics: Existence and Impact of Common Owners

2.3.1      Trends in Common Ownership


There is ample evidence that common owners are large and have been growing in the United
States for many decades. See, for example, work from 1996 by Hansen and Lott (1996) that
documents the growing share of owners that are diversified. More recent work by Backus et al.
(2019a) states that "[at] the beginning of 2018, the four largest asset managers (Blackrock,
Vanguard, State Street, and Fidelity) managed over $16 trillion in assets, and for 88% of
firms on the S&P 500 Index, the largest shareholder was one of those four asset managers."
Posner et al. (2017) point to the fact that over 70% of the US stock market was held by
institutional investors by 2017 whereas in 1950 that share was only 7%. Azar et al. (2018b)
provides multiple examples of industries in which top institutional shareholders hold large
blocks of stock in each of the relevant firms, including airlines, banks, and supermarkets.

                             Figure 1: Historical Trend in Profit Weights




To develop a sense of how important these trends are, we display in Figure 1 a graph from
Backus et al. (2019b). The authors calculate profit weights using historical data on common
ownership. They find that the average weight firms would assign to profits of other S&P
500 firms has grown from around 20% to around 70%.5 We note that this graph is not a
   5
       They provide several different parametric assumptions that permit control to differ from ownership. We

                                                      11
theoretical construct; it is a way to display the ownership data for US stocks over time. The
increase in the average weight placed on other companies' profits is large and indicates that
managers' incentives may have changed significantly over the past several decades.


2.3.2    Competitive Effects of Common Ownership


A series of early empirical papers (Azar et al., 2016, 2018a) kicked off a new area of empirical
literature assessing the competitive effects of common ownership. The first of these papers
focuses on banking and the second on airlines. Both evaluate the relationship between
MHHID and prices in the industry -- interest rates in the case of banks or airfares in the
case of airlines. Because MHHID is endogenous, the authors use an instrumental variables
strategy in an attempt to isolate exogenous movement in MHHID to determine if it caused a
change in prices. These initial papers resulted in a follow-on wave of activity asking similar
questions. For example, Backus et al. (2018) look at ready-to-eat cereal and find no impact
of profit weights on scanner data price measures. Because it is likely that the impact of
common ownership varies across industries, it would be useful to have many more such
industry studies.

It may also be the case that price is not always the outcome affected by common ownership.
For example, innovation and entry are dimensions of competition that have strong effects on
both profits and consumer welfare. Antón et al. (2018b) examines the impact of common
ownership on innovation that has spillovers to other firms in the portfolio, some of which
are product market competitors. The idea is that positive spillovers benefit product market
rivals, and common owners hold stakes in those rivals, so they benefit. If this externality is
internalized by common owners, then those owners may incentivize firms in their portfolio
to engage in more R&D when the firms operate in an industry with beneficial spillovers.
In such a setting, investments in innovation will generate a higher return for the common
owner than the focused owner. To the extent the innovating firms compete in the product
market, however, the common owners may desire softer competition, which could reduce
innovation. The authors look for cross-sectional differences in R&D spending and patent
filings according to common ownership and product market competition and obtain results
that support both hypotheses.

A second recent paper on common ownership Gerakos and Xie (2019) demonstrates that
when owners hold stakes in both a branded pharmaceutical manufacturer and a generic
display the basic case where ownership is equal to control rights.

                                                     12
competitor, a settlement between them that prevents or delays generic entry into the brand's
market is more likely. The authors focus on Paragraph IV challenges, which are cases where
the generic has the ability to enter the market against the brand provided the brand's patent
does not protect it (which will be the case if the patent has expired or is not infringed, e.g.
the color of the pill). During the time period of the data (2003-16) settling these cases so that
the generic stayed off the market was common, and settlements were generally considered
legal until 2013 when the Supreme Court ruled that such settlements could be a violation
of the antitrust laws.6 The authors show that when generic owners also own the brand,
settlements are more likely. This setting is a clever place to look for an impact of common
ownership because the impact of generic entry (small profit gain) on brand profits (large
loss) is asymmetric and therefore a small share in the brand will generate significant financial
incentive to alter the behavior of the generic. A second paper in this same industry also
demonstrates an impact of common ownership. Newham et al. (2018) takes the problem back
one step and examines generic drug entry, or lack thereof, by generics who share common
owners with the brand experiencing patent expiration. The authors ask whether generic
firms are less likely to launch a product that competes with a brand when there is a common
owner between the two firms. Using entry and ownership data from the US they find a large
effect, noting that "a one-standard-deviation increase in common ownership decreases the
probability of generic entry by 9-13%."

A second body of work uses cross-industry macro or finance datasets to look for the im-
pact of common ownership. Gutierrez and Philippon (2017) study the relationship between
investment over time and competition. They calculate a number of concentration metrics
but also MHHI, the Herfindahl measure adjusted for common ownership. They find that
industries with higher levels of MHHI have lower levels of investment for any given Tobin's
Q. Koch et al. (2019) examines the correlation between common ownership and accounting
profits, markups, capital expenditure, advertising, and other outcome measures. Overall,
they find no relationship between outcomes and common ownership changes or levels, re-
jecting "even modestly sized economic effects." The downside to the method in both papers
is the inherent imprecision of accounting data of markups, investment, monthly industry
producer price indices, etc., but, more importantly, the simultaneous determination of both
institutional holdings and these industry and firm characteristics. Using mergers between
investment funds is a popular method of isolating exogenous variation in common owner-
ship. However, the mergers Koch et al. (2019) exploit do not affect the measures of common
ownership used in the paper, making them a poor instrument. This stands in contrast to He

   6
       FTC v. Actavis, Inc., 570 U.S. 136 (2013).

                                                    13
and Huang (2017) who similarly use a dataset from 1980 to 2014 but employ a set of mergers
that cause measures of cross ownership to increase. They find that exogenous changes in
common ownership due to the mergers increase the prevalence of joint ventures, productivity,
and operating margins.

More importantly for our purposes, He and Huang (2017) carry out an analogous test to
our own using changes in block holding. They compare abnormal returns of existing block
held competitors in the same industry as the new block purchase, relative to the returns of
block-held stocks in another SIC code. The authors find that returns of competitors rise by
2.1% compared with unrelated stocks which have an abnormal return of close to zero. In an
earlier paper, Antón and Polk (2014) examine the relationship between common ownership
and share price movements. Their metric of co-ownership, FCAP, is the sum of the holdings
of each fund in the two stocks of interest normalized by the sum of the market capitalization
of the two stocks. Exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in common ownership caused by
a 2003 mutual fund scandal, they provide evidence for a causal relationship between common
ownership and co-movement in stock prices, controlling for attributes of the securities. The
authors suggest that the co-movement is generated by correlated asset flows, i.e. institutional
investors will tend to buy or sell an entire portfolio at once. Thus, the fact that common
owners may impact the relationship between the stocks they hold is already established in
the literature.

The mechanism by which common ownership might lessen competition remains uncertain
and under study. The first and only paper that we are aware of with results in this area
to date is Antón et al. (2018a), described above. Antón et al. (2018a) study a large num-
ber of US firms and evaluate executive compensation as a channel of causality. They first
show that a common owner with a goal of softening competition will want to compensate
top management for more profits, but not for "beating" a rival - because trying to beat a
rival will generate profit-decreasing competition. The intuition of the model is that pay-
for-performance incentives generate vigorous competition which leads to price cutting that
harms both firms. Moving top management payments closer to a flat salary is more con-
ducive to softening competition between firms in the product market. The authors study
how "wealth-performance sensitivity," the measure of the impact of an additional dollar of
earnings on the wealth of top management, varies with common ownership. Their empirical
results demonstrate that increases in common ownership lead to changes in executive com-
pensation that favor absolute performance as compared to relative performance. This result
is consistent with common ownership leading to softer product market competition.


                                              14
It is well documented that large investors and funds communicate directly with the top
management of the firms they hold, a fact that the funds promote as improving corporate
governance (Posner et al., 2017). These communications, however, are not public. Although
these communications could theoretically include illegal attempts to establish collusion be-
tween competing firms, we do not promote that hypothesis here, nor do we have any analysis
in this paper designed to shed light on it.



2.4     Research on Index Entry

There is a long literature in finance that examines the impact of a stock entering a particular
index. A clear and comprehensive literature review can be found in Afego (2017). The basic
fact the literature establishes and then attempts to explain is why a stock price rises upon
inclusion in an index. There are two basic theories in the literature: demand and information.

The first theory notes that investors tracking the index now demand the security, and if
demand slopes down, prices will rise. The idea that demand slopes down for an individual
security is contrary to some asset pricing theories. One would think arbitrageurs would move
their money to other securities that are substitutes. However, an early influential paper by
Shleifer (1986) as well as others provide evidence of downward-sloping demand for securities.7
Our research design allows us to be agnostic on the existence and size of a demand effect.
We examine the stock price increase of the entrant's product market rival, which is already
in the index and therefore should not experience this demand effect.

A second theory for why the entrant's stock price might increase is that entry conveys
new information (Jain, 1987). If the index seeks firms with capable management or those
in growing industries, for example, then investors might reasonably interpret inclusion as
positive news about future profits. There is an extensive finance literature in this area.
Particular theories in the literature include the idea that inclusion might raise the liquidity
of the stock (Mazouz and Freeman, 2012), increase investor awareness (Elliott et al., 2008),
or reduce information asymmetry (Baran and King, 1986).

There is a small set of papers that consider the impact on competitors of index entrants.
Gygax and Otchere (2010) examine price effects of index inclusion on incumbents of the
S&P 500, comparing incumbents in the same GICS industry classification as the entrant

   7
    Liu (2000) uses evidence from the Nikkei 500 and Biktimirov et al. (2004) uses data from the Russell
2000, reaching similar conclusions.

                                                  15
with non-industry incumbents. They find a small negative impact on stock prices of S&P
incumbent firms, which they attribute to selling pressure caused by index reweighting. This
finding is intuitive ­ firms entering the S&P 500 tend to have a larger capitalization than
the firms they are replacing, reducing the weights of the other indexed firms and generating
selling pressure by funds tracking the index. Interestingly, the authors find that negative
rebalancing effects are mitigated for firms in the same industry as the entrant, which they
attribute to non-specific "industry effects." Chen and Lin (2018) examine effects of entry
on 264 S&P 500 firms added to the S&P 500 from 1976 to 2011 as well as the returns of
the most similar-sized competitor in the same 4-digit SIC industry. They also find that
stock prices fall slightly with index entry. While the authors interpret the result as evidence
of a "competitive disadvantage" caused by the entering firm, it is also consistent with the
portfolio rebalancing found in the previous paper. Likewise, Cai (2007) compares entering
stocks from 1976-2001 with industry- and size-matched counterparts that are already in the
index. The definition he uses for industry is a 4 digit SIC code. Like previous papers, he
finds that the larger the entrant, the more there is a negative stock price response by index
incumbents, consistent with rebalancing. He also finds that the matched competitors' stock
prices rise slightly with entry of the focal firm.

Although this finance literature provides some interesting observations about how firms react
to the inclusion of a competitor in the S&P 500, they tend not to spend time carefully defining
a product market. Moreover, these papers show evidence of a negative rebalancing effect
which would offset any positive effect of common ownership, leading to further difficulties
with interpretation. Most importantly, this literature ignores a key source of heterogeneity
among entering firms: all the papers described above pool together companies that were
promoted from a smaller S&P index with companies that were not previously members of
any S&P index. In Section 4, we show that stock price reactions to entry diverge sharply
between these two groups. And we show that institutional investors purchase a much larger
number of shares for the latter group as compared to the former. Pooling outcomes from
the two groups masks important empirical outcomes that are uncovered in our analysis.




                                               16
3       Data

3.1     Financial Data

Trading data, including stock prices, returns, and market capitalization, are provided by
the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP) via Wharton Research Data Services
(WRDS). Other financial data, such as shares outstanding and accounting profits are from
Compustat. WRDS provides linking information between CRSP and Compustat databases.



3.2     Ownership Data

We use data from 13-F filings to measure institutional holdings of individual securities in our
sample. A description of this data, which we use more extensively to assess the relationship
between the results of this event study and metrics from the common ownership literature is
provided in Section 5. The SEC requires that institutional investors with over $100 million
in assets report holdings at quarterly intervals under Section 13-F of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934. These forms are made available to the public via the SEC's EDGAR database.
Thomson-Reuters compiles these reports into a single database that incorporates records as
far back as 1980, which we access through WRDS.

The Thomson-Reuters database has historically suffered from quality issues. In particular,
WRDS notes that records from 2010 through 2016 were corrupted, with a significant number
of records from this period excluded as a result. WRDS and Thomson-Reuters posted an
update in June 2018 with a regenerated database that has reintroduced the missing data.8

Our analysis uses institutional ownership data to illustrate the magnitude of changes to
institutional ownership after index entry, and to identify the particular funds that purchase
shares of entrants after entry. Figure 8 plots the distribution of within-firm institutional
shareholdings by quarter for the relevant time period of our analysis. Although institutional
shareholdings typically fall within a reasonable range, and display a consistent time trend,
they can sometimes exceed 100% of a firm's outstanding shares. There appear to be multiple
potential causes for this discrepancy. One explanation stems from short-selling: institutional

    8
     For more detail, see the corresponding research note posted by WRDS. We recommend that scholars
interested in this area take advantage of the data organized and cleaned by Chris Conlon, Matt Backus, and
Mike Sinkinson which they have kindly posted.

                                                   17
investors may lend assets to other investors, who then sell the borrowed assets to other
institutions in order to create a short position. If both institutions report these holdings,
double-counting may occur. This form of measurement error is difficult to remove from the
data, but we do not think it should create bias in our results. Another possible source of
measurement error relates to stock splits. We have found several examples of mismatches
between shareholdings listed by institutions and the shares outstanding for firms reported
by Thomson-Reuters. If reported shares outstanding are out-of-date, and if a stock split
occurs, then the corresponding percentage shareholdings of institutions may be overstated.
As a result, we replace the shares outstanding and share price data from Thomson-Reuters
with financial data obtained from CRSP, which appears to reduce measurement error in the
dataset. Finally, some firms may issue multiple classes of securities. Naive aggregation of
securities by firm may overstate the number of institutional shareholdings for the primary
security.9 Although the updated data appear to be reliable for the purposes of our analysis
(examining simple quarterly changes in shareholdings for firms after entry), care should be
taken when performing inference with the Thomson-Reuters data.



3.3     Sample of Entrants

CRSP provides a data set containing dates of entry and exit for firms in the S&P 500 from
1925 to the present. We construct our sample by limiting the CRSP data set to 463 entrants
from 2000 to 2017.10 Although CRSP provides the effective date of entry for each entrant,
Standard & Poors began preannouncing index changes in October of 1989. Given that our
goal is to assess the market reaction to entry, we are more interested in measuring abnormal
returns as of the announcement date, as this is when the news regarding entry into the index
would be incorporated into firms' stock prices.

To collect announcement dates, we conduct a news search using Factiva to retrieve press
releases from Standard & Poor's and corresponding dates for each of the 463 entrants in the
sample. These press releases provide two additional pieces of information that are central to
our analysis. First, they disclose whether a particular firm is added or removed because of a

   9
      A related anomaly in the Thomson-Reuters database relates the existence of distinct fund managers
that are members of a single institution. For example, Blackrock includes several distinct funds that appear
to be incorporated in different countries. To the extent that these funds can be considered to operate under
the incentives of the umbrella firm, they should be aggregated accordingly. See Ben-David et al. (2018) for
more detail.
   10
      This sample excludes 12 entrants from the CRSP data set that are listed as having entered and exited
the the S&P 500 on the same day.

                                                    18
confounding event such as a merger or spinoff. We remove 63 entrants from the sample that
entered the index as the result of an event that could potentially confound our analysis.11
Second, the announcements disclose whether a firm was moved from one of S&P's smaller
cap indices, the S&P Midcap 400 or the S&P Smallcap 600. As discussed above, this provides
an important source of variation in the shock to institutional ownership.

The remaining 400 entrants in the sample were merged with header files from Compustat
that provide a link to financial data. 20 entrants do not have a corresponding header in the
Compustat database or do not have sufficient returns data prior to the entry event, bringing
the number of entrants in our final sample to 380.

                              Figure 2: Entry and Exit in the S&P 500 (1989 - 2017)
               1990
                      1991
                             1992
                                    1993
                                           1994
                                                  1995
                                                         1996
                                                                1997
                                                                       1998
                                                                              1999
                                                                                     2000
                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                          2003
                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                        2005
                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                      2007
                                                                                                                                             2008
                                                                                                                                                    2009
                                                                                                                                                           2010
                                                                                                                                                                  2011
                                                                                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                                                                                2013
                                                                                                                                                                                       2014
                                                                                                                                                                                              2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2016
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2017
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2018



                 Note: Each horizontal line represents the incumbency period of a firm in
                 the S&P 500.


A natural strategy to expand our sample would be to examine index exit. Although we
have data regarding firm exits, they are not symmetric observations with respect to our
analysis. Exiting firms tend to be removed because they are acquired, go private, or declare
bankruptcy. Measuring the change in common ownership between the exiting firm and its
product market competitor in the index is then often not possible. Some companies are
removed because they are no longer "large" or representative of the market. These are
typically moved to either the S&P Midcap 400 or S&P Smallcap 600. As demonstrated in

  11
     In particular, we removed firms that entered as a result of a spinoff, acquisition, rebranding, or IPO.
Additionally, we removed several entrants in the CRSP database that represented additional share classes
issued by incumbent firms.

                                                                                                                 19
Figure 5, index switching does not sharply change institutional ownership. For all of these
                                                                        12
reasons we do not extend our analysis to the exiting sample.



3.4     Industry Classifications

To construct a sample of competing firms to our sample of entrants, we examine several
different industry classifications commonly used in the finance and trade literature. The
three most common are the Standard Industrial Classication (SIC), originally developed by
the United States government in 1937, the North American Industry Classication System
(NAICS), developed as a replacement for SIC by US, Canadian, and Mexican governments
to harmonize reporting of government statistics, and the Global Industry Classication System
(GICS), which is jointly maintained by S&P and Morgan Stanley Capital International
(MSCI) in conjunction with their indices.

Existing literature points to several potential advantages of GICS over SIC and NAICS when
performing financial analysis. Bhojraj et al. (2003) compare these systems by examining firms
in the S&P 1500, and find that GICS industries have higher intra-industry comovement in
stock returns and higher cross-sectional comovement in various multiples, growth rates, and
financial ratios.13 Hrazdil et al. (2013) present similar findings with an expanded sample that
includes all firms in the NYSE and the NASDAQ between 1990 and 2009. Most importantly,
Bhojraj et al. (2003) identify a major problem with SIC and NAICS, namely that data
vendors are the ones left to classify firms into different industries. This leads to significant
discrepancies between databases regarding the particular industry of a given firm. GICS
classifications, on the other hand, are assigned by specialists at S&P and MSCI, which
provides a measure of consistency across different data sources. Additionally, the fact that
the GICS classification is maintained by Standard & Poor's makes it a more suitable choice
for performing financial analysis related to S&P indices. For these reasons, we select GICS
as our primary traditional industry classification for analysis. CRSP provides two data sets
that contain the GICS industry code for firms in its database.14 We select competitors for a

  12
      Previous literature does not find a significant "deletion" effect, and suggests that while added firms
experience a positive information shock, deleted firms do not incur a negative information shock upon
exit Chen et al. (2004). Our analysis suggests a different interpretation. Asymmetry between additions and
deletions may be caused by the fact that the corresponding shocks to institutional ownership are asymmetric.
   13
      The S&P 1500 refers to the combined indices of the S&P 500, the S&P Midcap 400, and the S&P
Smallcap 600.
   14
      The COMPHIST table provides this information for firms starting in 2007 and the CSTHIST table contains
information for firms prior to 2007.

                                                    20
given entrant by filtering these data sets for firms within the same GICS subindustry.15

In addition to GICS classifications, we examine the network classifications created by Hoberg
and Phillips (2016) as an alternative method, selecting firms in the CRSP database that are
also identified as a competitor in the Hoberg-Phillips data set. In contrast to traditional
industry classification systems, which contain a fixed number of industry groups, Hoberg
and Phillips scrape business descriptions from 10-K filings and use text analysis to construct
a network classification data set that has parameters (between zero and one) that measure
the strength or likelihood the two firms are in the same industry.

As an alternative to the industry classifications described above, we conduct a review of
competitor quality using undergraduate research assistants who had no prior knowledge of
stock movements or the sample. We gave these RAs the union of GICS and Hoberg-Phillips
competitors for a given entrant. They were tasked with removing any competitors that did
not clearly operate in the same business sector using information from a fixed set of analyst
reports. This latter classification is our most preferred as it has fewer obviously incorrect
competitors included. We will use this classification ("Manual") in our results as well as
GICS.

We should state the obvious here, which is that product market competition cannot be neatly
mapped to ticker symbols and therefore any classification system will have error. However,
we do not want the perfect to be the enemy of the good (or better) and therefore we proceed
with the best method we can devise. We believe that the manual and GICS classifications
capture important product market competitors for our entrants.

The number of competitors in each type of classification are shown in Table 1 below.




  15
       The GICS subindustry is the most granular level of the GICS industry classification.

                                                      21
                         Table 1: Number of Competitors in Sample

                           Classification Entrant Type                 N

                           GICS              S&P Incumbent         2217
                           GICS              Non-Incumbent        27515
                           HP                S&P Incumbent         3402
                           HP                Non-Incumbent        27056
                           Manual            S&P Incumbent           721
                           Manual            Non-Incumbent         2487


              Note: The third column contains the number of entrant-competitor pairs in
              the sample, therefore firms may be counted multiple times if they compete
              with multiple entrants to the S&P 500 over the relevant time period.



4    The Event Study

We use an event study methodology to estimate abnormal returns both for entrants to the
S&P 500 and for industry competitors. Consistent with prior literature, we show that en-
trants to the S&P 500 generate significantly positive abormal returns. We use our definition
of product market competitor to identify stocks both in the S&P and outside that compete
with the entering firm. We extend the event study to examine abnormal returns of these
product market competitors.

We follow the classic event study methodology summarized in Campbell et al. (1997). Nota-
tion in the following sections closely follows this standard reference. Inference in the context
of correlated abnormal returns that arise from analyzing securities exposed to the same event
follows Kolari and Pynnönen (2010).

In this section, we begin with our motivation, describing the natural experiment presented
by the addition of firms to the S&P 500. We proceed with a formal definition of the event
study by describing the relevant sources of data, event definition, and firm selection criteria.
Next, we describe the model used to measure normal and abnormal returns, the choice of
the estimation window, and the choice of the event window. We define a testing procedure
to determine if the securities under study generate non-zero abnormal returns over the event
window. Finally, we present our results and interpretation.


                                                 22
4.1    S&P Index Additions as a Natural Experiment

We argue that the addition of a firm to the S&P 500 serves as a shock to institutional own-
ership that investors cannot predict prior to announcement of the firm's addition. Moreover,
we assume -- and justify below -- that the addition of the focal firm contains no informa-
tion about the profitability of its product market rivals that are already in the index. The
literature on index entry hypothesizes various reasons why the index entrant's stock price
should rise: increased demand from institutions, greater liquidity, etc. None of these reasons
apply to the entrant's product market rivals. Our identification strategy is similar in spirit
to the one in He and Huang (2017). Next we discuss the index selection process and provide
evidence for our assumption.

Changes to the S&P 500 are usually caused by the need to remove a firm from the index
because of a transaction or merger. Removal may also occur if the market capitalization
of a firm has fallen significantly or if S&P decides that a firm "[ceases] to represent the
economy" (Chen et al., 2004). Index additions are typically announced in tandem with
deletions. In order to be eligible for inclusion in the S&P 500, firms must be U.S. companies
with unadjusted market capitalization of $8.2 billion, be sufficiently liquid, and have positive
total earnings for the trailing year.16 Subject to passing these eligibility requirements, an
internal committee at S&P chooses firms with the goal of creating a proxy for the broader
economy. Although the S&P 500 contains many of the largest U.S. firms, the list of firms
tends to only partially overlap with the largest 500 firms in the U.S., and there are many
large firms that are not included in the index. For example, as of the last trading day
in 2017 there were 201 firms domiciled in the U.S. with market capitalization of at least
$8.2 billion that were not members of index, according to data provided by CRSP. This
suggests that the pool of potential entrants is relatively large and that stock prices would
be relatively unaffected prior to any announcement of an index modification, to the extent
that the selection process is not predictable and information is not leaked to the market.

We provide empirical support for our assumption of exogenous entry with four pieces of
evidence. First, we note that there is no clear "threshold" of firm size that guarantees entry
into the S&P 500. The typical entrant ranks in the 30th percentile of the distribution of
market capitalization for index incumbents. There is wide dispersion, however, in the size

  16
     Note that there are various exceptions to these rules, and some discretion is left to S&P's in-
ternal committee. S&P defines a U.S. company as one that files 10-K reports and which has a pri-
mary exchange listing on a U.S. exchange. See https://us.spindices.com/documents/methodologies/
methodology-sp-us-indices.pdf for an overview of S&P's indexing methodology.

                                                23
of added entrants, as shown in Figure 3 below.

            Figure 3: Distribution of Entrant Size Relative to S&P Incumbents

                                                                                     20




                                                                      True Entrant
                                                                                     15

                                                                                     10
                             40                                                      5
              All Entrants




                                                                                     0
                                                                                          0.00   0.25   0.50    0.75     1.00



                             20
                                                                                     30




                                                                      Promotion
                                                                                     20

                                                                                     10

                              0
                                                                                     0
                                  0.00   0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00                        0.00   0.25    0.50     0.75




             Note: Right panel shows distribution of entrant size for the two comparison
             groups used in the event study -- true entrants and promoted entrants.
             These two groups are discussed in more detail beginning in Section 4.2.




Second, qualitative evidence from market participants is provided with two quotations below.
Market participants appear to think that the choice of new S&P entrants is random. A 2015
article quotes the CEO of United Continental, which at the time was not a member of the
S&P index. He notes that despite the fact that UAL met the requirements to be listed in
the index, there was little it could do to influence the decision of S&P regarding its choice
to add the firm.


     United Continental (UAL), which today reported a 1Q profit, wants to join
     rivals Delta Air Lines (DAL) and American Airlines Group (AAL) in the S&P
     benchmark club of US equities. DAL and AAL were recently admitted, joining
     Southwest Airlines (LUV), once the solo flier. Asked about the possibility, UAL
     CEO Jeff Smisek jokes: "I think about that every night just before I go to
     bed...I'm a really boring guy." CFO John Rainey adds that UAL already meets
     the qualifications and inclusion would help its stock price long-term. But "there's
     nothing we can do to make them more interested in us," Rainey says. "It's largely

                                                                     24
        outside of our control."17


An article from 2000 provides an overview of how investors place bets on which firms might
be added to the index. In this case, although investors appeared to consider the addition of a
tech firm most likely, the S&P ended up adding Robert Half International, an HR consulting
firm.


        The Standard & Poor's 500 Index is missing one stock Friday, and some investors
        are clamoring to figure out which new stock will be added to the closely followed
        index... S&P usually announces deletions and replacements to its indices at
        least several days in advance. But "sometimes a deal just happens too fast," and
        S&P isn't able to announce changes ahead of time, Levine said... As a result,
        certain fund managers are scrambling to figure out who might replace Associates
        First. Whichever stock is added will be in heavy demand because index funds
        that try to mirror the performance of the S&P 500 will be required to buy it...
        Some investors are betting that Standard & Poor's will add a technology stock
        to the index. If so, candidates include Brocade Communications Systems Inc.
        (BRCD), Juniper Networks Inc. (JNPR), VeriSign Inc. (VRSN) and Ciena Corp.
        (CIEN)...18


Third, we examine whether firms are typically replaced by another firm from the same in-
dustry. If this were the case, market participants might guess the likely candidate for index
inclusion given knowledge of an upcoming deletion event (e.g. an announcement of an ac-
quisition of an S&P incumbent that would remove it from the index). Figure 4 demonstrates
that the industry of entrants are similarly dispersed for deletions from particular industries.




  17
       United Continental Pining to Join S&P 500, Dow Jones Newswires (April 23, 2015).
  18
       Investors Guess Which Stock Will Be Added To S&P 500, Dow Jones Newswires (December 1, 2000).

                                                  25
                      Figure 4: Industry of Deletion vs. Industry of Entrant

               1.00

                                                                                                                                                                                                             Communication Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Consumer Discretionary
               0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Consumer Staples
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Energy
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Financials
               0.50                                                                                                                                                                                          Health Care
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Industrials
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Information Technology
               0.25                                                                                                                                                                                          Materials
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Real Estate
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Utilities

               0.00
                       Consumer Discretionary

                                                Consumer Staples

                                                                   Energy

                                                                            Financials

                                                                                         Health Care

                                                                                                       Industrials

                                                                                                                     Information Technology

                                                                                                                                              Materials

                                                                                                                                                          Real Estate

                                                                                                                                                                        Communication Services

                                                                                                                                                                                                 Utilities
              Note: Horizontal axis indicates industry of exiting firm, and colored bars
              indicate the percentage of entering firms corresponding to a particular GICS
              industry.


Lastly, it could simply be that the S&P committee is picking entrants from "growing" in-
dustries, and that entry is predictive of industry performance. Whereas monopoly incentives
typically imply a reduction in output, industry growth would generate growth in output.
Figures 9 and 10 in the Appendix examine the excess growth rate in sales, compared to
the S&P average, using data from 10-K filings in the industries of entrant firms one and
two years after the entry event. Table 12 in the Appendix provides a regression formulation
showing that industries with an S&P 500 entrant do not experience sales growth significantly
different than the overall average.



4.2    Identifying Variation in Common Ownership

We exploit variation in the shock to common and institutional ownership generated by the
fact that some entrants transfer to the S&P 500 from a smaller Standard & Poor's Index,
whereas other entrants are admitted to the S&P 500 directly, even though they were not
previously members of the index. We call these two groups promotions and true entrants,
respectively, and show that true entrants experience a more pronounced shock to ownership
by institutional funds and in common ownership upon entry.

                                                                                                                                              26
We further separate product-market competitors along a second dimension. Some are S&P
500 incumbents and some are not. We demonstrate that S&P 500 index rivals of true entrants
experience a larger increase in institutional and common ownership upon entry than rivals
of promoted firms or rivals that are not members of the index.

Figure 5 below, displays these two dimensions of variation. The plot on the left shows the
distribution of changes in institutional ownership for the two kinds of entrants, as measured
by the quarterly difference in total 13-F holdings before and after index addition. The first
group, promotions, generates only a small reaction from institutional shareholders when
compared with the second group, true entrants. The mean change in institutional ownership
for promotions is roughly one percent of total shareholdings. For true entrants, on the other
hand, the mean change in institutional holdings comes to about 250 basis points, i.e. a
transfer from retail investors to institutions of about 2.5% of the equity of the typical added
firm. The plot on the right shows total institutional holdings of S&P 500 incumbent product
market competitors compare to non-incumbent product market competitors. Institutions
hold about 10 percentage points more of the equity of S&P 500 incumbent PMCs when
compared to non-incumbent PMCs.




                                              27
                          Figure 5: Shock to Institutional Ownership

                                                        0.76


   0.03



                                                        0.72

   0.02




                                                        0.68
   0.01




   0.00                                                 0.64

              Promotion           True Entrant                    Non-Incumbent        S&P Incumbent



              Note: Left panel indicates the percentage of total equity transferred from
              retail investors to institutional investors after entry to the S&P 500.
              Right panel indicates the (pre-entry) institutional ownership levels of non-
              incumbent and S&P 500 incumbent firms in the full sample of competitors.




The figures above concern aggregate institutional shareholdings only, and therefore ignore
changes in the underlying structure of institutional shareholdings. In fact, it is ownership
similarity, not total institutional ownership that is most directly connected to the common
ownership hypothesis. Distributions of ownership similarity for true entrants and promo-
tions are shown in Figures 6 and 7 below. We present distributions for two measures of
ownership similarity -- Bray-Curtis is an L1 metric that gives equal weight to small and
large institutional owners, and Cosine is an L2 metric that assigns a larger weight to larger
owners. Figure 6 shows that competitors of true entrants that are incumbents in the S&P
500 see a clear positive shift in the distribution of ownership similarity with true entrants.
Competitors that are not S&P 500 incumbents appear to have a much smaller shift in own-
ership similarity. Figure 7 demonstrates that there do not appear to meaningful shifts in the
distribution of ownership similarity for competitors of promoted entrants, even among S&P
500 incumbents. A more detailed overview of these ownership similarity measures, and their
relationship to the common ownership hypothesis, is discussed in Section 5 below.


                                                  28
        Figure 6: Distribution of Change in Ownership Similarity (True Entrants)

                             S&P Incumbent                                                S&P Incumbent
                           Bray Curtis Similarity                                        Cosine Similarity
                                                                  2.5
         4                                                        2.0
         3                                                        1.5
         2                                                        1.0
         1                                                        0.5
         0                                                        0.0
             0.00   0.25           0.50             0.75   1.00         0.00      0.25         0.50          0.75   1.00

                             Non-Incumbent                                               Non-Incumbent
                           Bray Curtis Similarity                                        Cosine Similarity
         6
                                                                    3
         4
                                                                    2
         2                                                          1
         0                                                          0
             0.00   0.25           0.50             0.75   1.00         0.00      0.25         0.50          0.75   1.00



                                                              Pre          Post




          Figure 7: Distribution of Change in Ownership Similarity (Promotions)

                              S&P Incumbent                                              S&P Incumbent
                           Bray Curtis Similarity                                        Cosine Similarity
                                                                  3
         4                                                        2
         2                                                        1

         0                                                        0
             0.00   0.25            0.50            0.75   1.00         0.00      0.25         0.50          0.75   1.00

                              Non-Incumbent                                              Non-Incumbent
                           Bray Curtis Similarity                                        Cosine Similarity

         6                                                        3

         4                                                        2
         2                                                        1
         0                                                        0
             0.00   0.25            0.50            0.75   1.00         0.00      0.25         0.50          0.75   1.00



                                                              Pre          Post




4.3    Identifying Assumptions

We need three assumptions to hold for our tests to be informative. The first is an exclusion
restriction in a difference-in-differences setting, i.e. that the difference in abnormal returns

                                                             29
between competitors of true entrants and competitors of promoted entrants arises solely
due to the differing shocks to their ownership structure.19 This is reasonable because index
entry itself does not change the nature of the product, costs, demand, or competition on
the ground; the stock is simply part of an index when it was not before. Even if index
membership were to change one or more of these variables, there is no reason to think that
it would affect true entrants and promoted entrants differently. The channel through which
competition is implicated is the new ownership structure, and this is also the only obvious
difference between our comparison groups. Note that this assumption is relatively weak in
that it allows for inclusion to affect profitability of the entrant's industry, as long as this
effect is the same for industries of true entrants and promoted entrants.

Our second assumption is that investors have rational expectations and incorporate new
information into stock prices immediately. Therefore the change in the stock price at the
announcement of entry reflects expected changes in ownership structure and competitive
behavior that are caused by index entry and the design of mutual funds. Though these
ownership changes occur later in time, they do not respond to the stock price increase as
they are expected.

Finally, investors must not have access to information about index changes before they are
publicly announced, otherwise prices would already reflect expected changes to competition.
We have provided substantial evidence that investors cannot predict index changes at the
beginning of this section. Furthermore, to the extent that prices already incorporate any
non-public information, we would be unable to detect any significant effect in our subsequent
analysis.



4.4    Event Definition and Selection Criteria

In this study, the events of interest are the entry of firms to the S&P 500. The securities in
the study are the publicly-traded stocks of entering firm as well as their publicly-traded in-
dustry competitors. We calculate results using three different industry definitions, described
above. We choose a three-day event window beginning on the day of the announcement
by Standard and Poor's of the entry of a firm to the S&P 500, as this is the relevant date on
which the news of a firm's entry becomes public. Announcements typically occur anywhere
from several days to several weeks prior to the actual transition of a firm to the S&P 500.
  19
    A similar exclusion restriction must hold for the comparison between S&P 500 incumbents and non-
incumbents.

                                                30
4.5    Measurement of Normal and Abnormal Returns

We use daily returns data provided by CRSP to estimate the normal and abnormal equity
returns for the selected firms. The relationship between normal, abnormal, and actual returns
is given by
                                   ijt = Rijt - E [Rijt |Xt ]

where ijt is the abnormal return for firm i over the event j on day t, and the two terms on the
right-hand side represent the actual return and the normal (expected) return conditional on
market information at date t. We measure abnormal returns for event j for both the entrant
and its industry competitors, therefore j can be equivalently thought of as an industry index.

To estimate abnormal and normal returns, we implement a standard market model

                                  Rijt = ij + ij Rmt + ijt

where Rmt represents the market portfolio, for which we use S&P 500 index returns. Other
variants include a CAPM model, which is essentially the same as the market model with
a restriction on the form of the intercept to match the empirical risk-free rate, or a factor
model that includes additional controls. The direct use of CAPM has fallen out of favor,
and there is typically little gain from using a factor model MacKinlay (1997). The majority
of recent empirical work uses an unrestricted market model (Sorokina et al., 2013).

We choose an estimation window beginning 200 days prior to the relevant announcement date
and ending 10 days prior to the announcement date so that the estimates are not affected
by any leakage of information for a short window prior to the actual announcement date.
Abnormal returns over the event window are calculated as the difference between actual
returns and normal returns (fitted values).



                                 ^ijt = Rijt - 
                                               ^ ijt - ^ijt Rmt


Cumulative abnormal returns for individual firms are calculated by summing daily abnormal
returns over the event window:


                                                      2
                                   CARij (1 , 2 ) =         ^ijt
                                                      t=1



                                              31
where 1 and 2 indicate the beginning and end of the event window.



4.6     Standard Errors

4.6.1   Individual Securities


To conduct hypothesis tests, we require an estimator of the variance for the cumulative
abnormal returns of the sample over the event window. Assuming that individual security
returns are i.i.d. normal, the OLS estimator of the error variance is consistent, giving an
estimator for the individual security CAR variance


                                                                  
                          ^ij  V ar[CARij (1 , 2 )] = (2 - 1 + 1)
                          V                                         ^2
                                                                    
                                                         T -2     t
                                                                     ijt


where T is the length of the estimation window. The squared residuals are summed over the
estimation window. Under the assumptions stated above, the standardized CAR estimate,
SCARij  CARij /V  ^ 1/2 follows a t distribution.
                     ij




4.6.2   Testing for No Event Effect


One commonly used statistic to test against a null hypothesis of no event effect is given below.
Nj indicates the number of firms in our sample for an event j . The form of the variance
results from the fact that the individual SCARs follow a t distribution. The resulting test
statistic tP is commonly referred to in the literature as Patell's statistic after Patell (1976).


                                                     1 
                                SCARj (1 , 2 ) =          SCARi (1 , 2 )
                                                     Nj i

                            ^jP [SCARj (1 , 2 )] = T -2                                      (1)
                            V
                                                 Nj (T - 4)
                                             tP  SCARj /(V ^ P )1/2
                                                            j


Patell's statistic may be rejected even if there is no mean effect if the event increases the
variance of returns (event-induced variance). To account for this, Boehmer et al. (1991)
propose the use of the sample variance in the cross-section of event-window abnormal returns.



                                                 32
                                                   
                        ^jB [SCARj (1 , 2 )] = 1
                        V                           (SCARi - SCAR)2
                                                 2
                                              Nj i
                                            tB  SCARj /(V
                                                        ^ B )1/2
                                                          j


The standardized industry-mean CARs may then be aggregated across events in the same
manner to conduct inference over the entire sample.


4.6.3    Adjustments for Event Correlation


The distribution of the CAR variance estimators discussed above are valid assuming that
abnormal returns of individual securities are uncorrelated over the event window. This
assumption is problematic in our setting, as we analyze securities in the same industry
responding to the same event (the addition of a competitor to the S&P 500). There are
several approaches to inference in this setting (Kothari and Warner, 2007). One involves
aggregating the individual equities of the competitor firms into a portfolio, which can then
be analyzed as if it were a single security.20 Although the portfolio approach is appealing for
its simplicity, it is less powerful than alternative approaches (Kolari and Pynnönen, 2010).21
Furthermore, it would make further analysis of heterogeneity in the response of individual
securities more difficult.

Kolari and Pynnönen (2010) provide correlation-corrected Patell and BMP statistics that
essentially cluster standard errors for securities that are exposed to the same event. They
show that the traditional Patell and BMP t-statistics may be adjusted using the average
sample cross-correlation of estimation residuals, r
                                                  ¯. The adjusted statistics are:

                                                   (                   )0.5
                                                             1
                                  tRobust   = tP
                                   P
                                                       1 + (Nj - 1)¯
                                                                   r
                                                   (                   )0.5
                                                           1-r ¯
                                  tRobust   = tB
                                   AB
                                                       1 + (Nj - 1)¯
                                                                   r




  20
     This is often referred to as the Jensen-alpha approach.
  21
     Intuitively, the loss of power from the portfolio method arises from the fact that only a single  is
estimated from a market model of a portfolio rather than an individual security i from a market model for
each security.

                                                       33
4.7     Results

Recall our hypothesis: provided that the increase in institutional ownership is large enough
to affect industry equilibrium and investors realize the impact of the change, expected profits
of firms in the industry will rise with index entry. When the expected future profits of the
entrant and its product market competitors rise, stock prices should immediately incorporate
that information and generate positive abnormal returns.


4.7.1   Entrant Abnormal Returns


Table 2 below presents the average CAR for true and promoted entrants, as well as Patell
and BMP test statistics. The difference in the inclusion effect is stark. Promoted firms gain
a return of only 1.3% compared to 4.0% for true entrants, demonstrating that the index
inclusion effect is strongly linked to changes in shareholdings from institutional investors
(shown previously in Figure 5).

                    Table 2: Mean Entrant CARs and Significance Tests

                   Entrant Type        Mean CAR          tP      tB       N

                   True Entrant        4.03%             14.32   10.54   147
                                                                      
                   Promotion           1.28%             4.73    3.79    233
                   *
                        Significant at the 0.05 level.
                   **
                         Significant at the 0.01 level.
                   ***
                         Significant at the 0.001 level.



As previously discussed, much of the previous literature examining the inclusion effect has
attempted to test two alternative theories. The information hypothesis suggests that index
inclusion reveals positive information to the market, which responds by driving the price of
entrants up. The demand hypothesis suggests that positive shocks are due to downward-
sloping short-term demand curves. Table 2 provides striking evidence that the entrant effect
is caused by the magnitude of the change in ownership structure for entering firms, a fact
that, to our knowledge, has not been recognized in the literature. This table will be the only
time in the paper that we examine the CAR of the entrant itself. In order to disentangle
effects of a change in ownership structure from demand effects, we continue on with analysis
of competitor abnormal returns.

                                                 34
4.7.2   Competitor Abnormal Returns


As we have shown in Figure 5, there are two sources of variation in ownership similarity
among product market competitors (PMCs) of entrants to the S&P 500. The first source of
variation corresponds to whether PMCs compete with true entrants or promoted entrants.
True entrants incur a much larger shock to ownership similarity when compared with pro-
moted entrants, therefore we would expect larger abnormal returns among this group to the
extent that the common ownership hypothesis is valid. The second source of variation corre-
sponds to whether PMCs are S&P incumbents or not. The observable change in ownership
similarity for PMCs that are not members of the S&P 500 is close to zero. Therefore we
expect the CAR for PMCs outside the S&P to be relatively smaller in comparison to S&P
incumbents.

The existence of two comparison groups (competitors of promoted entrants, and competitors
outside the S&P 500) naturally suggests a differencing estimator to measure the effect of
the shock to institutional ownership on abnormal returns. The first difference (true vs.
promoted) addresses a potential concern that, despite the evidence above, there is something
special about an entrant into the S&P 500 that raises expectations about future profits. If
such an unobserved "S&P 500 halo effect" exists, it is reasonable that it would both affect
entrants that switch indices and entrants that come directly into the S&P 500, whereas the
increase in common ownership is much larger for true entrants. By comparing the response
of these two groups, we may be able to difference out any such halo effect. The second
difference (S&P 500-incumbent vs. non-incumbent) would similarly remove any common
industry effect that does not result from a change in ownership structure.

Table 3 below shows the mean industry cumulative abnormal return of the product mar-
ket competitor for different subgroups. Patell and BMP t-statistics are reported for a test
corresponding to a null hypothesis of whether the mean CAR is equal to zero. These test
statistics are robust to correlation between CARs by event following the methodology out-
lined in Kolari and Pynnönen (2010) and discussed above. The results in Table 3 show a
pattern of negative mean return which we discuss below. But the group that we hypothesize
should have a larger CAR is the "True-Yes" subgroup. The CARs for this subgroup are both
positive in an absolute sense and much more positive than the other subgroups, as well as
statistically significant. This finding is consistent with a positive effect of common ownership
on future profits.




                                              35
                      Table 3: Mean Competitor CARs and Significance Tests

               Entrant Type        S&P     CAR        tRobust
                                                       P           tRobust
                                                                    B1            J        N

               GICS
                    True           No      -0.22%     -1.45        -0.42        137     8560
                    True           Yes     0.23%      4            2.13         131       714
                                                              
                    Promotion      No      -0.26%     -9.82        -1.06        222    15465
                    Promotion      Yes     -0.49%     -4.06        -3.67        215     1355
               HP
                    True           No      -0.35%     -6.41        -1.77        115     8928
                    True           Yes     0.46%      0.14         1.24         108     1103
                    Promotion      No      -0.33%     -7.08        -1.65        193    14839
                                                                           
                    Promotion      Yes     -0.50%     -3.33        -2.55        182     2048
               Manual
                    True           No      0.04%      -2.64        -0.21         76       683
                    True           Yes     0.41%      1.41         2.18          68       219
                                                                           
                    Promotion      No      -0.54%     -6.16        -2.58        134     1549
                    Promotion      Yes     -0.91%     -4.64        -5.98        120       451
               *
                    Significant at the 0.05 level.
               **
                     Significant at the 0.01 level.
               ***
                     Significant at the 0.001 level.

                Note: J refers to the number of entry events. N refers to the number of
                entrant-competitor pairs in the sample.


We find that there is a significant negative return for the group of promoted competitors
that are members of the S&P 500. This result looks like the previous literature that finds
an overall negative effect of index entry on incumbent S&P firms (Gygax and Otchere,
2010), which they ascribe to a portfolio rebalancing effect that causes selling pressure among
incumbent firms. However, in our sample the negative point estimates seem to be generated
by the inclusion in our sample of technology companies during the dot-com bust.22
  22
     The point estimates for PMCs of promoted firms that are not S&P 500 incumbents are also negative,
but, with the exception of the manual competitor classification, we cannot reject a null hypothesis that these
estimates are different than zero at typical significance levels with the BMP t-statistic. A more detailed
examination of the manual classification, provided in Figure 11, shows that the negative sign of this point
estimate is primarily caused by a number of technology firms in our sample that experienced highly negative
returns in the year 2000 during the dot-com bust. If we exclude observations from this year from our sample,
this point estimate is no longer significant, as shown in Table 13.

                                                      36
To the extent that either of these issues affects our primary group of interest (S&P 500-
incumbent PMCs that compete with "True" entrants), the positive point estimates in Table
3 will underestimate the effect of increased common ownership on stock returns. This is
another reason to focus on our differenced estimate, shown in Table 4. The significant,
positive point estimates in the second rows of each subgroup is again consistent with a
hypothesis that the shock to institutional ownership results in increased industry profitability.

                Table 4: Difference in Competitor CARs (True - Promoted)

                             S&P        CAR        tP
                                                      Robust
                                                               t Robust
                                                                B1

                             GICS
                                  No    0.04%      5.06        0.35
                                  Yes 0.72%        5.64        3.89
                             HP
                                  No    -0.02%     -0.68       -0.46
                                                          
                                  Yes 0.96%        2.03        2.39
                             Manual
                                  No    0.59%      1.68        1.15
                                  Yes 1.31%        3.89        5.27
                             *
                                  Significant at the 0.05 level.
                             **
                                   Significant at the 0.01 level.
                             ***
                                   Significant at the 0.001 level.



To exploit our last source of variation in the shock to common ownership, S&P 500 incum-
bency, we calculate a double-difference estimator. Table 5 differences the estimates from Ta-
ble 4 for each competitor classification and pools variances accordingly. The point estimates
are again positive and significant, consistent with a positive effect of common ownership on
industry profitability.




                                                 37
Table 5: Difference-in-Differences of Competitor CARs (S&P 500 Incumbent) - (Non-
Incumbent)

                   Industry Definitions       CAR          tP
                                                              Robust
                                                                       tB1
                                                                           Robust


                   GICS                       0.69%        2.1         2.53
                   HP                         0.98%        2.05        2.09
                   Manual                     0.72%        2.1         2.28
                   *
                        Significant at the 0.05 level.
                   **
                         Significant at the 0.01 level.
                   ***
                         Significant at the 0.001 level.



To summarize, the data demonstrate that competitors incur significantly higher positive
returns if they are members of the S&P 500 and if the index entrant is a true entrant.
Competitors of promoted entrants, on the other hand, incur negative abnormal returns if they
are S&P 500 incumbents, consistent with a index rebalancing hypothesis. Competitors that
are not members of the S&P 500 do not experience significant changes to their stock prices.
These findings are consistent with a hypothesis that firms that experience an increase in
common ownership incur higher profits in expectation. In order to examine this relationship
more closely, we explore how abnormal returns vary with more specific measures of investor
overlap and common ownership in Section 5.


4.7.3   Event Window Placebo Test


We implement a placebo test by shifting the event window in our event study forward by five
days. This placebo event window measures cumulative abnormal returns over a period prior
to any announcement of index addition, therefore we would not expect to see significant
results. Results are shown in Tables 14, 15, and 16. Most of these point estimates are
not significantly different than zero, and those that do appear to hold at modest levels of
significance have the opposite sign of what we would expect. The results of this placebo give
us confidence that our primary results discussed above are not solely due to chance.




                                                  38
4.7.4   Interpreting Magnitudes


How plausible are the estimated magnitudes for abnormal returns given above? We stress
that even small competitive effects could have an outsize impact on share prices. Consider,
for example, the average increase in profit margins that would be needed to support a one
percent increase in stock price. Assuming, consistent with S&P 500 averages, net margins
of 11%, a debt-to-equity ratio around 0.9, and a cost of capital of 8%, then it would only
take a 0.06% increase in margins to raise the present discounted value of future profits by
1%. Alternatively, consider that US stock PE ratios have historically ranged around 20x,
i.e., a share price is about 20 times its earnings. Therefore, a 0.05% increase in earnings
(margins) should translate to a 1% increase in share price. Market prices would therefore
have to increase by even less than margins to achieve this change.




                                            39
5     Metrics of Common Ownership

We have demonstrated that there is a clear link between changes in institutional ownership
and the abnormal returns to firms that enter the S&P 500 and their product market com-
petitors. In previous sections, we have not used direct measures of institutional ownership
except to demonstrate that there is a reaction in the shareholding structure of promoted
index entrants when compared to true entrants.

In this section, we examine how abnormal returns for competitors vary with alternative
measures of common ownership. We choose and then formally define these measures. As
motivation for our choices, we first review a simple model of firm behavior under the common
ownership hypothesis and derive profit weights following Backus et al. (2019b). We then
discuss how the incentives reflected by profit weights relate to tacit collusion and describe
and calculate metrics that reflect the similarity of owners of firm pairs. We also review
several other metrics used to measure common ownership in the broader literature.



5.1    Profit Weights

We follow Backus et al. (2019b) in their definition and calculation of profit weights who,
as discussed, build on earlier work by Rotemberg (1984), Bresnahan and Salop (1986), and
O'Brien and Salop (2000). They extend the basic framework of own-firm profit maximization
to one in which firms maximize cash flows to their investors, which results in managers who
place positive weights on rivals' profits.

Assuming shareholder i owns a percentage if of firm f , they are entitled to a proportion of
total profits f generated by the firm. This gives an expression for the value of a shareholder's
portfolio across all firms in the portfolio:


                                               
                                                   if f
                                               f


Letting if represent the control weight of owner i in firm f , we can write the firm's objective
function as a control-weighted sum of its shareholders' portfolios:




                                                   40
                                                        
                                                   if            ig g
                                               i            g


An assumption of proportional control rights would imply if = if . The above formulation
is more general, however, and allows for alternative specifications of shareholder control.
Backus et al. (2019b) show that rearranging terms yields an equivalent maximization problem
in which the firm maximizes not only its own profits, but an additional term that represents
a weighted portfolio of rivals' profits:

                                                    
                                              f +               f g g
                                                        g
                                                                                                          (2)
                                                      if ig
                                             f g    i
                                                    i if if


Here, f g are the profit weights, which measure the value to firm f of a dollar generated
for a competing firm g . Profit weights are the channel through which common ownership
affects firm behavior.23 Measuring profit weights requires knowledge not only of owners'
shareholdings, but also of control weights (managerial influence) each shareholder has in
each firm of their portfolio. The former can be estimated from the data, to the extent that
it is available. The latter is a stand-in for a model of corporate governance and cannot be
easily calibrated from the data.



5.2     Ownership Similarity and Coordinated Effects

The theory above converts the typical firm objective of profit maximization into a more
complex objective function that incorporates weights on profits of other firms held by its
owners. In principle, this is what the manager of the focal firm solves each period without
any assistance or communication from any common owner. While this type of expression is
a convenient method of writing down tacit collusion for an economist, it requires the strong
assumption that the manager maximizes the profits of the firm's owners. It might be difficult
for a principal to incentivize a manager to make this calculation. The informational burden

  23
      Interestingly f g can be larger than one. This occurs when common owners hold larger shares in a
rival than in the focal firm. In this setting a dollar of profit earned by the rival accrues more to the owner
than a dollar earned by the focal firm. Thus, if the owner can influence which firm should take a profitable
opportunity, it prefers the rival to do so.

                                                        41
would be high, and would likely be difficult to contract upon.


5.2.1    An Alternative Symmetric Model


We propose a supergame model of tacit collusion as a simple addition to the above, or
alternative for those who are concerned about the incentive scheme and informational burden
it requires. Tacit collusion in this setting occurs when managers compete less vigorously
today in the expectation that others in their industry will respond by continuing the favorable
strategy tomorrow. Participants in successful tacit collusion are relatively patient ­ they
must value the expected future profits obtained through cooperation more than they value
the short-term profits that may be gained by deviating. Competitors will find tacit collusion
more difficult to achieve than explicit collusion (abstracting from legal concerns) because,
by definition, no direct communication occurs. Firms that attempt to create tacit collusion
must be alert for the conditions under which tacit collusion could arise and be encouraged
and sustained by managerial actions.24

One way to conceptualize the effect of increased common ownership would be through an
increase in the discount factor. Common owners might cause managers of firms in their
portfolios to experience a higher discount factor, or to be more patient, by visiting them to
discuss strategy or by creating more confidence that their rivals are not about to abandon
the current equilibrium. The literature demonstrates that when the discount factor is higher,
a larger set of equilibria can be supported which increases the likelihood tacit collusion can
be sustained. Even if ownership shares of different owners were asymmetric, an increase in
common ownership could generate an increase in the value of the future for all competing
firms in the portfolio. Notice that in such a supergame, a rival that had no common owners
would also likely experience higher profits.25


5.2.2    Contrast with Asymmetric Incentives


When ownership of one firm becomes very concentrated in a particular owner, that owner
benefits more when profits flow to that firm relative to a competitor where it holds a lower
share. Thus, absent other considerations, the common owner would prefer that the two
  24
      See Tirole (1988), Chapter 6, which outlines the basic model and provides many citations for variations
on the folk theorem.
   25
      It is likely possible to construct counterexamples. For example, suppose the non-common rival has
enough capacity to find it profitable to price below its rivals and take all demand.

                                                     42
managers direct profits to the firm that is owned in a more concentrated fashion by the
common owner. The profit weight formulation above reflects this incentive by incorporating
competitive arrangements that might be highly asymmetric. For example, consider how a
duopoly in which one firm assigns a relatively low weight to the second and the second firm
assigns a relatively high weight to the first incentivizes profit-shifting from the second firm
to the first. We will borrow a term from the corporate governance literature and (loosely)
refer to this incentive as `tunneling.' A firm that experiences a rise in the concentration of
common ownership thus might experience higher profits because its less concentrated rival
alters its competitive behavior purposefully to benefit the concentrated firm. This incentive
is naturally asymmetric. We note that such asymmetric arrangements might run counter to
the legal obligations of managers, although this would depend on the preferences of owners
that have voting rights.

The tension between symmetric and asymmetric common ownership incentives is captured
within the profit weight framework. Backus et al. (2019b) show that f g as defined in
equation 2 may be further decomposed into an ownership similarity term and a measure of
investor concentration based on the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) as follows:

                                                   
                                                      IHHIg
                                 f g = cos(f , g )                                         (3)
                                                      IHHIf

where cos(f , g ) is the cosine similarity between the vectors of shareholder ownership, and
IHHIf = f 2 is the shareholder concentration of firm f . Ownership similarity is the
"symmetric" component of the profit weight, i.e. it appears in both f g and gf , and if
it increases it will increase the objective functions of both firms in the industry. On the
other hand, the relative shareholder concentration term is inherently asymmetric, i.e. an
increase in shareholder concentration of f will move the second term in opposite directions
depending on which kappa is being calculated. We have no ex ante hypothesis about the
relative magnitudes of the investor similarity effect relative to the asymmetric concentration
effect.


5.2.3     Ownership Similarity Measures


In our exploration of vector similarity we define two similarity metrics below. In these
descriptions we define M as the ownership vector for an entrant firm j , and N as the
ownership vector of its competitor k who is already in the index. Components of M and N

                                              43
correspond to ownership stakes. These metrics offer two different ways to capture ownership
similarity. An L2 metric gives a larger weight to larger owners when compared with an L1
metric.

Cosine Similarity

As shown in equation 3, cosine similarity is one theoretical component of , and is therefore
the first similarity metric that we examine. Cosine similarity can be thought of as a normal-
ized dot-product. Recall the inner-product formulation A · B = A B cos(). Abstracting
from the possibility of large short positions, ownership shares are non-negative, therefore this
similarity metric is restricted to the [0, 1] interval. Cosine similarity of zero corresponds with
no common owners and cosine similarity of 1 corresponds to identical shareholding structure.
Since this is an L2 similarity measure, the metric will put more weight on large owners than
small owners.                                                
                                              Mi N i
                                     M·N
                         LC (M, N) =     =  i
                                                
                                     M N    Mi2
                                                     Ni2
                                                         i        i



Bray-Curtis Similarity

An L1 similarity measure, Bray-Curtis similarity, is derived in Deza and Deza (2009). This
similarity metric stems from the Bray-Curtis distance:
                                              
                                              i |Mi - Ni |
                                  dB (M, N) = 
                                               i Mi + N i


The similarity measure transforms the Bray-Curtis distance so that it is bounded between 0
and 1:
                                      LB = 1 - dB (M, N)


If we perfectly account for all owners, the denominator is equal to two, as each ownership
vector sums to 1. Therefore, the Bray-Curtis similarity measure is also contained within
[0, 1], with similarity of 1 indicating perfect shareholder overlap and similarity of 0 indicating
orthogonal ownership vectors. This similarity metric is linear in the L1 distance, and should
therefore give an equal weight to shifts in ownership regardless of the size of the owners'
stake.




                                               44
5.3    Alternative Metrics

The Capitalist Conspiracy - CC

The "Big Three" funds, Blackrock, StateStreet, and Vanguard, tend to receive much of the
attention when it comes to discussing the common ownership problem. To be fair, these
funds have also joined the debate more prominently than others.26 One of these three funds
is the largest owner in a majority of firms in the S&P 500.

As the Big Three grow, one potential concern may be coordination among the owners that
would allow for increased profits through tacit collusion. Suppose ownership control increases
with absolute asset holdings across all companies, and therefore only the largest owners are
able to influence the strategy of the firms they hold. We call this the "Capitalist Conspiracy"
conjecture. Under this theory, if the top funds increase their ownership of the two competitors
this will lead to a softening of competition between them. Note that the funds themselves
need not be in the top three owners of the focal firm pair. We operationalize this hypothesis
with a simple metric that measures the increase in the stake of the entrant firm by the three
largest funds.

Fraction of Capitalization - FCAP

Introduced by Antón and Polk (2014), FCAP is defined as the total ownership value held
by all common owners of the two competitors over the total market capitalization of the
two stocks. An increase in FCAP would reflect the creation of new common owners of any
size upon the entrant of a firm to the S&P 500 or an increase in shareholdings of existing
common owners relative to undiversified owners.

Density of Firm-Pairs - DFP

Azar (2011) defines ownership network density as the number of firm-pairs that are connected
in an industry divided by the maximum possible number of firm pairs. Azar considers
firm pairs to be connected if the same institutional investor owns at least 5% of the two
competitors. We calculate this statistic for a cutoff of 5% as well as a smaller cutoff of
2%. This statistic gives a weight of zero to small common owners and downweights common
ownership that largely manifests itself as bilateral pairs rather than symmetric holdings. The
  26
    See, for example, Remarks by Barbara Novick at FTC Hearing #8 on Competition and
Consumer Protection in the 21st Century (available at https://www.blackrock.com/corporate/
compliance/bii-terms-and-conditions?targetUrl=%2Fcorporate%2Fliterature%2Fwhitepaper%
2Fpolicy-spotlight-common-ownership-data-is-incorrect-january-2019.pdf).

                                              45
total possible number of firm pairs can become high in an industry with many firms which
reduces the weight of any one pair. DFP puts relatively high weight on large owners.

The Percentage of Common Funds - PCF

Koch et al. (2019) suggest another metric for common ownership within an industry. They
define a "common fund" as a fund that is a blockholder in at least two competitors within in
an industry, where a blockholder is defined as a fund that owns at least 5% of the equity of a
firm. The percentage of commond funds is calculated as the number of common blockholders
within an industry divided by the total number of blockholders. We also calculate PCF using
a smaller cutoff definition for blockholders of 2% of equity. This metric is quite similar to
DFP except it does not feature combinatorics in the denominator and is therefore larger on
average because many funds hold more than one competitor. It also puts relatively high
weight on large owners.



6        Correlation of Common Ownership Metrics with Ab-
         normal Returns

6.1      Methodology

We calculate each of the above metrics for firms in our sample of manually classified S&P
incumbent competitors using quarterly ownership data from 13-F filings prior to and after the
entry of firms to the S&P 500.27 We then regress cumulative abnormal returns for firms from
the event study on the quarterly change in each ownership measure. Next, we add a covariate
to control for the pre-announcement level of each measure to parse out whether positive
returns are predicted by levels of ownership structure or changes in ownership structure.

We assume, as we did above, that variation in the quarterly change and baseline common
ownership metrics are exogenous with respect to the three-day abnormal return of stock
prices following the announcement that a firm is added to the index.

Additionally, the metrics we use vary in the weights they put on different kinds of over-

    27
     Firms without ownership information are removed from the sample, as well as several firms for which
total institutional ownership was reported to be greater than 100%, potentially indicating underlying errors
in the underlying data.

                                                    46
lap, thereby providing some insight as to whether and how ownership structure affects the
competitive nature of industries.

To review, we construct the following metrics of common ownership:


(1) jk is the weight that the entrant firm j places on the competitor k 's profits. We use
       the proportional control assumption.

(2) kj is the weight that the competitor firm k places on the entrant j 's profits.

(3) The cosine measure of vector similarity of the owners of j and k described above. (L2,
       weights large owners more heavily)

(4) The Bray-Curtis measure of vector similarity of the owners of j and k described above.
       (L1, equal weight to owners of different sizes)

(5) CC, the "Capitalist Conspiracy" metric, which measures the change in the combined
       ownership stake of the three largest funds: Blackrock, StateStreet, and Vanguard.

(6) FCAP measures the joint percentage of the firms' market value held by funds that own
       at least a portion of each.

(7) DFP is the density of firm pairs measures the fraction of connected firm pairs within an
       industry.

(8) PCF measures the percentage of common blockholders within an industry.



6.2       Results

6.2.1      Changes in Common Ownership Metrics


Summary statistics for the metrics described above are contained in Table 6.28 The first
six metrics are calculated for each competitor, whereas the last four metrics are calculated
per industry or per entrant. Table 7 provides the average change in each metric upon index
entry, reported in units of standard deviation. Table 17 provides cross-correlation between
metrics. Because the previous literature has not established a mechanism for the effects
of common ownership, it is not clear ex ante which of these measures best captures the
  28
       This table contains summary statistics for baseline metrics, i.e. calculated prior to index entry.

                                                       47
underlying competitive forces, to the extent that they are present. An important aspect
of the Bray-Curtis and Cosine similarity measures is that they increase significantly upon
entry of one of the stocks into the index. We test if these additional metrics also react
to the inclusion event. Two metrics, each with two cutoffs, DFP and PCF, do not change
with index entry, which may be reflective of the fact that indexing does not cause a major
change in large blockholders as defined by arbitrary cutoffs. CC and FCAP both experience
significant growth upon inclusion, demonstrating a clear reaction of the Big Three funds and
an increase in total common market capitalization, respectively. Table 7 demonstrates that
the kappa weights both increase, though by somewhat different amounts. Recall that kj
is the weight the incumbent firm places on the entrant. This increases significantly because
both the cosine increases with the increased overlap in owners and the ratio of investor
Herfindahls rises as the entrant's owners become more concentrated. The table also shows
that jk increases, but by about half as much. While this metric has the same cosine as the
other, the ratio of Herfindahls is inverted, leading it to decrease with entry and somewhat
offset the cosine increase.

                              Table 6: Baseline Summary Statistics

                      Metric           Mean Median      Std. Dev.    N

                      Cosine           0.45    0.46     0.21         571
                      Bray-Curtis      0.37    0.39     0.12         571
                      kj               0.52    0.50     0.30         571
                      jk               0.47    0.42     0.31         571
                      FCAP             0.52    0.55     0.17         571
                      CC               0.07    0.05     0.06         571
                      Density (2%)     0.71    0.73     0.20         168
                      Density (5%)     0.29    0.21     0.23         168
                      PCF (2%)         0.33    0.32     0.08         168
                      PCF (5%)         0.27    0.27     0.12         168




                                              48
   Table 7: Quarterly Change in Metrics for Competitors Before and After Index Entry

                         Metric            Change         Standard Error

                         Cosine            0.177                0.033
                                                  
                         Bray-Curtis       0.348                0.035
                         kj                0.193                0.035
                                                  
                         jk                0.071                0.045
                         CC                0.366                0.030
                                                  
                         FCAP              0.172                0.036
                         Density (2%)      0.034                0.038
                         Density (5%)      0.007                0.023
                         PCF (2%)          0.021                0.051
                                                  
                         PCF (5%)          0.073                0.053
                          * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01 (one-sided)

              Note: Cluster-robust errors are reported with clusters at the entrant level.
              Change is reported in units of standard deviation.


6.2.2   Relating Changes in Common Ownership to Changes Abnormal Returns


Index entry that exogenously increases common ownership may generate a new equilibrium
in the product market that generates higher profits. If so, stock prices should increase,
meaning CARs will be positive at the announcement. We expect an increase in common
ownership metrics to predict higher stock price returns.

Table 8 provides the results from a regression of abnormal returns on the quarterly change
in the corresponding common ownership metric. Measures of similarity are positive and
significant. All metrics have been standardized such that coefficients may be interpreted as
the change in abnormal returns due to a one standard deviation increase in the corresponding
metric. Our results indicate that a one standard deviation increase in Cosine and Bray-Curtis
similarity is associated with additional returns of 0.9% and 1.2%, respectively. Interestingly,
an increase kj , the profit weight that competitors place on the entering firm, reduces the
returns of the competitor. This result is consistent with theory. Notice that entry causes an
increase in ownership concentration for the entrant. Entry does not, however, cause a shift in
ownership concentration for the competitor. This translates into an unambiguously positive
effect of entry on the profit weight attached to the entrant, kj and an ambiguous effect on
the profit weight attached to the competitor jk . When the competitor's owners increase

                                                   49
the concentration of the entrant's owners by purchasing its stock, the competitor's owners
are happier to earn profit through the entrant than they were before. Thus, to the extent
higher total profits can be realized by shifting some earnings to the entrant and away from
the competitor, the common owner is more willing to do that than it was previously, and this
effect pushes down the competitor's returns. This effect is similar to the idea of `tunneling'
from corporate governance literature. The coefficient on jk positive and significant for
the same reason; the entrant's owners hold a larger share in the competitor and are more
willing to earn profits through that channel. Those expected profits increase the competitor's
returns.

Table 9 provides results from a similar regression, but calculated for the alternative metrics
described above: the Capitalist Conspiracy metric, FCAP, Density of Firm Pairs, and Per-
centage of Common Funds. None of these metrics appear to have a significant relationship
with the abnormal returns of product market competitors. Note that the CC and FCAP
metrics demonstrate no clear relationship with abnormal returns despite having positive
movement in the first stage. That is, the size of purchases by the Big Three funds and
shifts in total common market capitalization do not appear predictive of returns. Similarity
measures, which also have a foundation in the theoretical model discussed in Section 5, may
provide the best link to common ownership incentives.

           Table 8: Regression of CAR on Ownership Similarity and Profit Weights


                              Cosine      Bray-Curtis          kj         jk

                                (1)           (2)              (3)        (4)

            Change           0.0093        0.0126            -0.0051    0.0078
                             (0.0037)       (0.0043)         (0.0087)   (0.0042)


            Constant        -0.0062       -0.0089            -0.0035    -0.0051
                             (0.0026)       (0.0032)         (0.0021)   (0.0025)


            Observations                               571


             * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
             Cluster-robust errors are reported with clusters at the entrant level.

                                              50
               Table 9: Regression of CAR on Alternative Ownership Metrics


                   CC        FCAP       DFP (2%)      DFP (5%)      PCF (2%)     PCF (5%)

                   (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)        (6)

Change          -0.0005     -0.0059      0.00004        0.0005        0.0006      -0.0014
                (0.0080)    (0.0116)     (0.0053)      (0.0077)      (0.0047)     (0.0047)


Constant        -0.0043     -0.0035     -0.0045       -0.0045       -0.0045       -0.0044
                (0.0031)    (0.0023)     (0.0023)      (0.0023)      (0.0023)     (0.0023)


Observations                                        571


 * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
 Cluster-robust errors are reported with clusters at the entrant level.



Table 10 provides the same regression as before, but with an additional covariate added
to control for the pre-entry baseline of each metric. We omit alternative metrics, which
continue to show no clear relationship. Baseline common ownership metrics are negatively
associated with abnormal returns, suggesting that firms that begin with lower levels of
common ownership receive a relatively larger boost to the incumbent's stock price with
a given amount of increase. This suggests there may be decreasing returns to ownership
similarity for firms. As before, the quarterly change in each metric continues to be positive
and significant with the exception of kj .




                                              51
                          Table 10: Regression of CAR with Levels


                             Cosine      Bray-Curtis          kj          jk

                               (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)

           Change           0.0114        0.0143            -0.0002     0.0080
                            (0.0039)       (0.0044)         (0.0075)    (0.0043)


           Level           -0.0051        -0.0051           -0.0062     -0.0005
                            (0.0020)       (0.0020)         (0.0022)    (0.0017)


           Constant          0.0053        0.0080            0.0074     -0.0044
                            (0.0043)       (0.0065)         (0.0043)    (0.0039)


           Observations                               571


            * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
            Cluster-robust errors are reported with clusters at the entrant level.



We note that these results are robust to the event window placebo test that was previously
discussed in Section 4.7.3. A modified version of Table 8 is provided in Table 18 in the
Appendix that uses placebo abnormal returns as the dependent variable. These results show
that the placebo returns do demonstrate any significant relationship with common ownership
metrics.

The results above point to investor similarity as an important predictor for explaining the
magnitude of abnormal returns. The results concerning profit weights, however, are more
difficult to interpret. The importance of the ownership similarity metrics in explaining
returns may indicate that symmetric ownership is more important to explaining competition
than the asymmetric  metrics. We explore this issue next.




                                             52
6.2.3    Kappa Decomposition


Equation 3 from Backus et al. (2019b) demonstrates how  may be decomposed into two
terms -- an ownership similarity term and a term representing relative investor concen-
tration. The entry of a firm into the S&P 500 tends to increase ownership similarity, a
symmetric measure, as we have shown in Figures 6 and 7. The effect of entry on ownership
concentration is not symmetric. Ownership concentration rises for the entrant but not for
the competitor. This combination of effects generates a positive effect of entry on the profit
weight attached to the entrant, kj and an ambiguous effect on the profit weight attached
to the competitor jk .

Of course, the value of a firm is jointly determined by its own incentives as well as the in-
centives of other firms in its competitive environment, i.e. jk and kj should affect industry
incentives, and therefore firm values, jointly. As a result, we consider the joint relationship
of the components of  presented in equation 3. Table 11 regresses abnormal returns of
product market competitors on the change in cosine similarity and the change in investor
concentration of the entrant firm and the product market competitor.29 Under the common
ownership hypothesis, we would expect competitor returns to increase with ownership sim-
ilarity because this will soften downstream product market competition and raise expected
profits. Likewise, the competitor should earn higher profits if its common owners are rel-
atively more concentrated than the entrant, as they will optimally realize profits through
that company rather than any of its rivals. The opposite holds true if the common owners
are relatively more concentrated in the entrant. The intuition for this is the same -- all else
equal, investors would prefer to earn profits at the firm in which they hold a relatively larger
stake.

The regression results in Table 11 are consistent with these theoretical predictions. We
obtain a positive and significant coefficient, as before, on the cosine similarity regressor, while
investor concentration in the entrant has a negative and significant effect on the returns of
the competitor. Changes to investor concentration in the competitor itself are close to zero.
This might be expected because our entry experiment does not cause major change to the
shareholding structure of the incumbent firm.




  29
     Covariates are log-transformed given that  is log-linear in each component. In other words, taking logs
                                                 2 (log IHHIg - log IHHIf ).
of equation 3 yields log f g = log cos(f , g ) + 1

                                                    53
                  Table 11: Regression of CAR on Components of Kappa




           Cosine                                     0.0153
                                                      (0.0060)


           IHHI Competitor                             0.0008
                                                      (0.0034)


           IHHI Entrant                               -0.0119
                                                      (0.0071)


           Constant                                   -0.0058
                                                      (0.0025)


           Observations                                  570


            * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
            Cluster-robust errors are reported with clusters at the entrant level.



6.3    Alternative Explanations

One potential criticism of the analysis above results relates to the notion that shares of
competitor firms are substitutes for shares of the entrant because their returns are correlated.
In this setting, active managers of diversified firms may realize that a rigid rule requiring
purchase of the new entrant will be expensive due to increased demand for the security.
A fund might carry out an alternative strategy that avoids purchasing costly shares of the
entrant and instead purchasing cheaper substitutes that are product market competitors in
that industry. Because PMCs have correlated returns, this will give the fund a similar level
of diversification at a lower cost. Thus, PMCs may also receive a demand shock that we
interpret as higher future profits, but in fact is unrelated to common ownership.

We construct a metric for the expected demand that an entrant will experience by taking


                                              54
the difference between baseline total institutional ownership of the entering firm and average
institutional ownership within the S&P 500 for the same quarter. This gap serves as a proxy
for the incremental demand for the entering security. We add this metric as an additional
covariate to the previous results. Table 19 in the appendix provides the results of this
exercise as a modification of Table 8, and Table 20 modifies 11. The results show that this
metric provides significant explanatory power for the rival's abnormal returns. However,
the relationship between CAR and ownership similarity remains relatively unchanged and
significant. This exercise provides some evidence that the "substitute security" hypothesis
cannot explain our results.

Of course, there could be some other reason we see increased stock prices upon index entry
that we have not thought of yet. To help address this concern, we conduct an analysis
to examine whether accounting measures of profitability grew in the years following index
inclusion. This is a direct - albeit noisy - way to check if increased profits may be the reason
for increased CARs. To measure profitability of competitors relative to their industry, we
calculated the gross margin of each firm using financial statement data downloaded from
Compustat, and subtracted the aggregate gross margin of the industry.30 This "excess gross
margin" was calculated for each competitor in the sample for the three years prior to and
three years after the corresponding index entry event. We then calculated a difference-in-
differences regression of the form:

   ExcessM arginit = 0 + 1 T rueEntrantit + 2 Af terit + 3 T rueEntrantit Af terit
                                                                                              (4)
                          +4 T rueEntrantit Af terit Cosineit + t + uit ,

where t represents year fixed effects. 3 , the typical difference-in-differences effect, can be
interpreted as the increase in excess margin for a competitor of a true entrant conditional
on no change in cosine similarity. 4 can be interpreted as the increase in excess margin for
a competitor of a true entrant conditional on changing cosine similarity from zero to one.
Competitors of promoted entrants serve as a comparison group in the difference-in-differences
specification. Results are provided in Table 21. We run two specifications with and without
year fixed effects, and find a small positive effect on the third term (half a percentage point in
the fixed effects specification), and a larger positive effect on the fourth term (two percentage
points in the fixed effects specification). This indicates that excess margins of competitors
of true entrants increased after index inclusion relative to competitors of promoted entrants,
and that this increase was larger for firms that experienced a larger shock to ownership

  30
       We focus on the manual industry classification for this exercise.

                                                       55
similarity. The point estimates are not significant at traditional levels, though the data are
likely a noisy measure of the underlying true economic profit in which we are interested.
Because accounting profits may not be an accurate measure of these economic profits, this
exercise is inherently limited. It does, however, provide some suggestive evidence that stock
returns may have translated to a real increase in profitability ex post.



6.4    Index Concentration

Some theories of competition depend on the ex ante market structure of the industry. For
example, tacit collusion is easier to sustain in a more concentrated market structure. It
may therefore be that common ownership is more effective in lessening competition in these
settings.

Whereas typical measures of concentration examine functions of the number of firms in an
industry or their market shares, a natural measure of concentration in our setting is index
concentration, i.e. the share of an industry operating within the S&P 500. One might expect
larger returns from the inclusion event for competitors that operate in industries whose
firms are relatively concentrated in the S&P 500 due to the fact that common ownership is
increasing for a larger share of the industry.

To calculate index concentration, we retrieve the market capitalization of each firm as of
the date of the inclusion announcement, and calculate the percentage of industry market
capitalization held by firms inside the S&P 500. We then regress the cumulative abnormal
returns of competitors on this measure. Results are provided in Table 22 for the GICS
and manual industry classifications. The coefficient on the index concentration measure is
negative for the GICS classification but not the manual classification, although this positive
coefficient is not significant. We also recompute the Cosine and Bray-Curtis columns of
Table 8, which focuses on the manual classification, adding the index concentration measure
as a covariate. Results are shown in Table 23. We find that there is a significant positive
relationship between abnormal returns and the level of concentration of an industry in the
index, holding constant measures of common ownership. In other words, more concentrated
(in the index) industries appear to respond more strongly to an entry event regardless of the
magnitude of the change in common ownership. The interaction term allows the impact of
concentration to vary with the change in common ownership. If more concentrated industries
react more strongly to increases in common ownership then this interaction will be positive.
However, with the exception of the cosine similarity metric, this interaction is not significant.

                                                 56
Our dataset is not large enough to compare settings based on differences in market structure,
though a large IO theory literature indicates that this would be a fertile place to look for
competitive effects. Future research might provide a more formal analysis of how common
ownership incentives vary with different market structures.



7    Conclusion

In this paper we have demonstrated that increases in institutional ownership and common
ownership occur when stocks enter the S&P 500 index. We uncover a key source of variation
among index entrants -- "true entrants" that were not previously members of an S&P index
incur much larger shocks to their ownership structure after entry when compared to entrants
that are "promoted" from another S&P index. We replicate the classic index entry result;
entrants experience abnormally positive returns upon entry, and we show that this effect is
strongly linked to the size of the ownership shock (4.03% CAR for "true entrants" compared
to only 1.28% CAR for "promoted" entrants). Furthermore, when common ownership in-
creases with entry, the product market rivals of those entrants experience increased CAR.
Combining an event study methodology with a difference-in-differences estimator, we show
that positive abnormal returns accrue to an entrant's product market competitors when both
companies are in the index.

We further explore heterogeneity in the magnitude of returns using detailed information on
the level and changes of institutional ownership surrounding the index inclusion event. We
calculate several metrics of the increase in common ownership and demonstrate that two of
our measures of investor similarity (cosine and bray-curtis) show the expected relationship:
increases in common ownership cause higher cumulative abnormal returns. Measures that
focus on the largest funds or weigh larger funds more heavily, on the other hand, do not
demonstrate a clear relationship with abnormal returns.

The policy implications of these findings are substantial. First, we generate these results
using cases of index entry in many industries, thereby suggesting that common owner-
ship incentives are not only confined to specific industries such as airlines, but could be
widespread. Second, the owners that predict the increase in returns are not confined to
the largest funds, suggesting that smaller shareholders may also play an important role in
determining competitive outcomes. The impact of the change in ownership concentration
on own and competitor's stock market returns is consistent with the theory that firms max-


                                             57
imize their owners' profits and is, as far as we know, the first empirical evidence on this
issue. Unfortunately, there are a limited number of theories to test in this area. We hope
our results stimulate more research in corporate governance.

Lastly, these results lend support to those calling for more research of all kinds into the
issue of common ownership. The mechanism that might cause common ownership to lead
to higher profits is not yet certain, and more research in this area would be valuable. Even
more valuable would be a study of large owners by the FTC because of its ability to obtain
confidential information. Such a study would give the FTC more knowledge and expertise
than other enforcement agencies and researchers, and would allow it to offer advice to both
Congress and the courts concerning useful solutions to any problems it finds.




                                            58
References
Afego, P. (2017). Effects of changes in stock index compositions: A literature survey. Inter-
  national Review of Financial Analysis, 52.

Antón, M., Ederer, F., Giné, M., and Schmalz, M. C. (2018a). Common ownership, compe-
  tition, and top management incentives. Working Paper.

Antón, M., Ederer, F., Giné, M., and Schmalz, M. C. (2018b). Innovation: The bright side
  of common ownership?

Antón, M. and Polk, C. (2014). Connected stocks. The Journal of Finance, 69.

Appel, I. R., Gormley, T. A., and Keim, D. B. (2016). Passive investors, not passive owners.
  Journal of Financial Economics, 121(1):111 ­ 141.

Azar, J. (2011). A new look at oligopoly: Implicit collusion through portfolio diversification,
  phd dissertation.

Azar, J., Raina, S., and Schmalz, M. C. (2016). Ultimate ownership and bank competition.
  Working Paper.

Azar, J., Schmalz, M. C., and Tecu, I. (2018a). Anti-competitive effects of common owner-
  ship. Journal of Finance, 73(4), 2018.

Azar, J., Schmalz, M. C., and Tecu, I. (2018b). Reply to:"common ownership does not have
  anti-competitive effects in the airline industry".

Backus, M., Conlon, C., and Sinkinson, M. (2018). Common ownership and competition in
  the ready to eat cereal industry.

Backus, M., Conlon, C., and Sinkinson, M. (2019a). The common ownership hypothesis:
  Theory and evidence. Brookings papers.

Backus, M., Conlon, C., and Sinkinson, M. (2019b). Common ownership in america: 1980-
  2017. Working Paper.

Baran, L. and King, T. (1986). S&p 500 index reconstitutions and information asymmetry.
  Applied Financial Economics, 24.

Bebchuk, L. and Hirst, S. (2019). The misguided attack on common ownership. Harvard
  Law School working paper, (19-10).


                                               59
Ben-David, I., Franzoni, F., Moussawi, R., and Sedunov, J. (2018). The granular nature of
  large institutional investors. Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper Series.

Bhojraj, S., Lee, C., and Oler, D. K. (2003). What's my line? A comparison of indus-
  try classification schemes for capital market research. Journal of Accounting Research,
  41(5):745­774.

Biktimirov, E. N., Cowan, A. R., and Jordan, B. D. (2004). Do demand curves for small
  stocks slope down? Journal of Financial Research, 27:161­178.

Boehmer, E., Masumeci, J., and Poulsen, A. B. (1991). Event-study methodology under
  conditions of event-induced variance. Journal of financial economics, 30(2):253­272.

Brav, A., Jiang, W., and Li, T. (2018). Picking friends before picking (proxy) fights: How
  mutual fund voting shapes proxy contests. Working Paper.

Bresnahan, T. F. and Salop, S. C. (1986). Quantifying the competitive effects of production
  joint ventures. International Journal of Industrial Organizatoin, 4:155­175.

Brito, D., Elhauge, E., Ribeiro, R., and Vasconcelos, H. (2018). Modeling horizontal share-
  holding with ownership dispersion. working paper.

Cai, J. (2007). What's in the news? information content of s&p 500 additions. Financial
  Management, 36.

Campbell, J. Y., Lo, A. W., and MacKinlay, A. C. (1997). The Econometrics of Financial
  Markets, volume 2. Princeton University Press.

Chen, H., Noronha, G., and Singal, V. (2004). The price response to S&P 500 index additions
  and deletions: Evidence of asymmetry and a new explanation. The Journal of Finance,
  59(4):1901­1930.

Chen, S.-S. and Lin, Y.-H. (2018). The competitive effects of s&p500 index revisions. Journal
  of Business Financial Accounting.

Ciliberto, F., Aryal, G., and Leyden, B. (2019). Coorindated capacity reductions and public
  communication in the airline industry. Becker Friedman Institute wp 2018-11.

Deza, M. M. and Deza, E. (2009). Encyclopedia of Distances. Springer, 2009 edition.

Elliott, W., Van Ness, B., Walker, M., and Warr, R. (2008). What drives the s&p 500
  inclusion effect? an analytical survey. Financial Management.

                                             60
Fink, L. (2018). Larry fink's annual letter to ceos: A sense of purpose.

Gerakos, J. and Xie, J. (2019). Institutional horizontal shareholdings and generic entry in
  the pharmaceutical industry. SSRN.

Gilo, D., Moshe, Y., and Spiegel, Y. (2006). Partial cross ownership and tacit collusion. The
  RAND Journal of Economics, 37:81­99.

Gutierrez, G. and Philippon, T. (2017). Investmentless growth. Brookings Papers on Eco-
  nomic Activity, pages 89­169.

Gygax, A. and Otchere, I. (2010). Index composition changes and the cost of incumbency.
  Journal of Banking and Finance, 34:2500­2509.

Hansen, R. G. and Lott, J. R. (1996). Externalities and corporate objectives in a world
  with diversified shareholder/consumers. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
  31(1):43­68.

Hart, O. (1979). On shareholder unanimity in large stock market economies. Econometrica,
  47(5).

He, J. and Huang, J. (2017). Product market competition in a world of cross-ownership:
  Evidence from institutional blockholdings. The Review of Financial Studies, 30.

Hoberg, G. and Phillips, G. (2016). Text-based network industries and endogenous product
  differentiation. Journal of Political Economy, 124(5):1423­1465.

Hrazdil, K., Trottier, K., and Zhang, R. (2013). A comparison of industry classification
  schemes: A large sample study. Economics Letters, 118(1):77­80.

Jain, P. (1987). The effect on stock price of inclusion in or exclusion from the s&p500.
  Financial Analysts Journal, 43.

Koch, A., Panayides, M., and Thomas, S. (2019). Common ownership and competition in
  product markets. working paper.

Kolari, J. W. and Pynnönen, S. (2010). Event study testing with cross-sectional correlation
  of abnormal returns. The Review of financial studies, 23(11):3996­4025.

Kothari, S. P. and Warner, J. B. (2007). Econometrics of event studies. Handbook of empirical
  corporate finance, 1:3­36.



                                             61
Liu, S. (2000). Changes in the nikkei 500: New evidence for downward sloping demand
  curves for stocks. International Review of Finance, 1:245­267.

MacKinlay, A. C. (1997). Event studies in economics and finance. Journal of economic
  literature, 35(1):13­39.

Malueg, D. (1992). Collusive behavior and partial ownership of rivals. The International
  Journal of Industrial Organization, 10.

Mazouz, W. D. K. and Freeman, M. (2012). Information efficiency changes following ftse
  100 index revisions. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money,
  22.

Newham, M., Seldeslachts, J., Banal-Estañol, A., et al. (2018). Common ownership and
  market entry: Evidence from the pharmaceutical industry. Technical report.

O'Brien, D. and Salop, S. (2000). Competitive effects of partial ownership: Financial interest
  and corporate control. Antitrust Law Journal, 67(3):559­614.

Patell, J. M. (1976). Corporate forecasts of earnings per share and stock price behavior:
  Empirical test. Journal of accounting research, pages 246­276.

Posner, E. A., Scott Morton, F. M., and Weyl, E. G. (2017). A proposal to limit the
  anti-competitive power of institutional investors. Antitrust Law Journal, 81(3).

Rotemberg, J. (1984). Financial transactions costs and industrial performance. Working
  Paper.

Schmalz, M. C. (2018). Common ownership concentration and corporate conduct.

Shleifer, A. (1986). Do demand curves for stocks slope down? Journal of Finance, 41.

Sorokina, N., Booth, D. E., and Thornton Jr, J. H. (2013). Robust Methods in Event Studies:
  Empirical Evidence and Theoretical Implications. Journal of Data Science, 11.

Tirole, J. (1988). The Theory of Industrial Organization, chapter 6: Dynamic Competition
  and Tacit Collusion. MIT Press.




                                             62
Appendix

              Table 12: Excess Sales Growth of Entrant Industries

                                           One Year Two Year

                     Entrant Industry      0.001        0.005
                                           (0.007)      (0.006)

                     N                     1411         1357


     Note: Dependent variable is the future compound annual growth rate of sales for
     a GICS industry for one year (first column) and two years (second column) into
     the future. Entrant Industry is a dummy variable equal to one if a member of
     the GICS industry enters the S&P 500 in a particular year. Regression includes
     year fixed effects.




                                           63
Table 13: Mean Competitor CARs and Significance Tests (2001-2017)

  Entrant Type        S&P     CAR        tRobust
                                          P        tRobust
                                                    B1        J      N

  GICS
       True           No     -0.18%      0.52      -0.44     124   7464
       True           Yes    0.34%       4.23      2.38      118    616
       Promotion      No     0.14%       1.43      0.36      191 11981
       Promotion      Yes    -0.04%      -1.24     -1.56     185   1083
  HP
       True           No      -0.30%     -5.4      -1.84     103   7444
       True           Yes    0.30%       -1.72     0.21       96    943
       Promotion      No     0.05%       6.46      -0.2      162 11446
       Promotion      Yes    -0.02%      0.8       -0.42     152   1624
  Manual
       True           No      -0.16%     -3.4      -0.77      70    606
       True           Yes    0.39%       1.28      2.04       64    206
       Promotion      No     0.09%       -1.17     -0.64     119   1336
       Promotion      Yes    -0.55%      -3.54     -4.52     106    403
  *
       Significant at the 0.05 level.
  **
        Significant at the 0.01 level.
  ***
        Significant at the 0.001 level.




                                         64
Table 14: Mean Competitor CARs and Significance Tests (Placebo)

  Entrant Type        S&P     CAR        tRobust
                                          P         tRobust
                                                     B1        J       N

  GICS
       True           No     -0.19%      -4.57      -0.86     137   8560
       True           Yes    -0.22%      -1.53      -0.88     131     714
                                                
       Promotion      No     0.09%       3.89       0.66      222   15465
       Promotion      Yes    0.22%       2.02       1.5       215   1355
  HP
       True           No      0.09%      -2.19      0.91      115    8928
                                                 
       True           Yes    0.16%       -2.14      -1.31     108   1103
       Promotion      No     0.12%       11.53      1.39      193   14839
                                             
       Promotion      Yes    0.01%       2          0.23      182    2048
  Manual
       True           No      0.07%      -0.31      -0.72      76     683
       True           Yes    -0.21%      -1.72      -1.09     68     219
                                                          
       Promotion      No     0.47%       4.64       2.4       134    1549
       Promotion      Yes    0.24%       1.49       2.73      120     451
  *
       Significant at the 0.05 level.
  **
        Significant at the 0.01 level.
  ***
        Significant at the 0.001 level.




                                        65
         Table 15: Difference in Competitor CARs (True - Promoted, Placebo)

                            S&P        CAR        tP
                                                     Robust
                                                               t Robust
                                                                B1

                            GICS
                                 No    -0.27%     -6           -1.09
                                 Yes -0.44%       -2.44        -1.67
                            HP
                                 No    -0.04%     -8.84        -0.08
                                                         
                                 Yes 0.14%        -2.9         -1.21
                            Manual
                                 No    -0.40%     -3.08        -1.85
                                 Yes -0.46%       -2.27        -2.25
                            *
                                 Significant at the 0.05 level.
                            **
                                  Significant at the 0.01 level.
                            ***
                                  Significant at the 0.001 level.


Table 16: Difference-in-Differences of Competitor CARs (S&P 500 Incumbent) - (Non-
Incumbent), Placebo

                Industry Definitions         CAR            tP
                                                               Robust
                                                                          tB1
                                                                              Robust


                GICS                         -0.17%         1.11          -0.35
                                                                   
                HP                           0.18%          2.77          -0.82
                Manual                       -0.05%         0.04          -0.34
                *
                     Significant at the 0.05 level.
                **
                      Significant at the 0.01 level.
                ***
                      Significant at the 0.001 level.




                                                 66
                                              Table 17: Metric Cross-Correlations


                     CC     Bray-Curtis   Cosine   FCAP     Density (2%)    Density (5%)   PCF (2%)   PCF (5%)    jk     kj
         CC           1        0.35        0.38     0.34        0.22             0.70       -0.15       0.30      0.04   0.38
     Bray-Curtis     0.35        1         0.89     0.75        0.22             0.23        0.20       0.18      0.28   0.66
       Cosine        0.38      0.89          1      0.60         0.17            0.29        0.14       0.20      0.45   0.77
67




        FCAP         0.34      0.75        0.60       1          0.35            0.23        0.25       0.24      0.03   0.41
     Density (2%)    0.22      0.22        0.17     0.35          1             0.40         0.07       0.23     -0.02   0.11
     Density (5%)    0.70      0.23        0.29     0.23        0.40              1         -0.07       0.46      0.11   0.29
      PCF (2%)      -0.15      0.20        0.14     0.25        0.07            -0.07          1        0.36     -0.05   0.17
      PCF (5%)       0.30      0.18        0.20     0.24        0.23            0.46         0.36         1      0.03    0.17
         jk         0.04       0.28        0.45     0.03        -0.02            0.11       -0.05       0.03       1     0.01
         kj         0.38       0.66        0.77     0.41        0.11            0.29         0.17       0.17      0.01     1
Table 18: Regression of CAR on Ownership Similarity and Profit Weights (Placebo)


                       Cosine     Bray-Curtis         kj           jk

                         (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)

      Change          -0.0007       -0.0012       0.0014         -0.0015
                      (0.0034)      (0.0029)     (0.0030)        (0.0027)


      Constant         0.0003        0.0006      -0.0001          0.0003
                      (0.0019)      (0.0020)     (0.0018)        (0.0017)


      Observations                              571


       * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
       Cluster-robust errors are reported with clusters at the entrant level.




                                        68
         Table 19: Regression of CAR with Expected Demand


                       Cosine     Bray-Curtis         kj         jk

                         (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)

Change                0.0080        0.0109          -0.0059    0.0090
                      (0.0039)      (0.0044)        (0.0084)   (0.0043)


Expected Demand       0.0229         0.0199         0.0265     0.0282
                      (0.0103)      (0.0105)        (0.0105)   (0.0100)


Constant              -0.0049      -0.0074          -0.0022    -0.0039
                      (0.0025)      (0.0031)        (0.0022)   (0.0023)


Observations                                  571


 * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
 Cluster-robust errors are reported with clusters at the entrant level.




                                   69
Table 20: Regression of CAR on Components of Kappa and Expected Demand




   Cosine                                    0.0153
                                             (0.0055)


   IHHI Competitor                            0.0011
                                             (0.0033)


   IHHI Entrant                              -0.0129
                                             (0.0066)


   Expected Demand                           0.0276
                                             (0.0101)


   Constant                                  -0.0045
                                             (0.0023)


   Observations                                 570


    * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
    Cluster-robust errors are reported with clusters at the entrant level.




                                     70
Table 21: Excess Gross Margin Difference-in-Difference

                                       1             2

 After                                 -0.001        -0.001
                                       (0.007) (0.008)
 True Entrant                          -0.014        -0.013
                                       (0.009) (0.013)
 True Entrant * After                  0.009         0.005
                                       (0.013) (0.015)
 True Entrant * After *  Cosine        0.021         0.020
                                       (0.068) (0.046)

 N                                     3339          3339
 Year Fixed Effects                                  


 Table 22: Competitor CARs and SPX Market Share

                              GICS         Manual

         Intercept            0.008        -0.019*
                              (0.006) (0.010)
         SPX Market Share     -0.013       0.021*
                              (0.009) (0.012)

         N                    2196         717
         * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                         71
     Table 23: Abnormal Returns with Concentration Measures


                  Cosine                    Bray-Curtis

                    (1)                          (2)

Change           0.0392                        0.0401
                 (0.0164)                      (0.0197)


S&P Share        0.0371                        0.0427
                 (0.0157)                      (0.0187)


Interaction     -0.0434                        -0.0399
                 (0.0218)                      (0.0243)


Constant        -0.0321                      -0.0387
                 (0.0121)                      (0.0149)


Observations                             564


 * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01
 Cluster-robust errors are reported with clusters at the entrant level.




                                  72
      Figure 8: Distribution of Institutional Ownership Shares (2000­2017)

2.0




1.5




1.0




0.5




0.0
         2000                  2005                  2010                  2015




      Note: Each boxplot shows quarterly distribution of percentage of equity owned by
      institutions according to Thomson-Reuters 13-F data. The bold bar corresponds
      to the median of the distribution. The lower and upper hinges correspond to the
      25th and 75th percentiles of the distribution. Whiskers extend to the remainder
      of the distribution.




                                            73
                                  Figure 9: Sales Growth of Entrant Industries (1 Year After Entry)




                     40
Number of Entrants




                     20




                      0

                          -0.50                -0.25                0.00                0.25          0.50
                                                 Excess Industry Growth (1 Year Post-Entry)




                                                                  74
                                  Figure 10: Sales Growth of Entrant Industries (2 Years After Entry)


                     60
Number of Entrants




                     40




                     20




                      0

                          -0.50                 -0.25                0.00                0.25           0.50
                                                  Excess Industry Growth (2 Year Post-Entry)




                                                                   75
                                                                  Figure 11: Negative Abnormal Returns in 2000


                0.1


                                                                                              ALTERA CORP



                0.0             CIRRUS LOGIC INC               REMEC INC      ALPHA INDUSTRIES INC          MICROCHIP TECHNOLOGY INC


                                   CYPRESS SEMICONDUCTOR CORP
                                                       MICROCHIP TECHNOLOGY INC                XILINX INC      QUANTUM CORP
                                                                                                                                                                                       KRONOS INC
                                                                                                                                  LAM RESH CORP
                      ELECTRO SCIENTIFIC INDS INC
                                               NATIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR CORP
                                                                         MICREL INC               ACTEL CORP
                                                                                                                                                                                               ZEBRA TECHNOLOGIES CORP
                                                                                                                    K L A TENCOR CORP       A S M LITHOGRAPHY HOLDING N V         IVAX CORP
               -0.1   ATMEL CORP     TRIQUINT SEMICONDUCTOR INC              LATTICE SEMICONDUCTOR CORP
                                                                                                                                        COHU INC        SHIRE PHARMACEUTICALS GROUP PLC
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SONICBLUE INC
     Log CAR




                      INCYTE PHARMACEUTICALS INC       ACTEL CORP
                                                                                             L T X CORP
                                                                   TAIWAN SEMICONDUCTOR MFG CO LTD                 CREDENCE SYSTEMS CORP             R P C INC                  IVAX CORP
                                                                                                                                                                                                       UNOVA INC
                       AMGEN INC            L S I LOGIC CORP

               -0.2                                                                               SILICONIX INC        ELECTRO SCIENTIFIC INDS INC      A S M INTERNATIONAL N V
                                                                                                                                                                                               BIOVAIL CORP
                                     S D L INC        QLOGIC CORP          L S I LOGIC CORP
                                                                                                              H M T TECHNOLOGY CORP        AMKOR TECHNOLOGY INC
                                                                                                                                                                      ANDRX CORP ANDRX GROUP         APPLE COMPUTER INC
76




                       CIRRUS LOGIC INC      ACTEL CORP           P M C SIERRA INC
                                                                                           MICRON TECHNOLOGY INC              PRIORITY HEALTHCARE CORP
                                                                                                                                                                                                    IMRGLOBAL CORP
                            SILICONIX INC                                                                                                                        INCYTE PHARMACEUTICALS INC
                                                 NU HORIZONS ELECTRS CORP
               -0.3                                                                  MICROSEMI CORP                ATMEL CORP

                                            VITESSE SEMICONDUCTOR CORP
                                                                                     P M C SIERRA INC       ASYST TECHNOLOGIES INC

                      BIOCHEM PHARMA INC                                                                                                                                                      3COM CORP
                                                               BROADCOM CORP          QLOGIC CORP

               -0.4

                                                                    SILICONIX INC


                                                                                     APPLIED MICRO CIRCUITS CORP


                      Jan 2000                                      Apr 2000                                       Jul 2000                                       Oct 2000                                    Jan 2001




                  Note: Points show abnormal return of competitors in sample. Line shows normalized S&P 500 index movement
                  over the period. Firms with CAR less than negative 5% are highlighted in red with corresponding labels showing
                  firm names from the CRSP database. Negative outliers appear to consist primarily of tech firms that are included
                  in our sample and experienced highly negative returns over the event window.
