                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HAS MORTALITY RISEN DISPROPORTIONATELY FOR THE LEAST EDUCATED?

                                          Adam Leive
                                      Christopher J. Ruhm

                                      Working Paper 27512
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27512


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We thank David Bradford, Stephen Coussens, Leland Farmer, Ellen Meara, Peter Muennig, Sam
Norris, Andrew Oswald and seminar participants at Columbia University, the Essen Economics
of Mental Health Conference, Florida State University, Luxembourg Institute of Socio-Economic
Research, Southern Economic Association meetings, Syracuse University, University of
Copenhagen, and University of Hamburg Workshop on Risky Behaviors for helpful comments.
Bradley Katcher and Kelsey Pukelis provided superb research assistance. Ruhm is grateful for
financial support provided from the University of Virginia Bankard Fund. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Adam Leive and Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Has Mortality Risen Disproportionately for the Least Educated?
Adam Leive and Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 27512
July 2020
JEL No. I10,I12,I24,J10

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine whether the least educated population groups experienced the worst mortality trends
during the 21st century by measuring changes in mortality across education quartiles. We
document sharply differing gender patterns. Among women, mortality trends improved fairly
monotonically with education. Conversely, male trends for the lowest three education quartiles
were often similar. For both sexes, the gap in average mortality between the top 25 percent and
the bottom 75 percent is growing. However, there are many groups for whom these average
patterns are reversed ­ with better experiences for the less educated ­ or where the differences are
statistically indistinguishable.


Adam Leive
Batten School of Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
109 Garrett Hall, 235 McCormick Road
Charlottesville, VA 22904
leive@virginia.edu

Christopher J. Ruhm
Frank Batten School of
Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
235 McCormick Rd.
P.O. Box 400893
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
and NBER
ruhm@virginia.edu
1 Introduction

      There has long been an interest in the patterns and causes of social disparities in

health. Research documenting the "gradient" between health and socioeconomic status

dates back at least to the famous Whitehall studies (Marmot, Shipley, and Rose 1984;

Marmot et al. 1991), with many analyses conducted since that time.1 Despite considerable

research (Lleras-Muney 2005; Cutler and Lleras-Muney 2010; Clark and Royer 2013), there

remain unresolved questions regarding the causes of the inverse relationship between

educational attainment and health. Studies have also highlighted di erences in mortality

trends over time by educational group (Meara, Richards, and Cutler 2008; Cutler et al.

2011; Olshansky et al. 2012). Recently, particular attention has been paid to reversals in

historic progress in reducing death rates. Life expectancy at birth in the United States fell

from 78.9 to 78.6 years from 2014 to 2017 (National Center for Health Statistics 2017;

Murphy et al. 2018), the rst such three-year decline in a century. This decrease is part of

a broader phenomenon emphasized in the in uential research of Case and Deaton (2015),

highlighting the increased death rates of middle-aged non-Hispanic whites from 1999-2013.

      In this paper, we study whether the least educated have experienced the most adverse

trends in mortality since the beginning of the 21st century. A signi cant challenge in

answering this question is that growing disparities may result from secular increases in

educational attainment, such that there is increasing negative selection into the lowest

schooling categories (Dowd and Hamoudi 2014, Bound et al. 2015). Individuals who, in

previous cohorts, would have failed to complete high school may now be high school

graduates or even college-educated. These compositional changes could theoretically

increase death rates for all education groups, even with no overall change. In principle,


1
  In addition to a seminal publication by Kitagawa and Hauser (1973), examples include; Meara et al.
(2008), Cutler et al. (2011) and Montez et al. (2011). Bosworth (2018) provides an overview of di culties in
conducting this research, and some recent results.


                                                     2
analyzing mortality at xed percentiles of the distribution of educational attainment would

account for such shifts. However, the information needed to construct death rates by

percentile is inconsistently reported across data sources, both in a given year and over time,

complicating such e orts.2

      We make progress on this question by constructing quartiles of educational attainment

using population and death data combined with information from Census Bureau surveys.

Our distributions of educational attainment are based on single years of schooling for

subgroups strati ed by sex, race/ethnicity, and ve-year age ranges. We then use linear

regression to quantify how mortality trends vary from 2001-2017 across education quartiles.

To inform our empirical speci cations, we rst develop a conceptual model demonstrating

that equal-sized health shocks may have heterogeneous e ects across groups based on

di erences in health capital. This framework emphasizes potential disparities in the patterns

of absolute versus relative mortality changes. We therefore present empirical results for

trends in both the level and natural log of death rates. For clarity of exposition, we hereafter

use the terms "death rates" or "log death rates" to distinguish between these absolute versus

relative changes and "mortality" to indicate more general experiences that are consistent

across both measures.

      This paper builds on a small number of studies attempting to adjust for changes in

the education distribution using di erent approaches. Bound et al. (2015) employ similar

methods to construct quartiles of educational attainment and compare life expectancy

between the lowest quartile and the top three combined in 1990 and 2010.3 They nd that

the bottom quartile of white women experienced increased death rates, while trends for low-

educated white men were             at. The top three quartiles generally experienced large


2
 Rostron et al. (2010) supply a useful discussion of many of these complexities.
3
 They classify quartiles separately by race and sex, while our main speci cation classi es them separately
by sex alone. In Section 5, we also consider quartiles that are both race- and sex-speci c.


                                                     3
improvements. Goldring, Lange, and Richards-Shubik (2016) focus on changes in the

gradient between education and mortality, rather than changes at speci c percentiles, using

a non-parametric test. They indicate that the gradient has widened for women but fail to

 nd evidence of this pattern for men. Most recently, Novosad, Rafkin, and Asher (2020)

develop a partial identi cation approach to bound changes in mortality rates between 1992

and 2015. They conclude that the worst mortality experiences are concentrated in the

bottom decile of the educational distribution for both whites and blacks. We compare

experiences of the lowest decile to those of the remainder of the lower quartile (the 11th to

25th percentiles) in Section 5.4.

      Our results provide a more comprehensive picture of recent mortality trends among

the full U.S. population than most other studies by including Hispanics and other races in

addition to whites and non-Hispanic blacks (hereafter "blacks"), and using data through

2017. Next, we supply a comprehensive analysis of the frequency with which mortality

trends are not statistically distinguishable across education groups. We also show that the

results obtained using xed education categories (e.g., high school graduates), rather than

education quartiles, will be incorrect in important ways. Using xed categories frequently

misidenti es the groups with the worst mortality experiences and sometimes substantially

overstates the increases in their death rates.

      Our main nding is the characterizations of the most adverse mortality trends being

concentrated among the least educated are overly simplistic and often inaccurate. One

aspect of this is that the relationship between mortality trends and education varies sharply

by gender. For women, the magnitudes of reductions in both logs and levels of death rates

have generally increased monotonically with education. Conversely, males in the three lowest

education quartiles often have fairly similar experiences. For both men and women, the

average gap in mortality between the top 25 percent and the bottom 75 percent is growing.



                                                 4
These averages, nonetheless, conceal substantial disparities across groups. For example, we

document the frequency with which the patterns are reversed within sex-age-race/ethnicity

groups, such that lower education quartiles experienced larger mortality reductions than

their more highly educated counterparts. There are also many cases where less-educated

groups do worse but by amounts that are small enough that we fail to reject the null

hypothesis of no di erence, even when using a loose standard for rejection. These latter

patterns may have been previously concealed because of the considerable attention paid to

a small number of groups of low-educated non-Hispanic white (hereafter "white") males

experiencing large increases in levels (but not logs) of death rates (Case and Deaton 2015,

2017; O'brien, Venkataramani, and Tsai 2017).



2 Conceptual Framework
      Researchers commonly treat changes in health outcomes across population groups, in

this case mortality patterns, as providing a useful indication of who is being most a ected

by health-related shocks. We examine this view, in the context of a model where mortality

depends on investments in and depreciation of health capital (Grossman 1972). This section

provides an overview, with further details in Appendix A. Consider an exogenous shock that

produces an equal-size reduction in health capital for two groups varying in their initial

stocks of capital. If the distribution of the baseline stock of health capital is monotonically

increasing in education, or some other measure of socioeconomic status (SES), the absolute

increase in death rates will be larger for the less educated group.4 The intuition is that

deaths are "left-tail" events, but more so for higher SES individuals, so that the relevant

portion of the distribution over which deaths are being induced is "thicker" for low SES




4
 Our empirical speci cation uses educational attainment, rather than the more-encompassing "socioeco-
nomic status". Our conceptual model, however, does not draw a distinction between education and SES.


                                                    5
groups. However, high SES individuals may, experience bigger relative increases in mortality

risk from the same-sized negative shock.

     These ideas are illustrated in Figure 1, which shows the left tail of cumulative

distribution functions (CDF) for health capital, assumed here to be normally distributed

and with the same variance but di erent means for high and low SES groups. The solid

lines show the CDFs without a shock and the dotted lines are moved horizontally to the left

by the shock, S, which is equal-sized for both groups. Death occurs if health capital falls

below the threshold     , and the negative health shock increases the death rate by more for

the low SES group (     -       ) than for high SES individuals (      -     ).   However, since the

no-shock death rates are so much lower for the latter group (              versus     ), the relative

increase is greater for them.

     With more realistic assumptions, a uniform negative shock to some input (e.g. income)

could reduce health capital more for low than high SES individuals, and so also increase the

relative risk of death by a greater amount for them. For instance, this may occur because

lower levels of overall health imply higher returns to given investments (or disinvestments)

in health capital for low SES groups, or if they have less ability to mitigate the e ects of

the negative shock. Similarly, higher SES individuals might face lower prices for market

inputs to health (e.g. through insurance), and so be more able to limit the reduction in

health capital resulting from the shock.

     The analysis of positive health shocks is largely the reverse of that just described,

with the greatest absolute death rate reductions anticipated for the less educated and with

unclear predictions for relative decreases. For instance, improvements in medical

technology might result in larger total, but not necessarily percentage, mortality

improvements for groups with higher baseline death rates.




                                                6
      This simple framework suggests that both absolute and relative changes in mortality

can be informative for evaluating di erent questions. Changes in absolute death rates may

be particularly relevant when attempting to target policy interventions to speci c causes of

death that have di erential impacts across groups. Conversely, changes in relative rates may

be more useful for understanding the underlying exposure and responses to health shocks.

For this reason, we examine both absolute and relative changes in mortality.


3 Data and Methods
   Our empirical analysis measures how mortality rates have changed over time for di erent

population subgroups. This section rst summarizes the data and methods used to construct

mortality rates by education quartile, followed by a description of the regression

speci cation.


3.1 Death Rates by Education Quartile
      We calculate educational quartiles separately by 5-year age bins, gender,

race/ethnicity and year. For compactness, we frequently abbreviate the rst through fourth

education quartiles as Q1 through Q4, where Q1 refers to the least-educated. This approach

allows the distribution of education to di er across both demographic characteristics and

time periods. We construct death rates for age group a, race/ethnicity r and education

quartile i, in year t as:

                                                 
                                         =                                              (1)

where              and       refer, respectively, to the number of deaths and population of

the relevant group. We compute these death rates for ve-year age groups ranging from 25




                                             7
to 74.5 In all cases, we calculate death rates separately for males and females, with the sex

subscript excluded from equation (1) and later equations to simplify notation.

        We use 2001-2017 data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Multiple

Cause of Death (MCOD) les to construct annual counts of deaths from all sources for

speci ed age, education, sex and race-ethnicity groups.6 Information on total population by

age, gender, race/ethnicity, and year is obtained from the National Cancer Institute's

Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) database.7 These are combined with

information on the distribution of educational attainment by age, gender, race/ethnicity,

and year using data from the Census Bureau's American Community Survey (ACS). We use

2001 as the starting year for our analysis because this is the rst ACS year.

        An empirical challenge in constructing death rates by education quartile is that

education is measured in discrete units and the data are not fully comparable across time

periods or sources. With continuous education measures, the exercise would be

straightforward: we would simply calculate the group- and year-speci c distribution of

education and then divide it into quartiles. Instead, our approach is to use or construct

single-year measures of education, ranging from 0 to 17 years.8 Obtaining both deaths and

population by single year of education and demographic group involves two complications.

The rst is that the MCOD and ACS les each record education in single year increments

at various points throughout our sample period, but at other times code education into

categories (e.g. high school, some college, college). We address this limitation using an


5
  The youngest group analyzed are 25-29 year olds because educational attainment is not meaningfully
measured below this. Our oldest group are 70-74 year olds because (prior) mortality selection becomes an
increasing issue at older ages.
6
  The MCOD les summarize information from the universe of death certi cates to US residents.
7
  The SEER data are designed to supply more accurate population estimates for intercensal years than
standard census projections.
8
  In two cases we combine groups. Persons with one year of college but no bachelor's degree are assigned as
having 14 years of education. Those with one or more years of post-graduate education are categorized as
having 17 years


                                                     8
imputation procedure, detailed in Appendix B, to estimate single year of education death

and population counts. The second complication is that a single year of education may

straddle quartiles. For example, if 22 percent of the group has 10 or fewer years of education,

and 7 percent have exactly 11 years, the 25th percentile occurs somewhere between 10 and

11 years. Our procedure in these cases is to proportionately assign deaths from the

overlapping education cell to each quartile, based on population shares. In the example just

provided, three-sevenths of deaths and population for the 11-year group are assigned to Q1

and four-sevenths to Q2.9

        An additional issue arising when computing results for a single race-ethnicity group

is whether the education quartiles should be "general", constructed using the overall

distribution of education for the speci ed sex-age group, or whether these should be "race-

speci c", calculated based only on educational attainment for individuals of the same

race/ethnicity. Our primary analyses use general thresholds, reasoning that it does not make

sense for two individuals with the same age, sex, and education to be placed in di erent

quartiles because their races di er.10 One implication is that the lower quartiles will be

disproportionately populated by race/ethnicity groups with below average education levels

(e.g. blacks and Hispanics) while the other groups (whites and other races) will be over-

represented in the higher quartiles. For this reason, we also examine the robustness of our

results to using race-speci c education thresholds in Section 5.2.




9
  Three-sevenths are assigned to Q1 since -   -   = and four-sevenths to Q2 since -     -   = .
10
   It seems reasonable to allow for di erences in quartiles by age since, for example, the status of a 25-year-
old high school graduate may be quite di erent than that of her 70-year-old counterpart.


                                                       9
3.2 Regression Speci cations
     Our analysis seeks to determine how mortality patterns have changed di erentially

over time across education quartiles. Towards this end, we rst summarize changes across

quartiles and then directly test for di erential trends, by estimating:

              =     =
                           =
                               = [                ] +             += [           ×       ]+        (2)


where              is the level or log of the death rate for age group , race/ethnicity             and

education quartile in year ;                  is a group-speci c xed-e ect,             is a linear time

trend,    ,   , and           denote indicator variables for education quartiles 2, 3 and 4, and

with the lowest quartile,         , serving as the reference group. All of our regression models are

estimated separately for men and women, so that each includes 160 age-race/ethnicity-

education quartile groups. We cluster standard errors by age, race/ethnicity and education,

and weight each cell by its population to obtain nationally-representative estimates.

     In equation (2),           captures the average mortality trend for the lowest education

quartile (the reference group), which is restricted to be the same across all ages and races.

The coe cient           measures the mean di erential change in trend for the second-lowest

quartile relative to the lowest. The coe cients         and       have analogous interpretations for

the third and fourth quartiles, relative to the rst. The standard errors on  through 

are used to calculate 95 percent con dence intervals on these di erences relative to the

lowest quartile.

     Next, in order to examine how educational trends vary across speci c age-

race/ethnicity groups, we estimate:

                   =      =
                                  =
                                      = [               +     (          ×       )] +              (3)

where all variables are as previously described. These regressions include separate time

trends for all 160 age-race-/ethnicity education quartile groups (for each sex), without a



                                                   10
constant or trend main e ect, and so provide information on changes in death rates for each

education quartile and group individually. The coe cients of primary interest,           , show

the group-speci c annual mortality changes, with       indicating initial year levels.



4 Results
       This section rst describes overall trends in educational attainment and death rates

by educational quartile for ages 25-74 combined. We construct aggregated measures of

schooling and death rates in each year using common age standardization techniques

described in Appendix B. Next, we summarize the overall pattern of education quartile

di erences in mortality trends, from 2001-2017, and then the frequency with which group-

speci c education trends are statistically distinguishable from each other. Section 5 follows

with extensions and robustness tests.


4.1 Aggregate Trends
     Mean educational attainment across all ages for Q1 varied from 9.7 to 10.2 years,

depending upon the year, while the corresponding averages for Q2, Q3 and Q4 were 12.1 to

12.5, 13.9 to 14.6, and 16.3 to 16.5 years respectively (Appendix Figure C1). Schooling rose

modestly over time for men and somewhat more for women: average male education grew

by 0.46, 0.26, 0.52 and 0.07 years from 2001-2017 for Q1 through Q4, compared to 0.46,

0.63, 0.90 and 0.35 years for females. These overall changes sometimes conceal much larger

growth. For example, average educational attainment increased by 1.3 and 1.0 years

respectively for 60-64 year old Q1 and Q3 men and by 1.2, 1.6 and 0.8 years for same-aged

Q1, Q3 and Q4 women.

       Overall sex-speci c death rates from 2001-2017 for the four education quartiles are

shown in Figure 2. The gradient between death rates and educational attainment is clear,

but with higher absolute rates for men. For both men and women, Q4 is the only quartile



                                             11
to experience steady declines since 2001. Death rates fell for Q3 males and females until

2010, and then subsequently rose. Trends for the bottom two quartiles were at or slightly

increasing until 2010, and then exhibited a sharper increase.


4.2 Econometric Estimates
     We begin our econometric estimation by examining the overall pattern of trends in

mortality rates across education quartiles. Figure 3 presents results from equation (2), which

aggregates the quartile trends across groups. The entry for Q1 is the trend "main e ect",

  , from the model. The point estimates for the remaining groups are calculated as the main

e ect just described, plus the quartile-speci c trend coe cients. For instance, the estimated

trend for Q2 is calculated as  +  . The 95 percent con dence intervals (CIs) are centered

on the Q2 through Q4 total e ects and indicate whether the corresponding trend is

statistically signi cantly di erent from the Q1 trend. (This can be visually observed by

whether the CI crosses the dotted horizontal line showing the estimated Q1 trend).

     For men, trends in both logs and levels of death rates are at for the lowest quartile

(Figures 3a and 3c) and the di erences between Q1, Q2 and Q3 are never statistically

signi cant. Conversely, Q4 experiences reductions in log death rates that are signi cantly

larger than for Q1 and decreases in death rates that are marginally greater. Among women,

there is more evidence of monotonic trends across quartiles. Log death rates for the lowest

quartile rose, on average, by nearly 1 percent (Figure 3d). Each higher quartile had

successively better mortality trends. For instance, death rates in the top two quartiles fell

by about 6 and 8 per 100,000 and logs and levels of death rates improved by statistically

signi cantly larger amounts for Q3 and Q4, than for Q1.

     The speci cations just estimated are restrictive, since they treat the education trends

as being constant across all groups. To allow for more exible trends, we next provide a

series of plots visually summarizing how the distribution of estimated trends di ers by


                                              12
education. These distributions, displayed in Figure 4, present the trend coe cients from

estimating equation (3), ranked from largest increase to greatest decrease within each

education quartile. Thus, each point represents the estimate of                        for the particular

education group, with a total of 40 estimates for each quartile (10 ages x 4 races).

      The gure provides two main results. First, there is a clear overall education gradient

in mortality trends for women: the biggest reductions in log death rates are observed for

Q4, followed by Q3 and with the least favorable changes for the two lowest quartiles. For

men, by contrast, while Q4 experienced the largest average mortality declines, there is often

little di erence between Q1, Q2, or Q3.11

      Beyond these general patterns, there is often substantial overlap of the estimated

trends across the education quartiles. To illustrate, observe that the fty percent of the 160

groups (for each sex) with estimates between the 25th and 75th percentile of estimated

mortality trends are fairly evenly distributed across education quartiles. For death rates, 17,

18, 18 and 27 groups of Q1, Q2, Q3 and Q4 males are within the interquartile range as are

19, 15, 19 and 27 groups of corresponding females. For log death rates, the corresponding

numbers are 20, 23, 19 and 18 for males and 17, 20, 25 and 18 for females. Outside of the

interquartile range, the greatest mortality declines are concentrated among Q4 and the

highest increases among the two lowest quartiles (see Figure 4). Nonetheless, the results

demonstrate similar mortality trends across education quartiles for many groups in the

middle of the distribution.




11
  With that said, the three groups with the largest increases are whites in the lowest education quartile
aged 30-34, 50-54, and 55-59.


                                                     13
4.3 Testing for Worse Mortality Trends Among the Lower Education Quartiles
     The results above indicate aggregate patterns across education groups but are

somewhat limited in that they compare trends across all age and race-ethnicity groups or

for the overall distribution. However, it is possible, for example, that mortality trends are

worse in the lower education quartiles for some of these groups but not others in ways not

identi ed by the analysis performed up to this point. With this in mind, we next examine

the heterogeneity in results across education quartiles within groups. For clarity, we de ne

the mortality trends to be non-monotonic if an education quartile has a slower growth or

larger decline in mortality than a higher quartile for the same age, race, and sex. Thus a

non-monotonicity occurs if: Q1 does better than Q2, Q3 or Q4; Q2 does better than Q3 or

Q4; or Q3 does better than Q4. We also evaluate whether these di erences are statistically

distinguishable by using the estimated group-speci c trend coe cients to compare: Q1 vs.

Q2, Q3 and Q4; Q2 vs. Q3 and Q4; and Q3 vs. Q4, with the standard errors and associated

p-values estimated through bootstrapping, taking 10,000 samples with replacement to

calculate a distribution of trend estimates. Here, we conduct 1-sided tests where the null

hypothesis is that less-educated groups have equal or better mortality trends than the higher

quartiles and the alternative hypothesis is that they have worse trends. The choice of 1-

sided tests is guided by the prevailing narrative and allows us more power to reject the null

when a lower-educated quartile has fared worse than a higher quartile.

     A simple comparison of the trend coe cients reveals that non-monotonicities occur

for 30 of 40 groups of males for trends in log death rates for 16 of 40 groups of females. For

death rates, non-monotonicities occur for 31 and 25 groups of males and females,

respectively. When examining log death rates, the non-monotonicities most frequently occur

because Q3 does worse than either Q1 or Q2, while both Q3 and Q4 are often observed to

have worse trends than Q2 for death rates. Additional details are provided in Appendix

Table C1.

                                              14
        We next examine the frequency with which the mortality trends of lower quartiles are

statistically distinguishable from those of higher quartiles, based on the 1-sided tests

described above. Figure 5 summarizes the results of these tests by plotting the CDF of the

p-values of the hypothesis tests, separately by sex and by logs versus levels for the six

possible test for each group (Q1 vs. Q2-Q4, Q2 vs. Q3-Q4 and Q3 vs. Q4). The dashed 45-

degree line represents the distribution of p-values under the "grand null" that lower-educated

quartiles have experienced trends no worse than those of higher-educated quartiles of the

same group, using data for each of the six tests just described. By de nition, with trends

that were randomly distributed across education quartiles, 5 percent of tests would have p-

values less than 0.05, 10 percent below 0.1, and so forth. Also, note that the p-values will

be above 0.5 in cases where the lower quartile has a better estimated trend than the higher

quartile, since the test is 1-sided.

        As expected, given the large mortality declines of Q4 observed above, the evidence

against the grand null hypothesis of equal trends across educational quartiles is strong. For

instance, for log death rates, 48 percent of male and 65 percent of female tests have p-values

below 0.05. For death rates, 33 percent of male and half of female tests have p-values below

0.05.

        At the same time, evidence in support of a widening gradient throughout all quartiles

is often weak. This is especially true for men. In 26 percent of tests for log death rates and

42 percent for death rates, the p-value exceeds 0.5, indicating that the estimated trends for

lower-educated quartiles are more favorable than for higher-educated quartiles in the same

group. For females, 15 and 30 percent of the tests have p-values over 0.5 for death rates and

log death rates, respectively. Moreover, 20 percent of tests for male death rates have a p-

value above 0.98 and 17 percent of tests for female death rates have p-values above 0.9.




                                              15
These disproportionate shares of p-values close to 1 are displayed by the CDFs in Figure 5

crossing the 45-degree line at the upper centiles of the distribution.

      Moreover, we often fail to detect statistically distinguishable di erences when allowing

for less stringent criteria for rejecting the null hypothesis. For instance, when using a p-

value of 0.2--well above conventional levels of statistical signi cance--the null is not

rejected in 39, 58, 26 and 42 percent of cases for male logs, male levels, female logs and

female levels of mortality rates. It is important to note that we have more statistical power

when considering log death rates than death rates, which explains why we fail to reject more

often in the latter.12

      Since the top quartile generally has the greatest declines in mortality, we next test for

di erences between the bottom two quartiles and third quartile by considering two tests for

each group: Q1 vs. Q3 and Q2 vs. Q3. The results are summarized in Figure 6. For men, p-

values exceed 0.5 over half the time, for both logs and levels, indicating the frequency with

which Q3 does worse than one of the lower education quartiles, while this occurs 19 and 30

percent of the time for females. Using the p-value of 0.2 as the threshold for hypothesis

testing, we are able to reject the null hypothesis of greater declines for less-educated

quartiles just 35 and 36 percent of the time for male logs and levels of death rates, compared

to in 71 and 64 percent of cases for females.

      The fourth quartile frequently has experienced better trends than Q1 and Q2, as

shown in Appendix Figure C2. For log death rates, the pattern is nearly universal. Lower




12
  As an example, we simulate power to detect a 1 percent change in mortality between two quartiles for a
group with a baseline death rate of 750 per 100,000. Assuming a normally distributed random error equal to
10 percent of the baseline mean and a type I error rate of 0.05, we have 87.2% power to detect a change of
0.01 for log death rates but only 42.6% power to detect a change of 7.5 for death rates. For a larger type I
error rate of 0.2, we have 97.7% power for log death rates and 72.3% power for death rates.


                                                     16
quartiles, however, have larger reductions in death rates in about a third of cases for both

men and women. This pattern can be explained by the low baseline rates for Q4.


5 Robustness and Extensions

   This section extends upon the preceding results in several ways. First, we assess whether

the observed patterns are concealed or incorrectly estimated when using xed categories of

educational attainment, rather than education quartiles. Next, we replicate our estimates

using race-speci c rather than general thresholds for classifying education quartiles. Third,

we investigate how sampling variation in the ACS may a ect our estimates. Fourth, we split

the lowest education quartile into those below and above the bottom decile to examine a

di erent classi cation of the lowest-educated group. Finally, we present descriptive evidence

examining whether geography may explain our ndings.

5.1 Education Quartiles vs. Categories

       It is considerably more di cult to analyze education quartiles ­ whose thresholds

vary across groups and over time ­ than to use xed education categories (e.g. high school

graduate). Here we summarize whether such extra e ort is warranted by examining whether

education quartiles produce meaningfully di erent results compared to        xed categories.

Appendix D provides detail on this analysis and the ndings.

       The correlations between the quartile and categorical mortality trend coe cients are

reasonably high, between 0.72 and 0.90, and the highest group (college graduates) continues

to experience the largest mortality declines, as others have documented (e.g. Case and

Deaton 2017). Yet mortality in the second-highest category (some college) is substantially

worse compared to the quartile-based results. In fact, log death rates for males with some

college have risen by more than for those never attending college (Appendix Figure D1).

These comparisons by category are confounded by compositional changes, unlike our

quartile-based estimates.


                                             17
       Important di erences also emerge when considering mortality trends for individual

groups. The magnitudes of the trend increases for those with the worst experiences are often

dramatically overstated when using education categories. For instance, less-educated whites

near retirement age experienced the largest growth in death rates with either classi cation

method, but the use of educational categories overstates the increases by a factor of two or

three (Appendix Table D1). In the most extreme cases, the estimated rise in death rates

using educational categories are an order of magnitude larger than those based on quartiles.

Our overall conclusion is that the gains from classifying groups by education quartile are

substantial and justify the greater complexity involved.


5.2 Race-speci c education thresholds
       Our main speci cations used age- and sex- but not race-speci c thresholds for

categorizing education quartiles. Appendix Figures C3 and C4 present quantile plots for

logs and levels of death rates, allowing the quartile thresholds to also di er by race. The

monotonic pattern between education quartiles and mortality trends for women is somewhat

weakened, with almost half of Q1 groups now overlapping with Q2. However, with one

exception, the largest increases continue to be observed in the lowest education quartile. For

men, there continue to be similar patterns between Q1 and Q2, but with Q3 log death rates

now closer to those of Q4. For both levels and logs, non-monontonic patterns remain

common for men.

5.3 Sampling variation in education shares

       We use survey data from the ACS to estimate group-speci c education shares.

Although the ACS is designed to be nationally representative with weighting, small cell

sizes thus could lead to substantial sampling error in these shares and, consequently, in the

denominator of our mortality rate calculations. We investigate this possibility by calculating




                                              18
the standard errors of the shares for four education categories. 13 Appendix Figure C5

displays histograms of the coe cient of variation (CV) of these shares by sex-age-

race/ethnicity group. Most are estimated with a high degree of precision: the median CV is

33 in 2001 and 64 in 2017. The 5th percentiles are 13 in 2001 and 31 in 2017. The small CV's

provide support to our main results, and indicate that sampling variation in education

shares is unlikely to change their interpretation.

5.4 Decomposing Mortality Experiences of the Bottom Quartile
        Novosad, Rafkin and Asher (2020), hereafter NRA, have recently argued that the

worst mortality experiences have been concentrated among the lowest decile of whites and

blacks. To compare our results, we estimate models where the bottom quartile is split into

those at or below and versus above the 10th percentile. Appendix Figures C6 and C7 show

that the bottom 10 percent of non-whites almost always fared better than the 11th to

25th percentiles. Conversely, for whites the lowest decile almost always had worse experi-

ences than their slightly more educated counterparts for death rates, consistent with

NRA, but with mixed results obtained when examining log death rates.

        Di erences between our ndings and those of NRA for non-whites and may partially

re ect the data sources used to calculate group-speci c populations. NRA utilize the

Current Population Survey (CPS), whereas we obtain overall sex-age-race populations from

the (more accurate) SEER data and then use data from the ACS to estimate education

shares for each group. Neither the CPS nor the ACS is fully representative at this level, but

the ACS has a substantially larger sample size.14 Small sample sizes may lead to instability


13
   Although our analysis uses single years of education to construct quartiles, we calculate the CV for four
education categories here since our interest is in potential mismeasurement of the cuto s between quartiles,
rather than between each particular year of schooling.
14
   For example, the CPS collects data from 100,000 residences compared to 3 million in recent years of the
ACS. See https://www.census.gov/topics/income-poverty/poverty/guidance/data-sources/acs-vs-cps.html
for more information comparing the two surveys.


                                                     19
that produces inaccurate estimates of the changes over time in population and thus

mortality rates. Also, the sampling weights are based on age, race and sex but not education,

introducing potential problems when using them to construct education-speci c

populations. The CPS further excludes those who are institutionalized and military persons

living in group quarters, requiring NRA to make adjustments for this population.

        We explore these issues by calculating, for each group, the ratio of the population

estimates obtained from the CPS alone versus those from the combined SEER and ACS

data. Appendix Figure C8 plots these ratios separately for whites and blacks in 2001 and

2017. A ratio of 1.2, for example, means the CPS population estimate is 20 percent larger

than that from the SEER/ACS. The ratios change substantially over time for blacks, and

less so for whites, which may explain why NRA obtain di erent ndings for blacks than we

do for non-whites.15 Since NRA focus exclusively on whites and blacks, we also recalculate

our quartile thresholds after excluding Hispanics and other races. As shown in Appendix

Figure C9, we nd broadly similar patterns to our main results in Figure 4, except that the

male log death rate for the third quartile is generally higher than for Q1 or Q2.

        Disparate results for the bottom decile of non-whites may also re ect the time periods

analyzed. NRA study mortality changes between 1992 and 2015, while we focus on 2001 to

2017. Death rates for prime-age blacks declined substantially towards the end of the 20th

centure, part because of better treatments for HIV (Coile and Duggan 2019), before our

analysis period. Conversely, deaths due involving fentanyl increased extremely rapidly

towards the end of the timespan we analyze (Agency for Health Care Research and Quality

2020), particularly in 2016 and 2017 which are not included in NRA's estimates.




15
  The dissimilar qualitative results for low-educated blacks could also be due to NR's earlier (1992) starting
date or because of the bounding procedure they employ, which di ers from our method of proportional as-
signment. We discuss the trade-o s in these modeling decisions in Appendix B.


                                                      20
5.5 Geographic Patterns

       Recent literature suggests a possible role for geographic di erences in explaining the

mortality growth of the less educated (Montez et al. 2019; Montez, Hayward, and Zajacova

2019). However, the analysis of regional patterns is complicated since migration is

endogenous, introducing another potential source of selection bias (Currie and Schwandt

2016). To explore this issue, we calculate the mix of education quartiles within Census

divisions over time and determine that there is generally little change in the quartile shares

from 2001 to 2017 (Appendix Figure C10).

       Next, we draw on Woolf and Schoomaker's (2019) calculations of relative changes in

mortality across states. The data reveal mixed evidence on a Census division's relative

changes in death rates and its level of educational attainment (Appendix Figure C11).

Speci cally, census divisions with larger Q4 shares had greater percentage reductions in

death rates, while the reverse is true for areas with larger population shares of Q2. Both

results could, in principle, be consistent with some correlated geographic factors providing

the actual source of mortality di erences. However, the relationship is at for Q1, rather

than positive as it is for Q2, which operates against such a story. Taken together, this

analysis provides limited support for geography-based explanations for our main results.

6 Discussion
       We provide a detailed analysis of mortality changes, from 2001-2017, for subgroups

strati ed by sex, race-ethnicity, 5-year age groups and education quartiles. Our most

important conclusion is that prior characterizations suggesting that the worst mortality

trends have been concentrated in the bottom of the education distribution are overly

simpli ed and, in important ways, substantially incorrect. Consistent with prior work, we

 nd the least-educated women generally experienced the smallest mortality reductions, and

often sizable increases. However, this is less true for males, where all but the highest


                                              21
education quartile had substantially similar patterns. Conversely, both men and women in

the top quartile, on average, had the most favorable mortality experiences, leading to a

widening gap between those at the top and the rest of the population. The second key point

is that there is substantial variation around these averages. Within sex-race/ethnicity-age

groups, monotonicity violations are frequent--whereby lower education quartiles have more

favorable mortality experiences than higher ones--and even when the less educated do

worse, the di erences are often small and statistically indistinguishable from those of the

higher quartiles.

     Our results should be interpreted in light of several limitations. First, causation is

always di cult to infer from descriptive analyses, although an understanding of the "stylized

facts" provides an important rst step. Second, data limitations restrict the time period

analyzed and it would be informative to test the sensitivity of the results to the use of

di erent starting and ending years (Coile and Duggan 2019). Third, our focus is on

estimating linear trends to concisely summarize mortality patterns across groups, although

non-linearities could exist for some groups. We have also not accounted for immigration,

which could be relevant if mortality rates di er between foreign-born and native-born

populations. However, since net migration has been largest for Hispanics over the analysis

period and the main results are qualitatively similar when we only consider whites and

blacks (although with somewhat worse experience for Q3 males), immigration patterns are

probably not driving our ndings. Finally, our methods are intended to account for rising

levels of education, but we have not considered the causal role that education itself may

play on mortality. While conceptually important, we observe the largest increases in

educational attainment over time for the lower quartiles, but worse average mortality trends

for them. This suggests that within-quartile changes in educational attainment are unlikely

to meaningfully a ect the interpretation of our results.



                                             22
        Throughout the analysis, we stress the utility of considering both relative and

absolute changes in death rates and believe that prior research has probably paid too little

attention to the former. In particular, since the absolute growth or decline equals the

baseline level times the percentage change, groups with the largest absolute changes will

often be those with high initial death rates. For instance, some of the biggest percentage

mortality reductions occurred among 35-54 year-old men, while the absolute decreases were

substantially smaller for them than for corresponding 65-74 year olds. However, this

primarily results from the strong positive age gradient in death rates and it would almost

certainly be incorrect to conclude that progress in reducing mortality was smaller for the

former group than for the latter.

        Our conceptual framework demonstrates that equal-sized shocks to health capital

are likely to result in the largest absolute changes in death rates for lower educated groups,

while the di erences in percentage changes are likely to be more muted or even reversed.

Our empirical ndings are generally not in accordance with these predictions. Speci cally,

mortality has trended downwards for the majority of groups over time, suggesting positive

shocks to health capital, but the absolute reductions are often larger for the most highly

educated. This pattern suggests di erential shocks, or responses to these shocks, by

education level. Two other pieces of evidence support this possibility. First, while most

mortality rates have fallen over time, on average, increases were observed for over one- fth

of the groups examined.16 Second, as highlighted above, the results for education quartiles

within age-race/ethnicity-sex groups are often quite heterogeneous.

        A natural question is what factors explain these particular mortality patterns. The

relatively unfavorable mortality trends of the second and third education quartiles for men



16
  Across both sexes, there is only one group out of 80, 30-34 year old white men, for whom death rates in-
creased for each quartile (ranging from 7.0 deaths per 100,000 for Q1 to 0.2 per 100,000 for Q4).


                                                     23
are initially surprising, but may be consistent with recent evidence indicating poor outcomes

of persons with some college experience but who did not graduate (Zajacova, Rogers, and

Johnson-Lawrence 2012; Zajacova and Lawrence 2018). Although the reasons for this are

not well understood, one possibility is that individuals completing some college without

receiving four-year degrees are relatively poor and come from disadvantaged backgrounds.

Cherlin (2018) emphasizes the relative decline in job opportunities and eroding stability of

families among the moderately educated. These patterns have the potential to di erentially

a ect males and females. In future work, we intend to examine speci c causes of death and

patterns by age and race that may shed additional light on the trends observed here.




                                             24
                                      References

Agency for Health Care Research and Quality. 2020. "Blacks Experiencing Fast-Rising
    Rates of Overdose Deaths Involving Synthetic Opioids Other than Methadone."
    AHRQ Publication No. 20-0032-1.

Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. 2019. "When Work Disappears:
    Manufacturing Decline and the Falling Marriage-Market Value of Young Men."
    American Economic Review: Insights 1 (2): 161­78.

Bosworth, Barry. 2018. "Increasing Disparities in Mortality by Socioeconomic Status."
    Annual Review of Public Health 39: 237­51.

Bound, John, Arline T. Geronimus, Javier M. Rodriguez, and Timothy A. Waidmann.
    2015. "Measuring Recent Apparent Declines in Longevity: The Role of Increasing
    Educational Attainment." Health A airs 34 (12): 2167­73.
    https://doi.org/10.1377/hltha .2015.0481.

Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2015. "Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among
    White Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century." Proceedings of the National
    Academy of Sciences 112 (49): 201518393. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1518393112.

------. 2017. "Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century." Brookings Papers on
    Economic Activity.

Cherlin, Andrew J. 2018. "How Inequality Drives Family Formation The Prima Facie
    Case." In Unequal Family Lives: Causes and Consequences in Europe and the
    Americas, edited by Naomi R Cahn, June Carbone, Laurie Fields DeRose, and J
    Bradford Wilcox, 69­82. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Clark, Damon, and Heather Royer. 2013. "The E ect of Education on Adult Mortality
    and Health: Evidence from Britain." American Economic Review 103 (6): 2087­2120.

Coile, Courtney C, and Mark G Duggan. 2019. "When Labor's Lost: Health, Family Life,
     Incarceration, and Education in a Time of Declining Economic Opportunity for Low-
     Skilled Men." Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (2): 191­210.

Currie, Janet, and Hannes Schwandt. 2016. "Mortality Inequality: The Good News from a
    County-Level Approach." Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (2): 29­52.

Cutler, David M., and Adriana Lleras-Muney. 2010. "Understanding Di erences in Health


                                           25
    Behaviors by Education." Journal of Health Economics 29 (1): 1­28.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.10.003.

Cutler, David M, Fabian Lange, Ellen Meara, Seth Richards-Shubik, and Christopher J
    Ruhm. 2011. "Rising Educational Gradients in Mortality: The Role of Behavioral
    Risk Factors." Journal of Health Economics 30 (6): 1174­87.

de Walque, Damien. 2010. "Education, Information, and Smoking Decisions: Evidence
    from Smoking Histories in the United States, 1940-2000. Journal of Human Resources
    45(3): 682-717.

Dowd, Jennifer B, and Amar Hamoudi. 2014. "Is Life Expectancy Really Falling for
   Groups of Low Socio-Economic Status? Lagged Selection Bias and Artefactual Trends
   in Mortality." International Journal of Epidemiology 43 (4): 983­88.
   https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyu120.

Goldring, Thomas, Fabian Lange, and Seth Richards-Shubik. 2016. "Testing for Changes
    in the SES-Mortality Gradient When the Distribution of Education Changes Too."
    Journal of Health Economics 46: 120­30.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2015.12.002.

Grossman, Michael. 1972. "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for
    Health." Journal of Political Economy. https://doi.org/10.1086/259880.

Kitagawa, Evelyn M, and Philip M Hauser. 1973. Di erential Mortality in the United
    States: A Study in Socioeconomic Epidemiology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
    Press.

Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. "The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality
     in the United States." The Review of Economic Studies 72 (1): 189­221.

Marmot, Michael G, Martin J Shipley, and Geo rey Rose. 1984. "Inequalities in Death--
   Speci c Explanations of a General Pattern?" The Lancet 323 (8384): 1003­6.

Marmot, Michael G, Stephen Stansfeld, Chandra Patel, Fiona North, Jenny Head, Ian
   White, Eric Brunner, Amanda Feeney, and G Davey Smith. 1991. "Health
   Inequalities among British Civil Servants: The Whitehall II Study." The Lancet 337
   (8754): 1387­93.

Meara, Ellen R, Seth Richards, and David M Cutler. 2008. "The Gap Gets Bigger:
   Changes in Mortality and Life Expectancy, by Education, 1981­2000." Health A airs


                                          26
    27 (2): 350­60.

Montez, Jennifer Karas, Mark D Hayward, and Anna Zajacova. 2019. "Educational
   Disparities in Adult Health: US States as Institutional Actors on the Association."
   Socius 5: 1­14.

Montez, Jennifer Karas, Robert A Hummer, Mark D Hayward, Hyeyoung Woo, and
   Richard G Rogers. 2011. "Trends in the Educational Gradient of US Adult Mortality
   from 1986 through 2006 by Race, Gender, and Age Group." Research on Aging 33 (2):
   145­71.

Montez, Jennifer Karas, Anna Zajacova, Mark D Hayward, Steven H Woolf, Derek
   Chapman, and Jason Beck eld. 2019. "Educational Disparities in Adult Mortality
   Across US States: How Do They Di er, and Have They Changed Since the Mid-
   1980s?" Demography, 1­24.

Murphy, Sherry L., Jiaquan Xu, Kenneth D Kochanek, and Elizabeth Arias. 2018.
   "Mortality in the United States, 2017." NCHS Data Brief, No. 328.

National Center for Health Statistics. 2017. "Health United States, 2017: With Special
    Feature on Mortality." Hyattsville, MD.

Novosad, Paul, Charlie Rafkin, and Sam Asher. 2020. "Mortality Changes Among Less
    Educated Americans." Mimeograph, Darmouth University.

O'brien, Rourke L, Atheendar S Venkataramani, and Alexander C Tsai. 2017. "Economic
    Mobility and the Mortality Crisis Among US Middle-Aged Whites." Epidemiology
    (Cambridge, Mass.) 28 (2): e12.

Olshansky, S. Jay, Toni Antonucci, Lisa Berkman, Robert H. Binstock, Axel Boersch-
    Supan, John T. Cacioppo, Bruce A. Carnes, et al. 2012. "Di erences in Life
    Expectancy Due to Race and Educational Di erences Are Widening, and Many May
    Not Catch Up." Health A airs 31 (8): 1803­13.
    https://doi.org/10.1377/hltha .2011.0746.

Preston, Samuel H, and Haidong Wang. 2006. "Sex Mortality Di erences in the United
    States: The Role of Cohort Smoking Patterns." Demography 43 (4): 631­46.

Rostron, Brian L, Elizabeth Arias, and John L Boies. 2010. "Education Reporting and
    Classi cation on Death Certi cates in the United States." Vital Health and Statistics
    2 (151). www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_02/sr02_151.pdf.


                                            27
Woolf, Steven H., and Heidi Schoomaker. 2019. "Life expectancy and mortality rates in
   the United States, 1959-2017." JAMA 322(20): 1996-2016.

Zajacova, Anna, and Elizabeth M Lawrence. 2018. "The Relationship between Education
    and Health: Reducing Disparities through a Contextual Approach." Annual Review of
    Public Health 39: 273­89.

Zajacova, Anna, Richard G Rogers, and Vicki Johnson-Lawrence. 2012. "Glitch in the
    Gradient: Additional Education Does Not Uniformly Equal Better Health." Social
    Science & Medicine 75 (11): 2007­12.




                                           28
             Figure 1. Probability of death with and without health shock by SES




Note: Figure shows the cumulative distribution function for health capital which is assumed to have an equal
variance for high and low SES groups but with a higher mean value for the former group. A health shock
causes an equal left-ward shift of the distribution for both groups. Death occurs if health capital falls below
   , and the fraction of the group dying is shown by the dotted lines extending to the y-axis. Figure shows
the case where normal distributions in the "without shock" case have means of 0 and 1, equal variances of 1.0
and where the health shock shifts both distributions to the left by 0.075 standard deviations.




                                                      29
             Figure 2. Death rates by education quartile and sex, 25-74 year olds




Note: Figure shows age-adjusted death rates per 100,000 by education quartile among 25-74 olds from 2001-
2017. Death rates are calculated using MCOD, ACS, and SEER data as described in Appendix B. Death rates
are age-standardized using the 2017 age distribution speci c to each education quartile. Education quartiles
are calculated separately by sex, age and year.




                                                    30
                         Figure 3. Estimated Trend Di erences by Quartile




Note: Figure shows regression results from estimating equation (2). Dots represent estimates on the trend
coe cient for each quartile, with those for quartiles 2, 3 and 4 calculated by adding the estimate on the
corresponding regression trend interaction term to the trend estimate corresponding to quartile 1. The
whiskers plot the 95% con dence interval of the di erence relative to quartile 1, with the di erence centered
on the mean for quartiles 2, 3, and 4. If the upper-bound of the con dence interval overlaps with the
horizontal dotted line, then the quartile's trend is not statistically distinguishable from the trend for quartile
1. Regression is weighted using the population in each group (age/sex/race/quartile cell), and standard
errors are clustered at the group level.




                                                       31
                     Figure 4. Ranked mortality trends by education quartile




Note: Figure shows quantile plots of the trend coe cient estimates on log and levels of death rates from
estimating equation (3). Coe cient estimates are reported separately by education quartile, pooling races and
ages together. The x-axis lists the rank of the trend coe cient estimate within each education quartile, in
which higher ranks denote larger reductions in mortality rates. For clarity, we bottom-code decreases in death
rates at negative 40 to permit visible detection of di erences for most of the distribution. These decreases are
presented in Appendix Table D.3.




                                                      32
         Figure 5. CDFs of p-values of tests of non-monotonicity in mortality trends




Note: Figure plots the cumulative distribution functions of the p-values from the hypothesis tests of non-
monotonicity in trends. The null hypothesis is that increases in mortality among a lower-educated quartile
has been no larger than increases of a higher-educated quartile within the same age/sex/race group. For
each group, there are 6 hypothesis tests (Q1 vs. Q2, Q1 vs. Q3, Q1 vs. Q4, Q2 vs. Q3, Q2 vs. Q4, Q3 vs.
Q4). Each CDF plots the results of 240 tests (40 groups x 6 tests per group). p-values are calculated via
bootstrapping using 10,000 repeated samples within groups.




                                                     33
  Figure 6. CDFs of p-values of tests of non-monotonicity in mortality trends comparing
                              quartiles 1 and 2 to quartile 3




Note: Figure plots the cumulative distribution functions of the p-values from the hypothesis tests of non-
monotonicity in trends between the bottom 3 quartiles. The null hypothesis is that increases in mortality
among a lower-educated quartile has been no larger than increases of a higher-educated quartile within the
same age/sex/race group. For each group, there are 2 hypothesis tests (Q1 vs. Q3, Q2 vs. Q3). Each CDF
plots the results of 80 tests (40 groups x 2 tests per group). p-values are calculated via bootstrapping using
10,000 repeated samples within groups.




                                                      34
                         Appendix A Conceptual Framework
For simplicity, assume there are two groups: those with low socioeconomic status (SES) and
those with high SES, proxied in our analysis by rank in the educational distribution. The
stock of latent (unobserved) health capital at the end of a period for members of these two
groups, denoted by            and     , is      + and  + , for  = + , with
  > 0 and a random variable normalized without loss of generalization as ~(0,1). Death
occurs if health capital falls below a threshold level  . For group , where = { , }, this
occurs if:

                                                                       +       .
De ning     =     -    , the probability of death for the low and high SES groups are:

                                             =       ( )                                       (A.1a)
and
                                             =       (        - )                              (A.1b)

where () is the cumulative distribution function of the relevant distribution. High SES
individuals have lower death rates than their low SES counterparts:  < , since > 0.
      We begin by considering the effects of a health shock, , that has a uniformly
negative effect on the health capital of all individuals. The new health capital for members
of group is then        = - S + and the risk of death of low and high SES persons
becomes
                                          =      (       + )                                   (A.2a)
and
                                          =      (       +        - ).                         (A.2b)

The probability of death has risen for both groups; however, what we are interested in
are the absolute and relative changes in these risks. The absolute changes are:

                                   =      -          =        (       + )- ( )                 (A.3a)
and
                                   =         -           =        (    +    - )-    (   - ).   (A.3b)

The absolute change in the probability of death will then be higher for low SES group
members if  >   , which occurs if:

                         (   + )- (              +       - )>              ( )- (   - ).        (A.4)

This condition holds as long as the density of F is increasing on the interval to the left of
    and the shock is "small" (such that < -           ). Intuitively, this occurs if deaths are
"left-tail" events and the shock is not so large as to change this.


                                                         35
Next, consider the conditions under which the high SES group has higher relative increases
in mortality than the low SES group, even though the absolute increase is smaller. This
occurs by de nition if  <         or:

                       ( + )- ( )             ( + - )- ( - )
                           ( )
                                        <         ( - )
                                                                                        (A.5)

Rearranging the inequality yields:

                        (   - ) (    + )<          ( ) (   +   - )                     (A.6a)
or
                               ( - )        ( + - )
                                ( )    <     ( + )                                     (A.6b)

This expression holds for S > 0 if the density of F is increasing on the interval [-, ]
which will occur for left-tail events with many common distributions (e.g. normal and T-
distributions), although it need not be the case for others.
        The preceding discussion suggests that equal size deleterious shocks to health capital
will raise the absolute death rates more for low than high SES groups but that the opposite
could be true for relative changes. However, there are additional reasons why equal shocks
may also have larger relative e ects as well for low SES individuals. For instance, assume
the shocks are to the inputs into a Grossman-type health production function, where health
capital at time is determined by investments, occurring during the period and an
exogenous depreciation rate (Grossman 1972). These investments are determined by a set
of positive inputs that have diminishing marginal returns. A deleterious shock can be
characterized as a reduction in the size of one of the (positive) inputs. Under this scenario,
there are at least two reasons why equal size negative health shocks will have larger harmful
e ects on health investments and health capital for the disadvantaged. First, since high SES
persons are likely to be further out on the " at of the curve", where the marginal
productivity of health investments is relatively low, a given negative investment shock will
reduce health capital by less for them than for persons with lower initial levels of health
capital, for whom the productivity of health investments is greater. Second, high SES
individuals are likely to be more able to undertake compensatory investments to o set the
negative e ects of the shock. For example, when faced with increased pollution levels, they
may have more ability to make local moves to less polluted areas or to make other
investments to partially pollution-proof their residence. Similarly, they are likely to have
greater access to high-quality medical care useful for mitigating the consequences of
pollution.
        The analysis of positive health shocks is largely the reverse of that just described,
with greater absolute mortality reductions anticipated for the less advantaged and with


                                              36
unclear predictions for relative decreases in death rates. To the extent that improvements
in medical technology or other similar positive health shocks are the norm, we expect to
observe larger absolute (although again not necessarily relative) mortality improvements for
disadvantaged groups with relatively elevated initial death rates.




                                             37
           Appendix B. Construction of Death Rates by Education Quartiles
       This Appendix details our methods for constructing death rates by education
quartile. Section B1 rst describes the details of our imputation procedure to calculate
deaths and population counts by years of education and demographic characteristics. These
counts are then used to construct death rates by group, and represent the data used in
estimating the main regressions of the paper as described in Section 3. Section B2 then
describes the procedure to age-standardize death rates by education quartile, which follow
common practices from the literature.
B1. Procedure to Estimate Population and Deaths by Years of Education
      To estimate death counts (the numerator in the death rate calculations), we sum all
deaths for the speci ed cell by age, gender, educational attainment, year and race/ethnicity,
using MCOD data. We drop approximately 4,200 observations with missing age out of over
47.7 million recorded deaths during this period. Prior to 2003, information on single year of
education is provided on the death certi cates. Beginning in 2003, approximately 16 percent
of deaths measure education in one of seven categories: 8th grade or less, 9-12th grades
without a diploma, high school, some college (no degree), bachelor's degree, master's degree,
or a doctorate/professional degree. By 2007, just over half of records classify education using
these coarser groups, rather than single year of education, and in 2017, nearly all deaths are
recorded using the seven education categories. For some classi cations, we can reasonably
assign a single year of education. Speci cally, we treat high school graduation as 12 years
of education, some college or associate's degree as 14 years, a bachelor's degree as 16 years,
and a master's or doctorate/professional degree as 17 years of schooling. However, for the
other education categories ("<= 8th grade" and "9-12th grade, no diploma"), this
assignment cannot be done, since these broader categories include people with substantially
di erent years of education; therefore, we develop an imputation procedure to use in these
cases.
      To implement the procedure, we rst calculate the fraction of single year educational
attainment, when these are provided, comprising each of the broader categories. For
example, for deaths corresponding to grades 9 to 12 without a diploma, we calculate the
percentages of deaths occurring among persons where the death certi cate speci es 9, 10
and 11 years of education, respectively (and not just the broader education category). We
then regress the percentages for each of these years of education on a quadratic trend in
years and a full set of age, sex, and race/ethnicity interactions, with the sample restricted
to those in the speci ed broader education categories (e.g. 9 to 12 years of education without
a diploma). To ensure a large enough sample to make these extrapolations, we use wider
than ve-year age bins, speci cally, combining those 25-39, 40-54 and 55-74 years of age.
We restrict the time period for these regressions to be prior to and including 2010, since


                                              38
after that year fewer than 30 percent of deaths record single year of education. Next we use
these estimates to predict the probability of persons with information only on the broad
education category having the particular number of years of education, conditional on the
three age aforementioned categories, age, sex, race/ethnicity and year of death.
      A potential threat to this imputation strategy is that states adopting the broad
education categories might have di erent distributions of within-category educational
attainment to those that did not. To examine whether this was a problem, we rst classi ed
states according to whether they predominantly reported continuous years of education in
2010 versus those that primarily used the broader education categories. We then compared
the distribution of deaths across these two classi cations for those with 9, 10 and 11 years
of education prior to 2003 (when all states used continuous education), conditional on having
between 9 and 12 years of education (without a high school degree). We found that the
distributions were nearly identical across the two types of states. We repeated this for those
with 8th grade or less, and found similarly that the distribution of 0 through 8 years of
education in the pre-2003 period was very similar between states that used di erent
classi cation methods in 2010. These results suggest that the educational distributions in
earlier years provide a useful indication of the predicted distributions in later ones.
      Educational attainment is missing for roughly 5 percent of death certi cates. We
assume that the education distribution within a given year, race, sex, 5-year age bin is the
same for these missing certi cates as when education is reported, and include such deaths
in the calculations using this allocation.
      To estimate population counts, the denominator of death rates, we begin by assigning
the number of years of education completed corresponding to the level of educational
attainment, as measured in the ACS. While information on education is available from the
2000 Census, our analysis suggested that these data were not fully consistent with those
reported in the ACS. Since we also use the ACS for other years, we choose to exclusively
use the ACS to maintain comparability over time. This procedure is straightforward for
categories up to grade 12 starting in 2008, since these are measured in single year bins. Prior
to 2008, grades below 8th grade were combined (nursery school to 4th grade, 5th and 6th
grade, and 7th and 8th grade). We split these cases into each of the possible grades based on
the distribution within a given race, sex and wide age bin among years 2008-2017. We record
"no schooling completed", "nursery school, preschool", and kindergarten" as 0 years of
education. We assume a high school degree is equivalent to 12 years, classify 12th grade
without a diploma as 11 years of schooling, and less than one year of college as 12 years.
We assign "1 or more years of college credit, no degree" or an associate's degree as 14 years
of schooling and assume that a college degree without additional education is equivalent to
16 years. Education beyond a college degree is coded as 17 years of education. Using ACS
sample weights, we then calculate the distribution of education measured from 0 to 17 years


                                              39
(excluding 13 or 15 years) by 5-year age categories, gender, survey year (and sometimes
race/ethnicity). Finally, we multiply these population shares by the SEER population data
corresponding to the age, gender, year and usually race/ethnicity cells to estimate
population counts by single year of education and demographic sub-group.
      It is important to acknowledge the assumptions implied by proportionately assigning
deaths across quartiles using our methods. Novosad and Ravkin (2019) note that the
proportional assignment, which is also used by Meara, Richards, and Cutler (2008) and
Bound et al. (2015), treats mortality rates as being at within education bins, and only
allows for changes discretely across bins. By contrast, their methods assume a continuous
latent education rank distribution, with mortality rates weakly declining in this rank.
Assuming a step-function of mortality with proportional assignment is undesirable when
education bins are wide, but the assumption is less problematic when education is measured
in single years of schooling, as in our analysis. Novosad and Ravkin (2019) consider four
education bins (less than high school, high school, some college, and bachelor's degree or
higher), while we split education into 16 bins (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 16
and 17 years, where 14 includes all those with more than a year of college but who did not
graduate and 17 includes all with at least one year of post-graduate education). Given the
  ner granularity of our measure of educational attainment, we view the assumption of
constant mortality rates within single year of education as reasonable and potentially
advantageous to analyses that divide the sample into just four education categories.


B2. Aggregation of Death Rates and Education Quartiles
        The procedures described above result in education-quartile speci c death rates
calculated for demographic subgroups within 5-year age bins. In computing overall death
rates for the aggregate group of 25-74 year olds (separately by sex), we adjust for changes
over time in the age and education distributions over time by constructing weights for each
5-year age group a in education quartile i, based on 2017 population shares as:

                                           7
                                               =        ,                                  (B1)

where        is the 2017 age group population for educational quartile i and              is the
total population of that quartile. These aggregations are done based on age and education
but not race groups, so the r subscript is not included. We then take the weighted average
of death rates across age groups, standardized based on the 2017 age distribution:


                                       = (          ×          ),                          (B2)



                                               40
where          denotes the death rate for age-group a in education quartile i and year t, and
       denotes the corresponding overall age-adjusted death rate for quartile i in that year.
       To describe broad changes in the education distribution, we similarly also aggregate
across groups. Speci cally, we calculate quartile-speci c average education as:


                                                  7
                                    = (               ×   ),                            (B3)

where         denotes average years of education for age-group a in education quartile i and
year t, and        indicates the corresponding overall age-adjusted average education for the
quartile and year.




                                             41
                        Appendix C: Additional Tables and Figures
    Table C1. Number of violations of education-based monotonicity in mortality trends

                                                    Males                            Females
              Group                      Log Death           Death         Log Death          Death
                                           Rate              Rate            Rate             Rate


Any Violation (max = 40)                      30                31              16               25
Type of Violation
Q1 < Q2                                       10                7                4               4
Q1 < Q3                                       17                17               3               7
Q1 < Q4                                        0                9                1               10
Q2 < Q3                                       22                22              10               15
Q2 < Q4                                        2                16               3               17
Q3 < Q4                                        3                14               5               16
Note: Table shows the number of age-race-sex groups with monotonicity violation, de ned to occur when a
lower education quartile has slower mortality growth or larger decline than does a higher quartile for the same
age, race and sex. This includes cases where Q1 has a better outcome than Q2, Q3 or Q4; Q2 has a better
outcome than Q3 or Q4; or Q3 has a better outcome than Q4. The numbers in the row Q1 < Q2, for example,
denote the number of cases when the mortality rate rose faster or fell more slowly for the rst quartile than
the second quartile of the same age-race-sex group.




                                                      42
           Figure C1. Mean years of education by quartile and sex: 25-74 year olds




Note: Figure shows the average number of years of completed education by education quartile and sex for 25-
74 year olds from 2001-2017. Education quartiles are calculated separately by sex, 5-year age group, and year
using data from the ACS and SEER as described in Appendix B. The 2017 age distribution speci c to each
quartile and sex is used to age-standardize the mean years of education in the 25-74 year old group across
time.




                                                     43
 Figure C2. CDFs of p-values of tests of non-monotonicity in mortality trends comparing
                             quartiles 1 and 2 to quartile 4




Note: Figure plots the cumulative distribution functions of the p-values from the hypothesis tests of non-
monotonicity in trends between Q1 or Q2 and Q4. The null hypothesis is that increases in mortality among
a lower-educated quartile has been no larger than increases of a higher-educated quartile within the same
age/sex/race group. For each group, there are 2 hypothesis tests (Q1 vs. Q4, Q2 vs. Q4). Each CDF plots
the results of 80 tests (40 groups x 2 tests per group). p-values are calculated via bootstrapping using
10,000 repeated samples within groups.




                                                    44
         Figure C3. Ranked log death rate trends by race-speci c education quartile




Note: Figure shows quantile plots of the trend coe cient estimates on log death rates from estimating
equation (3), in which education quartiles are constructed separately for each race. Coe cient estimates are
reported separately by education quartile, pooling races and ages together. The x-axis lists the rank of the
trend coe cient estimate within each education quartile, in which higher ranks denote larger reductions in
mortality rates.




                                                     45
           Figure C4. Ranked death rate trends by race-speci c education quartile




Note: Figure shows quantile plots of the trend coe cient estimates on death rates from estimating equation
(3), in which education quartiles are constructed separately for each race. Coe cient estimates are reported
separately by education quartile, pooling races and ages together. The x-axis lists the rank of the trend
coe cient estimate within each education quartile, in which higher ranks denote larger reductions in mortality
rates. For clarity, we bottom-code decreases in death rates at negative 40 to permit visible detection of
di erences for most of the distribution.




                                                     46
Figure C5. Histograms of Mean Education Shares Relative to Standard Error by Group




Note: Figure plots histograms of the coe cient of variation (Mean/SE) on the education shares from the
ACS for each group of race, 5-year age, and four categories of education (less than high school, high school,
some college, college grad or higher), separately by sex in 2001 and 2017. Bin width equals 10. Each
histogram includes 160 groups. The smallest CV in 2001 is 8 for Hispanic women aged 70-74 with a college
degree (mean = 6.3%, SE = 0.7%). The largest CV in 2017 is 234, for white women aged 30-34 with a
college degree (mean = 47.8%, SE = 0.2%).




                                                      47
            Figure C6. Ranked log death rate trends among lowest quartile, by race




Note: Graph plots distributions of the trend coe cient estimates on log death rates that split the bottom
quartile into the lowest 10 percent (hollow circles) and the 11th to 25th percent (shaded circles) of the education
distribution. The y-axis lists the trend coe cient estimates on log death rates. The x-axis lists the rank of the
trend coe cient estimate within either the bottom 10 percent or 11th-25th percentiles, in which higher ranks
denote larger reductions in mortality rates.




                                                        48
              Figure C7. Ranked death rate trends among lowest quartile, by race




Note: Graph plots distributions of the trend coe cient estimates on log death rates that split the bottom
quartile into the lowest 10 percent (hollow circles) and the 11th to 25th percent (shaded circles) of the education
distribution. The y-axis lists the trend coe cient estimates on death rates. The x-axis lists the rank of the
trend coe cient estimate within either the bottom 10 percent or 11th-25th percentiles, in which higher ranks
denote larger reductions in mortality rates.




                                                        49
      Figure C8. Comparison of Population Estimates using CPS vs. ACS and SEER




Note: Figure plots the ratio of population estimates from the CPS to those estimated from the combination
of the ACS and SEER for 5-year age bands, sex, race, and four education categories (Less than high school,
high school, some college, college). The y-axis displays the ratio using 2017 data and the x-axis displays the
ratio using 2001 data. A ratio of 1.2 is interpreted as the population estimated from the CPS is 20 percent
larger than that estimates by multiplying the SEER by the share of that demographic cell in the ACS.




                                                     50
     Figure C9. Ranked mortality trends by education quartile, whites and blacks only




Note: Figure shows quantile plots of the trend coe cient estimates on log and levels of death rates from
estimating equation (3), with only whites and blacks in construction of quartiles. Coe cient estimates are
reported separately by education quartile, pooling races and ages together. The x-axis lists the rank of the
trend coe cient estimate within each education quartile, in which higher ranks denote larger reductions in
mortality rates. For clarity, we bottom-code decreases in death rates at negative 40 to permit visible detection
of di erences for most of the distribution.




                                                      51
       Figure C10. Shares of Education Quartiles within Census Divisions, 2001-2017




Note: Figure shows the fraction of education quartiles within Census divisions in 2001 and 2017, calculated
separately for males and females. Each observation corresponds to a quartile within a particular Census divi-
sion. The solid line denotes the 45-degree line. Points located farther from the 45-degree line indicate larger
charges in the fraction of the Census division composed of that particular quartile. Points located close to the
45-degree line, indicate little change over time in the composition of quartiles within regions. We use the
national thresholds for quartiles calculated using the ACS and the SEER as described in the text and used
throughout the analysis.




                                                      52
              Figure C11. Percentage Change in Death Rates vs. Quartile Shares
                                  within Census Divisions




Note: Figures plot the relationship between the average annual percentage change in census region death rates
against the average share of each education quartile. The mortality data are from Figures 9, 10, and 11 in
Woolf and Schoomaker (2019), with males and females combined. The average education quartile shares within
Census regions are calculated from 2001 to 2017, and also combine males and females because the shares vary
little within Census divisions. We use the national thresholds for quartiles calculated using the ACS and the
SEER as described in the text and used throughout the analysis. The relative change in the death rates,
within Census regions, is negatively related to the share of population in Q4 positively related to the share in
Q2. There is little relationship between mortality changes and the share within Q1 or Q3.




                                                      53
                  Appendix D: Education Quartiles vs. Categories

        Our main analysis divides education groups into quartiles, so as to examine a
constant proportion of the educational distribution over time. The more commonly used
method is instead to use xed educational categories. When doing so, secular increases in
education will cause the proportions of the population in the categories to change, with
increases in higher and decreases in less educated categories. This introduces potentially
serious selection biases and a potential tradeo between simplicity and accuracy. It is an
empirical question whether the bene ts of the more complicated strategy we follow are
worth the additional complexity. For this reason, this appendix examines whether the results
obtained substantially di er when using education quartiles rather than categories.
        The four education quartiles can be roughly matched to the following four schooling
categories less than high school graduate; high school graduate but no college, some college
but no degree, and college degree or more. These categories approximately correspond to
the overall average educational attainment of Q1-Q4, although quartile-speci c years of
schooling vary across groups and generally increase over time.
        A positive correlation between categorical and quartile-based mortality trends is
obtained, as would be expected, although with considerable variation across groups. For
example, the correlations are 0.90 and 0.71 when examining male logs and levels of death
rates, and 0.89 and 0.72 for corresponding female outcomes. The rank correlations for males
range from 0.83 to 0.88, compared to 0.84 to 0.88 for females. The categorical and quartile
trend coe cients have di erent signs in around 16 percent of cases for men and for 19
percent of groups for women, although this mostly occurs when the absolute value of the
trend coe cient is small.
        To provide a better indication of the importance of the sensitivity of the results to
the use of educational categories versus quartiles, Appendix Tables D1 and D2 expand on
some of the prior analysis. In each case, the original estimates for quartiles are shown rst,
followed by the corresponding results using education categories. Using education categories
often results in misclassi cation of both the worst and best performing groups. Between 2
and 5 of the 10 age-race-education quartiles with the largest trend increases in death or log
death rates are misidenti ed when using corresponding education categories, with
particularly poor performance (half of the 10 groups misidenti ed) for levels of death rate
(see Table D1). In addition, the use of categories leads to a substantial overstatement of the
magnitude of the rise for the worst-o groups. For instance, the death rates of white male
Q1 aged 55-59 and 30-34 were estimated to increase by 9.5 and 7.0 per 100,000 annually,
the two largest increases of any of the 160 groups. By comparison, the estimated increases
for same aged white males with less than high school education were 31.6 and 8.8 per
100,000 annually.


                                              54
       However, these estimates are erroneous, re ecting increasing negative selection into
these groups as educational attainment rose over time. Similarly, the largest increases for
females were the 12.0 per 100,000 annual rise in death rates estimated for 50-54 year old Q1
whites. However, once again the growth for corresponding aged white women with less than
a high school education was over two and a half times as large: 30.8 per 100,000. The
estimated increase for white women aged 65-69 with less than a high school degree was 43.1
per 100,000, but the rate a decline of 6.7 per 100,000 for Q1 white women of this age. Table
D2 shows that the use of education categories, rather than quartiles, also frequently
misidenti es the best performing groups, although both the magnitudes and identi cation
of groups in the top 10 are much closer to those obtained using quartiles.




                                             55
          Figure D.1 Ranked log and level death rate trends by education category




Note: Figure shows quantile plots of the trend coe cient estimates on log and levels of death rates from
estimating equation (3), using education categories rather than quartiles. Coe cient estimates are reported
separately by education category, pooling races and ages together. The x-axis lists the rank of the trend
coe cient estimate that is speci c to each education quartile, ranging from largest increase to largest
reduction.




                                                    56
                           Table D1. Groups with largest mortality increases by education quartiles and categories
                                      Log Death Rate                                                                  Death Rate
                      Quartiles                              Categories                            Quartiles                              Categories
 Rank      Race      Age    Educ        Coef     Race       Age    Educ       Coef      Race      Age    Educ        Coef     Race       Age    Educ        Coef
 Males
   1        W         30        3      0.029       W        25         3      0.040      W         55        1       9.46       W        65         1       50.34
   2        W         30        2      0.025       W        30         3      0.040      W         30        1       7.01       W        60         1       47.45
   3        W         30        1      0.024       W        30         2      0.031      W         50        1       6.57       W        70         1       41.76
   4        W         25        3      0.022       W        25         2      0.026      W         30        2       5.87       W        55         1       31.58
   5        W         25        2      0.021       W        35         3      0.024      W         55        3       5.52       W        50         1       16.77
   6        W         25        1      0.018       W        30         1      0.024      W         55        2       4.71       B        65         1       10.29
   7        O         25        1      0.016       O        30         1      0.024      W         35        1       4.65       W        30         2       9.53
   8        O         30        1      0.016       O        25         1      0.023      W         25        1       4.43       W        30         1       8.80
   9        W         35        2      0.013       W        25         1      0.023      W         25        2       4.18       W        35         2       7.21
  10        W         35        1      0.012       O        30         3      0.021      O         50        2       3.92       W        25         1       7.00
Females
   1        W         30        1      0.036       W        30         2      0.044      W         50        1      11.95       W        65         1       43.10
   2        W         25        1      0.034       W        25         2      0.042      W         55        1      8.29        W        70         1       42.11
   3        O         25        1      0.028       W        30         3      0.041      W         45        1      7.11        W        55         1       37.49
   4        W         30        2      0.028       W        25         1      0.040      W         30        1      5.81        W        60         1       35.98
   5        W         35        1      0.025       O        25         1      0.040      W         35        1      5.61        W        50         1       30.84
   6        W         25        2      0.025       W        25         3      0.040      W         50        2      5.31        W        45         1       16.45
   7        O         30        1      0.024       W        30         1      0.038      W         40        1      4.96        W        40         1       10.40
   8        W         50        1      0.021       W        50         1      0.037      W         25        1      4.04        W        35         1       9.83
   9        W         45        1      0.018       W        35         2      0.035      W         45        2      2.98        W        30         1       9.30
  10        W         35        2      0.017       W        55         1      0.033      W         30        2      2.93        W        50         2       9.00
   Note: This table shows the 10 groups with the largest estimated increases in logs or levels of death rates, separately by sex and whether education
   quartiles or categories are used in estimating equation (3). Education categories also range from one to four and refer respectively to less than high
   school graduate, high school graduate without college, some college but no degree, and a Bachelor's degree or more.


                                                                              57
                          Table D2. Groups with largest mortality decreases by education quartiles and categories
                                      Log Death Rate                                                                  Death Rate
                      Quartiles                             Categories                            Quartiles                              Categories
 Rank      Race      Age  Educ         Coef      Race      Age   Educ         Coef      Race     Age  Educ          Coef      Race      Age   Educ          Coef
 Males
  160       B        70        3      -0.039       B        50        4      -0.038      B        70        3      -161.1      B         70        2        -174.2
  159       B        50        4      -0.036       H        45        2      -0.036      B        70        4      -101.8      H         70        2        -105.9
  158       B        70        4      -0.035       B        45        2      -0.034      B        70        2       -90.8      B         65        2         -91.0
  157       B        45        4      -0.035       B        50        2      -0.034      B        65        3       -87.8      B         70        4         -90.4
  156       H        65        4      -0.035       B        45        4      -0.034      B        65        2       -87.8      O         70        2         -58.3
  155       B        45        2      -0.034       H        40        2      -0.033      H        70        3       -82.3      H         65        2         -53.8
  154       H        70        3      -0.034       B        70        4      -0.031      W        70        3       -69.5      W         70        4         -53.7
  153       B        40        4      -0.033       H        70        2      -0.030      W        70        4       -63.4      B         50        2         -50.2
  152       H        45        2      -0.033       B        40        4      -0.030      H        70        4       -53.5      H         70        4         -47.1
  151       H        40        2      -0.033       O        65        1      -0.030      B        65        4       -50.5      W         70        2         -46.5
Females
  160       B        45        4      -0.040       B        45        4      -0.037      B        70        3      -115.5      B         70        2        -123.4
  159       B        60        4      -0.036       H        70        2      -0.036      B        70        4       -69.9      H         70        2         -75.0
  158       B        70        3      -0.036       B        70        2      -0.032      B        65        3       -62.8      B         65        2         -68.6
  157       H        70        3      -0.036       B        25        4      -0.030      B        70        2       -61.9      B         70        3         -43.9
  156       W        65        4      -0.035       B        60        4      -0.030      H        70        3       -61.3      B         70        4         -42.2
  155       B        25        4      -0.033       B        50        4      -0.030      B        65        2       -58.6      H         65        2         -34.0
  154       B        65        4      -0.033       O        65        1      -0.028      B        65        4       -49.6      W         70        4         -32.7
  153       W        70        4      -0.033       O        60        1      -0.027      W        70        4       -48.7      B         65        4         -32.3
  152       O        65        3      -0.032       B        65        2      -0.027      O        70        3       -39.6      B         60        4         -28.7
  151       O        70        4      -0.031       B        55        4      -0.027      B        60        4       -35.8      O         70        1         -28.4
   Note: This table shows the 10 groups with the largest estimated decreases in log or levels of death rates, separately by sex and whether education
   quartiles or categories are used in estimating equation (3). Education categories also range from one to four and refer respectively to less than high
   school graduate, high school graduate without college, some college but no degree, and a Bachelor's degree or more.


                                                                              58
