                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MORAL UNIVERSALISM AND THE STRUCTURE OF IDEOLOGY

                                       Benjamin Enke
                                  Ricardo Rodríguez-Padilla
                                    Florian Zimmermann

                                     Working Paper 27511
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27511


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We acknowledge funding from the William F. Milton Fund, the Harvard Asia Center, and a
Harvard Inequality in America Grant. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin Enke, Ricardo Rodríguez-Padilla, and Florian Zimmermann. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Moral Universalism and the Structure of Ideology
Benjamin Enke, Ricardo Rodríguez-Padilla, and Florian Zimmermann
NBER Working Paper No. 27511
July 2020
JEL No. D01,D72

                                          ABSTRACT

Throughout the Western world, people's policy views are correlated across domains in a
strikingly similar fashion. This paper proposes that what partly explains the structure of ideology
is moral universalism: the extent to which people's altruism and trust remain constant as social
distance increases. In new large-scale multinational surveys, heterogeneity in universalism
descriptively explains why the left and right both simultaneously support and oppose different
types of government spending. Moreover, the left-right divide on topics such as redistribution
strongly depends on whether people evaluate more or less universalist policies. Large-scale
donation data provide additional evidence for the political left's universalism.


Benjamin Enke                                    Florian Zimmermann
Department of Economics                          Institute on Behavior
Harvard University                               & Inequality (briq)
Littauer M008                                    Schaumburg-Lippe-Str. 5-9
Cambridge, MA 02138                              53113 Bonn
and NBER                                         Germany
enke@fas.harvard.edu                             and University of Bonn
                                                 florian.zimmermann@briq-institute.org
Ricardo Rodríguez-Padilla
Harvard University
rodriguezpadilla@g.harvard.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27511
1    Introduction
A key stylized fact in the study of political economy is the existence of ideological con-
straint: people's policy views are correlated across domains, so that an individual's self-
identification as "left" or "right" carries information about an entire vector of policy views.
Strikingly, the internal structure of these ideological clusters is very similar across West-
ern countries. As we confirm using new large-scale survey data from multiple Western
democracies, people in a left cluster generally desire government expenditure on for-
eign aid, affirmative action, environmental protection, welfare, and universal health
care, while people in a right cluster always support government spending on the mil-
itary, police and law enforcement, and border control. While these clusters appear to
have become more pronounced over the last 40 years, the basic qualitative structure of
ideology has been remarkably constant in recent history, across both time and space.
    Yet, it is not immediately obvious why these particular bundles of policy views would
prevail in the first place. A prominent view ­ which we confirm in our data ­ is that peo-
ple differ in their overall preferences for "big government." However, views about the
size of government as a whole do not rationalize why, in terms of expenditure shares,
demand for redistribution is always correlated with demand for environmental protec-
tion rather than support for a strong military. A fortiori, the fact that the left desires a
larger government overall does not explain why in some policy domains (such as law en-
forcement) the left actually demands a lower level of spending than the right. Still, the
striking similarity of ideological clusters across countries with vastly different electoral
systems and party structures suggests that these bundles reflect a systematic core rather
than coincidence. This paper attempts to identify this core and to partly explain what
it ultimately means to be "left" or "right," beyond the mechanical description of policy
views associated with these labels.
    Our central proposition is that what imposes the particular structure on the space
of policy views is heterogeneity in moral universalism, by which we mean the extent
to which people's altruism and their trust in others remain constant as social distance
increases. Universalism is not about a person's overall level of altruism or trust, but in-
stead about its slope as a function of social distance. Universalists are not more or less
moral people, they just allocate a given altruism or trust budget more uniformly. Based
on this definition, we first conceptualize the link between universalism and policy views
in a simple model. We then test the resulting predictions in large-scale surveys to pro-
vide evidence that heterogeneity in universalism descriptively explains the structure of
ideology observed in the Western world, in an almost identical fashion across countries.
Using those same surveys, we also document that the canonical left-right divide on pol-
icy views substantially attenuates or even reverses once traditionally conservative policy


                                              1
domains are recast as universalist policies, or once traditionally left-wing policies are
implemented in non-universalist ways. Finally, we leverage large-scale donation data to
provide complementary field evidence for the link between heterogeneity in universal-
ism and political behavior. The entire paper is descriptive in nature and offers a new set
of stylized facts.
   To formalize how we think about the link between universalism and a vector of policy
views, we first introduce a simple model that builds on Tabellini (2008). In the model, the
key primitives are two parameters that govern an agent's universalism in altruism and in
trust. Universalism in altruism determines the welfare weights that an agent assigns to
other agents, as a function of social distance. Universalism in trust determines the extent
to which trust in others declines as a function of social distance. Both universalist and
non-universalist agents have rational expectations about the overall rate of cheating in
society, yet they differ in their beliefs about who the cheaters are, where a full universalist
believes that cheating is uncorrelated with social distance from her.
   Agents evaluate two potential policies, where Policy B is "risky" in that it introduces
a scope for free-riding or cheating by individual members of society. Policy A is "safe"
in that it reduces the scope for cheating but is associated with other societal costs. For
example, in the domain of welfare, Policy B corresponds to a system with more extensive
welfare payments, which introduces scope for claiming benefits one is not entitled to.
Policy A, on the other hand, corresponds to a smaller redistributive system with less scope
for free-riding, yet this introduces the social cost that random income shocks cannot be
equalized ex post. In this setup, less universalist agents oppose welfare because they
are more likely to believe that the socially distant are likely to free-ride on the agent's
in-groups. Thus, in the model, universalism in altruism and trust both lead to a stronger
demand for welfare.
   To further illustrate the logic of the model, consider the domain of police and law
enforcement. Here, the risky Policy B corresponds to a system with less police presence,
which introduces scope for stealing. The safe Policy A, meanwhile, corresponds to more
police presence, which eliminates the scope for stealing but introduces the societal cost
of paying for a law enforcement system. Here, less universalist agents again support the
safe Policy A because they worry that their in-group members get exploited by socially
distant agents. The takeaway is that, in our framework, less universalist agents (defined
in both altruism and trust space) sometimes support and sometimes oppose government
spending, purely depending on whether it introduces or prevents free-riding opportuni-
ties. While our formal model emphasizes the role of cheating, we also discuss informally
how universalism in altruism could explain variation in policy preferences absent oppor-
tunities for cheating. The common thread that runs through our formal and informal
applications is that a person's universalism should be predictive of their support for con-


                                              2
temporary "left" policies.
   We test our predictions about the link between universalism and a vector of pol-
icy views in pre-registered representative large-scale surveys in five Western countries:
United States, Australia, France, Germany, and Sweden. We further include Brazil and
South Korea as two non-Western countries in our sample. Non-Western countries typi-
cally do not exhibit the particular ideological clusters observed in the West, so that the
link between universalism and policy should be weaker or absent in these countries.
In total, we survey N  15, 000 individuals. We measure respondents' universalism in
altruism and trust, along with their policy views.
   To measure universalism in altruism, we implement structured decision tasks. In each
task, a respondent is endowed with the hypothetical sum of $100 and is asked to split
the money between two equally rich individuals: (i) a randomly selected member of a
specific social (in-) group who lives in their own country of residence and (ii) a randomly-
selected person who lives in their own country of residence. Each respondent makes ten
allocation decisions across which the social group (i) varies. The list of groups is based
on an ex-ante crowdsourcing exercise and includes the respondent's extended family;
neighbors; friends of the family; colleagues; members of the same organization; or peo-
ple who share the respondent's hobbies; religious beliefs; age; political views; and race.
For example, in one question, a U.S. participant is asked to split hypothetical $100 be-
tween a member of their extended family and a randomly-selected person from the
United States. In addition to these 10 questions that measure "domestic universalism",
we also measure "foreign universalism" and "global universalism" through money allo-
cation tasks that involve different types of foreigners. From all of these questions, we
construct an individual-level summary statistic of universalism in altruism. While all of
our survey questions are hypothetical in nature, they underwent an extensive selection
and experimental validation procedure, and have been shown to be correlated with real
donation decisions (see Enke et al., 2020).
   Using an analogous procedure, we estimate respondents' universalism in trust by ask-
ing them to allocate 100 trust points between the individuals outlined above, to indicate
whom the respondent trusts more. These questions again deliver measures of domes-
tic, foreign, and global universalism in trust. In our data, universalism in altruism and
universalism in trust are highly correlated, which suggests that they capture the same
underlying psychology, which we refer to as "moral universalism." In our data, respon-
dents exhibit large variation in universalism: some participants always split the money
or trust points equally, while others consistently share more money with, and trust more,
members of their own in-groups. Consistent with prior findings, universalism does not
just reflect favorable economic conditions: if anything, individuals with higher income
and wealth are less universalist.


                                              3
   We supplement these measurements of universalism with detailed questions on re-
spondents' policy views. To this effect, we solicit quantitative responses about how much
money the government should collect on average from each citizen to fund specific expen-
diture categories. Here, a respondent states a per capita dollar amount that they would
like to see collected and spent on each of welfare payments; universal health care; af-
firmative action; military; law enforcement and police; border control; foreign aid; and
environmental protection.
   Using these data, the empirical analysis begins with a principal component analysis
that analyzes the structure of ideology. In line with prior findings, we find that people's
desired expenditure levels can be summarized by two intuitively appealing main compo-
nents that are strikingly similar across Western countries: (i) a big-vs.-small government
component that captures how much money respondents would like to spend overall and
(ii) desired expenditure shares conditional on overall spending, which exhibit the famil-
iar structure described in the opening paragraph.
   Looking at the link between policy views and universalism, we find that the structure
of this second component is strongly correlated with universalism in the ways predicted
by the model and our pre-registration. Universalism is positively correlated with desired
expenditure levels on welfare payments, environment, affirmative action, foreign aid,
and ­ to a lesser extent ­ universal health care. Moreover, as we pre-registered, univer-
salism is negatively correlated with desired expenditure levels on border control, military,
and law enforcement and police. In this sense, universalism reproduces the structure of
policy views that we attempt to explain in this paper.
   These correlations are robust and general in the following three ways. (i) The results
are almost identical when we consider either universalism in altruism or universalism in
trust, as predicted by our model. (iii) The relationship between universalism and policy
preferences is robust against controlling for rich measures of income, wealth, religiosity,
education, urbanicity and beliefs about government efficiency, among others. (iii) The
results are strikingly similar across the United States, Australia, France, Germany, and
Sweden. In the two non-Western countries in our sample, Brazil and Korea, where policy
views generally cannot be grouped according to the Western left-vs.-right divide, hetero-
geneity in universalism does not explain much of the variation in policy views. At the
same time, among the rich and well-educated elites in these countries, universalism is
correlated with policy views in a very similar fashion to the patterns in Western countries.
This may suggest that the role of morality for policy preferences is a "luxury good".
   As has long been known, various sociodemographics, beliefs and preferences are cor-
related with the left-right divide. To put our results on universalism in perspective, we
implement a series of benchmarking exercises against variables such as age, religiosity,
education, income and wealth, equity-efficiency preferences and beliefs about the effi-


                                             4
ciency of government. In our data, these variables are all reasonably strongly correlated
with respondents' self-positioning on a left-vs.-right scale, which suggests that we mea-
sure them in meaningful ways. We also find that these variables are often correlated
with desired expenditure levels in important and known ways. At the same time, uni-
versalism is the only variable in our data that organizes the key pattern we are trying
to explain: simultaneous support for government spending in the domains of welfare,
universal health care, environmental protection, affirmative action, and foreign aid, but
opposition to large government spending in the domains of military, police, and border
control. While many other variables plausibly affect policy views on single or multipe is-
sues, none of them gets close to (correlationally) producing the characteristic structure
of ideology that is our focus here.
   In a next step, we make the link between universalism and policy views more direct
by manipulating people's support for broad policy domains by proposing specific (non-)
universalist implementations of different broad policies. To take an example, universal-
ists may well be in favor of specific universalist policies within the general domain of the
military, and non-universalist conservatives may be supportive of redistribution once it
is implemented in a local, "communal" fashion. We elicit respondents' desired spending
levels for specific policy proposals within each broad policy domain, where some propos-
als are more universalist than others. For example, within the domain of the military, we
separately elicit desired spending levels on "Peacekeeping and humanitarian missions
by the military abroad" and "Ensuring American defense and security." Likewise, within
the broad domain of welfare payments, we separately elicit desired spending levels on
"Redistributing local tax revenues as welfare payments across all communities nation-
wide" and "Redistributing local tax revenues as welfare payments only within the local
communities they were raised."
   In these exercises, the relationship between universalism and policy views can be
predictably attenuated or even reversed, depending on whether the specific policy pro-
posal is more or less universalist. To take a few examples, universalists (left-wingers) are
more supportive of military expenditure than non-universalists (right-wingers) once the
military is said to focus on humanitarian missions. Similarly, conservatives are equally
likely to support redistribution or environmental protection as left-wingers once it takes
place locally. These results further strengthen the empirical case for the idea that what
matters for the support of a policy is at least partly whether it is universalist in nature.
   In the final part of the paper, we complement the survey analysis with field evidence.
We estimate the universalism of U.S. Congressional Districts (CDs) using large-scale
donation data from DonorsChoose, an American non-profit organization providing an
online "crowdfunding" platform for public school teachers. On this website, individual
donors give money to specific funding requests that are posted by teachers. As a proxy


                                             5
for aggregate universalism, we estimate the extent to which a CD's donations decline as a
function of the geographic distance to the recipient CD. As in our surveys, we only lever-
age variation in towards whom a given donor CD donates, not how much they donate
(or receive) overall.
    We find that a CD's universalism is strongly correlated with Democratic vote shares:
Republican CD's donate relatively more money locally and less money to faraway places.
That is, as in our surveys, left-wingers tend to treat their local community relatively
poorly also in terms of actual donations. This raw correlation is robust against leveraging
only within-state variation, and against controlling for variables such as local education
expenditure or income.
    Linking our work to the literature, much research in political science has been de-
voted to studying the internal structure of elite opinion (Poole and Rosenthal, 2000),
but there is no extant theory that convincingly explains the internal structure of mass
opinion. Popular accounts often distinguish between an "economic" and a "cultural" or
"social" axis, yet these descriptive classifications do not explain (i) why economic and
social views are correlated in systematic ways and (ii) why certain types of social views
tend to go together.
    Various literatures in economics, political science, and moral and political psychol-
ogy have highlighted the role of morality, identity and social preferences for political
attitudes, though none of them attempts to explain the internal structure of ideology.
Enke (forthcoming) studies the supply of and demand for universalist vs. communal
moral values in U.S. presidential elections using a psychological (non-utilitarian) frame-
work of moral values (Haidt, 2012). We innovate on this work (i) by examining not just
voting behavior but the internal structure of specific policy views; (ii) not just in the
U.S. but in the Western world more generally; and (iii) by operating with a utilitarian
framework of universalism and corresponding measurements. ¹ Much of our approach is
inspired by the model in Tabellini (2008).
    The idea that social groups and identity play an important role in politics runs
through various recent contributions and reviews (Shayo, 2009; Grossman and Helpman,
2018; Gennaioli and Tabellini, 2019; Kranton and Sanders, 2017; Besley and Persson,
2019; Guriev and Papaioannou, 2020). For instance, large literatures explain variation
in demand for redistribution through ethnic divisions and citizenship (Alesina et al.,
1999, 2018; Luttmer, 2001; Alesina and Glaeser, 2004; Gilens, 2009; Fehr et al., 2019),
or social preferences (Kerschbamer and Müller, 2020; Epper et al., 2020; Fisman et al.,

    ¹ A popular view in political psychology is that political affiliation correlates with "negativity bias"
(Hibbing et al., 2014) or "threat sensitivity" (Jost et al., 2009). Waytz et al. (2019) show that U.S. liberals
express greater moral concern toward friends relative to family, and the world relative to the nation. We
believe that our notions of universalism in altruism and trust can be usefully understood as capturing
many of the more fine-grained psychological concepts that have received attention in this literature.


                                                      6
2017). Similarly, the broader concept of social capital has received substantial attention
in the political economy literature (Putnam, 2000). For example, Dal Bó et al. (2018)
and Algan et al. (2018) document that far-right voters exhibit lower trust. We differ from
all these contributions in that we emphasize the relevance of universalism (the gradient
of social capital, rather than its level) for an entire vector of policy views. ²
    Finally, we interpret our results as linking to a recent broader social science literature
that emphasizes the importance of affective polarization (Iyengar et al., 2019; Boxell
et al., 2020) and the role of emotions and morality in political disagreement (Haidt,
2012). Some of the hostility in political conflict may stem from people having a hard
time understanding that those on the other side of the aisle are not selfish but instead act
on different moral priorities, emphasizing either those that are close to them or impartial
treatment.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 summarizes the internal
structure of ideology. Section 3 offers a formal framework. Sections 4 and 5 describe the
design and results of our surveys. Section 6 offers field evidence and Section 7 concludes.



2     The Structure of Western Political Ideology
To illustrate our motivating observation on the structure of political ideology in rich
Western societies, we work with our own survey data, described in detail in Section 4.
The data cover the United States, Australia, France, Germany, and Sweden, along with
the non-Western countries Brazil and South Korea, for a total of approximately 15,000
respondents. We elicited respondents' desired per capita expenditure levels for eight do-
mains: welfare payments; universal health care; affirmative action; environmental pro-
tection; foreign aid; military; police and law enforcement; and border control. That is,
respondents provided a per capita amount that they would like their national govern-
ment to collect and spend on each of these domains.
    To probe the correlation structure of policy views, we implement principal compo-
nent analyses (PCA) separately in each country. The first principal component (first
eigenvector) is that convex combination of the underlying variables that accounts for
as much variation in the data as possible. It hence assigns similar weights to highly cor-
related variables. The second principal component is that convex combination of the
underlying variables that explains as much of the residual variation as possible, condi-
tional on being orthogonal to the first eigenvector.
    We find that, in each Western country, the first principal component of (log) desired
expenditures across domains exhibits an unsurprising and almost identical structure: it

     ² More generally, our paper links to a recent literature on the economics of morality (e.g., Bénabou et
al., 2020; Dal Bó and Dal Bó, 2014; Bénabou and Tirole, 2011).


                                                     7
                                                         First eigenvector of desired expenditure shares
       Loading of first principal component
       -.6   -.4     -.2     0      .2   .4




                                              Border   Military   Police       Foreign   Affirmative   Environ-     Health   Welfare
                                                                                 Aid       Action       ment         Care

                                                           USA     Australia       Germany         France         Sweden


Figure 1: Factor loadings of the first principal component of desired expenditure shares. Sign convention:
the loading on "Border" is always non-positive, and the other signs are determined accordingly.


loads positively and with essentially equal weights on desired expenditure levels in the
eight categories. This first component captures "big vs. small government" views.
    The second principal component, on the other hand, closely corresponds to our object
of interest: in each country, it loads negatively on desired expenditure levels for military,
police and law enforcement, and border control, and almost always positively on desired
expenditure levels for welfare, universal health care, affirmative action, environmental
protection, and foreign aid. This second component, by virtue of being orthogonal to the
first one, intuitively captures desired expenditure shares.
    To make this point more explicit, we perform a principal component analysis directly
on desired shares of overall spending, computed as desired expenditure level in a given
domain divided by total desired expenditure on all eight domains. Figure 1 presents
the loadings of the first principal component for the Western countries. Border control,
military, and police and law enforcement all receive negative weights in each country,
while foreign aid, affirmative action, environmental protection, welfare payments, and
universal health care almost always receive positive weights.
    The structure of this eigenvector is reminiscent of intuitive notions of "left" and
"right." To confirm this intuition, we elicited from our respondents how they would posi-
tion themselves on an 11-point left-vs.-right Likert scale. Figure 2 summarizes the rela-
tionship between respondents' self-positioning and their desired expenditure levels. In
all Western countries, more pronounced left-wing identification is correlated with higher
desired expenditure levels for canonical left-wing policies and lower desired expenditure
levels for canonical conservative policies.
    Indeed, Figure 2 informally suggests that when respondents tell us that they are "left"
or "right," they appear to refer more to how they would like to use a given government


                                                                                    8
                                                    Regression: Desired log expenditure levels on left-right (0-10 scale)


                                             .15
        Regression coefficient: left-right
                                             .1
                                             .05
                                             0
                                             -.05
                                             -.1




                                                     Border   Military    Police     Foreign   Affirmative Environ-   Health    Welfare
                                                                                       Aid       Action     ment       Care

                                                     USA      Australia    Germany       France      Sweden           All Western countries



Figure 2: The figure plots the OLS regression coefficients of univariate regressions of desired log expendi-
ture levels for each policy domain on self-positioning on a left-right scale (0­10). The dependent variables
are standardized into z-scores. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals using robust standard errors.
The "All western countries" specification includes country fixed effects.


budget rather than the overall size of government. To make this argument more formal,
we compute the pairwise correlations between people's left-vs.-right self-positioning, the
first principal component of desired expenditure levels (the "big-vs.-small-government"
component), and the first principal component of desired expenditure shares. We find
that the correlation between the left-right-scale and the big-vs.-small-government com-
ponent ranges between  = -0.14 in the U.S. and  = -0.02 in France. In contrast, the
correlation between the left-right-scale and the expenditure-shares-component ranges
between  = 0.49 in the U.S. and  = 0.30 in Australia. This suggests that at least a
considerable part of people's self-identification as "left" and "right" relates to how a given
budget is spent, rather than how big the budget is in the first place. The objective of this
paper is to understand why policy views exhibit this particular correlation structure, in
a strikingly similar fashion across Western countries.
    Two comments on the scope of our analysis are in order. First, we attempt to un-
derstand the structure of contemporary, rather than historical, ideology. This being said,
while recent research suggests that the magnitude of the intra-correlations between peo-
ple's policy views has increased over the last 40 years, the qualitative structure of ide-
ology has remained remarkably constant over this period (e.g., Rehm and Reilly, 2010;
Kozlowski and Murphy, 2019; Wu, 2020; Draca and Schwarz, 2020).

                                                                                         9
    Second, we only attempt to understand the structure of Western, rather than global,
ideology. Figures 19 and 20 in Appendix C.4 replicate the analyses above for the two non-
Western countries in our sample. Similarly to the results found in other survey datasets
(Malka et al., 2019), we see that the structure of policy views outside the West is con-
siderably less pronounced, and there is no clear relationship with people's left-vs.-right
self-assessment. ³



3     Theoretical Framework
This section develops a simple framework to clarify how we think about the relationship
between policy preferences and universalism in both altruism and trust. Our setup builds
on Tabellini (2008). In the model, agents choose between two policy options, yet we will
argue that the structure of these two policies captures an essential feature of all eight
policy domains discussed in the previous section.
    The main ingredients of the model are: (i) agents live on a rectangle and hence at
different (social) distance to different members of humanity, where social distance could
capture distance along the lines of family, ethnicity, religion, language, values, geography
etc.; (ii) the two policy options differ in the extent to which they enable or rule out free-
riding or cheating; (iii) in terms of timeline, agents first vote on a policy and then decide
whether to cheat on society; and (iv) agents differ in the extent to which their altruism
and trust are universalist. Our object of interest is how an agent's universalism affects
their choice between the two policies. We relegate derivations to Appendix A.


3.1    Social Distance and Preferences
Let I be a set consisting of N agents from two separate countries, where for analytical
convenience we assume that N   and that N is a multiple of four. We formalize
countries and social distances by allocating agents in equal proportion to the vertices
of a rectangle of length dl and width dw where dw < dl and dw + dl = 1. The social
distance between agents i and j is di , j , where distance is measured along the edges of
the rectangle. Agents in the same country are connected by the short end of the rectangle.
    We assume that each vertex of the rectangle corresponds to a social group. Agents
who populate the same vertex are said to belong to the same domestic in-group (say, the
same neighborhood or the same set of religious beliefs). Agents at distance dw can be
thought of as domestic out-group. Likewise, we think of agents at distance dl as global


    ³ We confirm that very similar results on the difference between Western and non-Western countries
hold in a much larger sample of countries in the Comparative Study of Electoral Systems (CSES) dataset,
and in the World Values Survey (WVS) longitudinal dataset, see Appendix B.


                                                 10
in-group (say, people who live in a different country but adhere to the same values) and
at distance dl + dw = 1 as global out-group.
    Agents care about their own consumption and the consumption of others, though
to potentially heterogeneous degrees. Our formalization of universalism is similar to
Tabellini (2008); also see Enke (2019) for a recent cultural economics application. Define
Ji = I \ {i } to be the set of N - 1 people in the population other than i and by Di the set
of N /2 - 1 domestic people other than i . Let x i denote the consumption of agent i . The
utility function of agent i is given by

                                ui ( x i , x -i ) = x i + i           x j ai , j ( di , j , i )        (1)
                                                              j  Ji
                                                       1 + i
                               ai , j ( di , j , i ) =       - i di , j                                (2)
                                                         2

The parameter i  (0, 1] scales agent i 's level of altruism, while i  (0, 1] governs the
slope of altruism as a function of social distance. Figure 3 illustrates. We construct ai , j
such that (i) altruism declines linearly as a function of distance; and (ii) the function
integrates to a constant (1/2). This clarifies that the universalism parameter i does not
scale who is "more or less moral," but only how uniformly an agent distributes a given
altruism budget.  Intuitively, a full universalist might argue that it is appealing to treat
everyone equally, while others might point out that the universalist's moral compass is
distorted in that she treats her friends not very well. Indeed, in Enke et al. (2020) we
show that universalists have fewer friends and spend less time with them, compared to
less universalist people.


3.2     Domestic Policy
3.2.1    Domestic Policy Options

Agents first vote for one of two policies in a simple majority system, where voting is
assumed to be sincere. After each agent casts a vote vi  {A, B }, depending on which
policy was selected, agents potentially take an action qi  {0, 1} that we will think of
as free-riding or cheating. The "safe" policy option A enforces that nobody can cheat on
society. However, the enforcement of this policy is costly, and that cost is shared equally
among all domestic agents for a per capita cost c that is deducted from the baseline
consumption level that is normalized to zero. The "risky" option B does not impose a
per capita cost on each agent, yet each agent can free-ride or cheat on society. Cheating

      A potential micro-foundation for such type-dependent altruism is that agents exhibit greater altruism
towards those agents that they believe to be "good" types, as in the model of Levine (1998). Then, our
utility function corresponds to a reduced-form version of a model in which beliefs about the types of others
vary as a function of social distance, as in Section 3.2 below.


                                                        11
                Altruism

                                Low universalism ( = 1)




                                                                            Full universalism ( = 0)
                            ×                    ×                      ×                 ×




                                                                                                    Social distance




                                                                  up




                                                                                            l = r
                          p




                                                  r




                                                                                        + nge
                                            d nge




                                                                                               1)
                        0) ou




                                                                ro
                            r




                                                               -g




                                                                                     d tra
                                                                    )
                     j = -g




                                         j = tra

                                             w)




                                                                    d
                                                                    l
                                                          in




                                                                                           d
                         n




                                                                                          s
                                             s




                                                                =
                (d ic i




                                                                                       al
                                                          al
                                    (d tic




                                                                                      w
                                                                j




                                                                            (d lob
                                                        ob
                      t




                                                               i,
                                   es
              es




                                                          (d
                  i,




                                                                                 j =
                                      i,




                                                      Gl
                                  m
             m




                                                                            G
                                Do
           Do




                                                                              i,
Figure 3: Illustration of heterogeneity in universalism. In the empirical analysis, we do not impose that
the domestic stranger is socially closer than the global in-group.


by agent i delivers an extra rent s > 0 for agent i but imposes an overall externality of
e > 2s, which is shared equally among all domestic agents for a per capita externality
of 2e/N . As will become clear, we only use the terminology "safe" and "risky" policy to
point out the scope for cheating that is implied by the policies ­ it will sometimes be the
case that what we call the "safe policy" is riskier in respects other than cheating, but this
is immaterial for our purposes.
    As explained in Table 1, we argue that these abstract features of the two policies map
into some of the structural features of each of the eight policy domains discussed above.
For example, in the case of welfare payments, the safe option A corresponds to a system
with few welfare payments, so that agents cannot cheat on society by claiming benefits
they are not entitled to. On the other hand, this causes a societal loss because random
income shocks cannot be equalized. The risky option B, on the other hand, corresponds
to a more expansive welfare state, which opens up the possibility of cheating.
    In this model, option A and option B are not defined by the implied level of govern-
ment spending. Indeed, as can be seen in Table 1, in the domain of welfare, the safe
option A corresponds to lower spending, while in the domain of police and law enforce-
ment, the safe policy A corresponds to higher spending.


3.2.2    Beliefs and Equilibrium

In order to calculate valuations of each policy, a decision maker must form beliefs about
who would cheat under policy option B. We model decision makers that have rational ex-


                                                           12
                       Table 1: Mapping of policy domains to abstract model policies


  Policy domain           Risky Option B                        Safe Option A
  Abstract framework      No fixed cost, but agents can cheat   Cheating impossible, but agents pay fixed per
                          and hence earn rent s by imposing     capita cost of c
                          per capita externality of e


  Domestic policies

  Welfare                 Expansive welfare state: Agents       No welfare state: Agents cannot cheat by
                          can cheat on society by claim-        claiming benefits they are not entitled to, yet
                          ing benefits they are not entitled    this imposes a per capita cost c because in
                          to (and hence reap rent s); this      the absence of welfare payments, random in-
                          causes per capita externality e       come shocks cannot be equalized ex post
  Universal     health    Same logic as for welfare
  care
  Affirmative Action     Extensive AA: Agents who benefit       No AA: Agents cannot reduce effort while
                         from AA can cheat by reducing ef-      still getting promoted; yet absence of AA also
                         fort because they know that they       entails a social cost because disadvantaged
                         will get promoted either way; this     groups in society cannot live up to their po-
                         imposes a cost on other agents         tential
  Police and law en- Weak police: Stealing and fraud            Strong police: Stealing is impossible; but en-
  forcement          possible                                   tails a cost because police needs to be paid
                                                                for


  Foreign policies

  Effective     border    Weak border control: Increase in      Strong border control: less immigration, but
  control                 number of people who could come       this entails a per capita cost because border
                          into country and free ride on oth-    control is expensive, and because some immi-
                          ers' efforts                          grants are truly in need
  Military                Weak military: Other countries        Strong military: Foreigners cannot exploit
                          can cheat or exploit                  domestic people; entails per-capita cost be-
                                                                cause military needs to get paid for
  Environmental pro- Strong regulation: Other countries         Weak regulation: Foreign countries cannot
  tection            can cheat by de-regulating and             exploit domestic regulation; yet this en-
                     hence growing their economy at             tails cost because environmental degradation
                     expense of domestic agents                 might have economic or health impacts on
                                                                domestic agents
  Foreign aid             Extensive aid: Foreigners can         No aid: Foreigners cannot cheat; yet this en-
                          cheat by claiming aid they are not    tails a cost because lack of aid could cause
                          entitled to or by misusing funds      increased migration or wars



pectations about the overall fraction of agents who will cheat under option B. However, to
allow for an analysis of the role of universalism in trust beliefs, we assume that decision
makers may not form correct beliefs about which agents will cheat. For example, casual
introspection suggests that people differ dramatically in whether they believe that immi-
grants are more likely to be criminals than natives. Formally, the subjective probability
that agent i assigns to agent j not cheating under policy B is



                                                      13
                                                                   dw
                               bi , j (di , j , i ) =  +              i - i di , j                               (3)
                                                                   2

where i  (0, 1] controls the rate at which the belief that an agent will not cheat falls as a
function of social distance. We think of i as the inverse of universalism in trust. Note that
beliefs are defined analogously to altruism above, and can be graphically represented
analogously to Figure 3. As in the case of altruism, universalists and non-universalists do
not differ in their overall level of trust: the belief function in equation (3) integrates to
the constant  , which is endogenous and corresponds to the fraction of agents who do
not cheat in equilibrium. Thus, in equilibrium, agents have rational expectations about
the overall rate of cheating in society but not necessarily about how cheating is correlated
with social distance from them. We assume that (i , i , i ) are positive independent joint
uniform.


3.2.3   Domestic Policy Views

We solve the game by backward induction. Denote by Ei [·] the subjective "expectations
operator" that applies the belief function in equation (3). Further denote by L-i the
hypothetical losses that agents incur due to the cheating of agents other than i . In the
second stage of the game, if the risky policy is implemented, agent i cheats iff

                            2e                                       2e
   Ei [ui (qi = 1)] = s -      - L -i + i    [1 - bi , j (i )] · s -    - L-i · ai , j (i )                      (4)
                            N             jD
                                                                     N
                                                             i


    > Ei [ui (qi = 0)] = - L-i + i               {[1 - bi , j (i )] · s - L-i } · ai , j (i )                    (5)
                                         j  Di


which delivers the vector q of individual cheating decisions qi (i ). The resulting losses
(externalities) that each agent incurs are denoted by L  (q ( ))  (1 -  ( ))e.
   In the first stage of the game, an agent votes for the safe policy A iff

            ui (A) = -c + i           {-c } · ai , j (i )                                                        (6)
                              j  Di

        > Ei [ui (B )]
        = [s · qi (i ) - L  (q ( ))] + i                    {[1 - bi , j (i )] · s - L  (q ( ))} · ai , j (i )   (7)
                                                    j  Di


which delivers the vote vi (i , i ) as a function of universalism and other parameters.
Under the parameter assumptions discussed in Appendix A, we get:

Prediction. Individuals with higher universalism exhibit a stronger preference for the risky


                                                             14
domestic policy B: welfare, universal health care, affirmative action, and weak police and
law enforcement. These predictions hold for universalism in both altruism and trust.

    See Appendix A.2 for a proof. The intuition behind this prediction is straightforward.
All else equal, a decision maker who is less universalist will believe that out-group agents
are more likely to cheat. This, in turn, implies a redistribution of resources away from
the agent's in-group members to the out-group, which all agents who are not fully uni-
versalist dislike. As a consequence, agents who are less universalist in altruism or trust
(or both) prefer option A more.


3.3     Foreign Policy
Decision makers are again presented with a choice between two policy options. Under
the safe policy option A, domestic and foreign agents receive their baseline consumption
x . Domestic agents additionally pay a per capita cost c .  Under the risky policy B, domes-
tic agents do not have to pay c . However, in this regime foreign agents can cheat and get
s by imposing an overall cost of e on all domestic people, which is again equally shared.
Table 1 explains how this abstract structure maps into the domains of military, border
control, foreign aid, and environmental protection. As with the domestic policies above,
note that the risky policy B sometimes corresponds to big and sometimes to small gov-
ernment. Again, the key defining characteristic that matters for our analysis is whether
a policy introduces or prevents cheating opportunities.
    The mechanics of the foreign policy analysis are very similar to the domestic case.
We again assume that agents' beliefs about the overall fraction of cheaters are correct,
but that they have heterogeneous beliefs about how cheating is correlated with distance
from them. We exposit the details in Appendix A, and state the main prediction here.

Prediction. Individuals with higher universalism exhibit a stronger preference for the risky
policy B: weak border control, weak military, stringent environmental protection, and ex-
pansive foreign aid. These predictions hold for universalism in both altruism and trust.


3.4     Informal Discussion
Our formal model highlights the role of cheating opportunities because this allows us
to tie together different types of policy preferences in a simple formal framework, in
a way that accommodates both altruism and trust. At the same time, universalism in
altruism as such can also plausibly explain heterogeneity in some policy preferences

    In some of the foreign policy domains we consider, c is likely to be paid by both domestic and foreign
agents. Our main predictions remain unchanged if we assume that c is paid by both domestic and foreign
agents.


                                                   15
absent cheating opportunities. For instance, non-universalists may intrinsically dislike
the idea that their own tax money goes to people that they are socially distant from
them. Similarly, non-universalists may support tight border control even in the absence
of cheating opportunities for immigrants, if they view immigrants as crowding out do-
mestic in-groups' consumption of the country's resources, like jobs. To take a final exam-
ple, non-universalists might dislike the concept of foreign aid simply because they value
the welfare of the domestic poor higher than that of the foreign poor. These examples
illustrate that our general idea ­ that "left" policies are appealing to universalists ­ does
not appear to hinge on our specific cheating framework but comfortably accommodates
other intuitions as well.



4     Survey Design

4.1    Logistics
We implemented internet surveys in Australia, France, Germany, Sweden, the United
States, Brazil, and South Korea through the infrastructure of the market research panel
of Dynata. The surveys were implemented between June and August 2019. The original
survey was developed in English, translated into other languages by Dynata, and then
checked by us using native speakers. The median completion time was 20 minutes.
    The survey consisted of four components: (i) an introductory screen that elicited
demographics and routed respondents into or out of the survey; (ii) decision screens to
measure universalism and other social preferences; (iii) screens to measure policy views;
and (iv) a questionnaire to elicit additional information and covariates. The order of
parts (ii) and (iii) was randomized across respondents. We also randomized the order
in which universalism in altruism and universalism in trust were elicited. 
    We took two measures to ensure quality control. First, every respondent who com-
pleted the survey in less than 400 seconds was dropped and replaced by Dynata. Second,
the survey contained two attention check questions, interspersed throughout the survey.
Whenever a respondent answered an attention check incorrectly, they were immediately
routed out of the survey and replaced by Dynata.
    We contracted with Dynata for nationally representative samples of N = 1, 700 citi-
zens aged at least 18 in each country (see details on the pre-registration below). How-
ever, because constructing a sample that is nationally representative along the lines of
age, gender, ethnicity, income, employment status, and education is logistically difficult,
Dynata eventually supplied a larger sample to us (total N = 14, 731), a subset of which

     A permanent link for the U.S. version of our survey is: https://harvard.az1.qualtrics.com/
jfe/form/SV_aftuqgHsyIAShkp.


                                              16
makes up the more representative samples that we pre-registered. The physical process
was that Dynata kept sampling respondents until our pre-specified quotas were satis-
fied. "Surplus" respondents came free of charge for us. Since we view throwing away
data as scientifically questionable, all analyses reported in the main text make use of the
full sample. In the Appendix we replicate all analyses using the pre-registered (smaller)
representative samples. The results are always extremely similar.
   As a final remark on the sample, Dynata had considerably more difficulty in con-
structing representative samples in Brazil and South Korea than in the other countries,
which we did not anticipate when we initially contracted with them. Thus, the final
samples sent to us skew young, rich, and employed in Brazil and Korea. The sample
characteristics are summarized in Appendix C.1.


4.2     Measurement of Universalism
Our objective is to measure the empirical analogue of the universalism parameters  and
 in the theoretical framework in Section 3. This requires measuring how altruism and
trust vary as social distance increases, holding fixed the overall level of altruism and trust.
We rely on a new set of structured experimentally-validated survey games to measure
an individual's universalism. Our main goals when designing these games were to use
survey games that (i) are conceptually closely linked to the model; (ii) capture a broad
set of in-groups; and (iii) can be deployed at scale in online surveys relatively easily. To
conserve space and focus, we relegated the development, experimental validation, and
testing of these survey measures to a separate paper (Enke et al., 2020). We summarize
the key aspects below.


4.2.1   Survey Games

Universalism in altruism.      Respondents completed a total of 16 hypothetical money
allocation tasks that allow us to construct a summary statistic of universalism in altruism
( in the model). The construction of the survey games is closely tied to the theoretical
framework in Section 3 in that it makes use of four different types of groups: domestic
in-groups, domestic strangers, global in-groups, and global strangers. From these four
types of groups, we construct three universalism components: domestic universalism,
foreign universalism, and global universalism.
   First, to estimate domestic universalism, respondents made ten decisions. In each
of them, they were asked to split hypothetical $100 between (i) a randomly-selected
person from their country of residence and (ii) a randomly-selected member of one of
their social groups, who also resides in the respondent's country of residence. We based
the selection of in-groups on an ex-ante crowd-sourcing exercise (see Enke et al., 2020,

                                             17
for details). Across the ten questions, the social groups included extended family, friends
of family, neighbors, colleagues at work or school, same organization (e.g., club), same
age, same ethnic background or race, same political views, same hobbies, and same
religious beliefs. For example, in one question, respondents in the U.S. were asked to
split $100 between a randomly-selected person who lives in the U.S. and a member of
their extended family, such as a cousin. The average allocation to the randomly-selected
person across the ten questions then makes up the domestic universalism measure.
   Second, to estimate foreign universalism, respondents were asked to split $100 be-
tween (i) a randomly-selected person from their country of residence and (ii) a randomly-
selected person who lives anywhere in the world. Foreign universalism then corresponds
to the monetary amount sent to the global stranger.
   Third, to estimate global universalism, respondents made five decisions, in each of
which they were asked to split hypothetical $100 between (i) a randomly-selected per-
son who lives anywhere in the world and (ii) a randomly-selected person who lives
anywhere in the world and is a member of the respondent's social groups. Across the
five questions, the social groups included same language, same religious beliefs, same
ethnic background, same values, and same occupation. The average amount of money
sent to the randomly-selected world citizen makes up the global universalism measure.
   For the purpose of these tasks, respondents were always asked to assume (i) that both
individuals are equally rich (addressing income effects) and (ii) that neither of these indi-
viduals would find out who sent them the money (ruling out reciprocity considerations).
The order of questions was randomized across respondents. Figure 13 in Appendix C.2
shows an example decision screen.
   As discussed in detail in Enke et al. (2020), the separate money allocation decisions,
and in particular the domestic, foreign, and global universalism summary components
are all highly positively correlated with each other in a representative sample of the U.S.
population. This is also true in our multinational dataset. To reduce the dimensionality
of the data and minimize measurement error, we hence average the three components
into a summary statistic of universalism in altruism. The construction of this summary
statistic was pre-registered, see below. To document the validity of this procedure, some
of the analyses below will also work with the separate universalism components.


Universalism in trust.    Respondents completed a total of 16 tasks from which we esti-
mate an individual's universalism in trust as empirical analogue of  in the model. The
procedure was identical to the one described for altruism above, except that in a given
game respondents were asked to allocate 100 "trust points" (rather than $100) between
two individuals, to express whom they trust more. This again yields domestic, foreign,
and global universalism components, which we average into a summary statistic of uni-


                                            18
versalism in trust. Again, the construction of this summary statistic was pre-registered.


Composite measure of universalism.       Universalism in altruism and trust exhibit a cor-
relation of  = 0.62 after accounting for measurement error using the obviously-related
instrumental variables technique of Gillen et al. (2015). To reduce the dimensionality of
the analysis, in most analyses below we work with a composite measure of universalism,
which consists of the unweighted average of universalism in trust and universalism in
altruism. At the same time, we reference robustness checks that use the altruism and
trust measures separately, see Section 5.6.


4.2.2   Construct Validity

We validate the universalism measures along three dimensions. See Enke et al. (2020)
for details. (i) Experimental validation. We implemented an ex-ante experimental vali-
dation procedure. Specifically, we show that, over a one-week horizon, our hypothetical
measure of universalism in altruism is highly correlated with a financially-incentivized
measure of universalism, which consists of the same questions with real incentives. Sec-
ond, we document that behavior in our trust point allocation game is highly correlated
with trust beliefs in a structured cheating task that is standard in the experimental eco-
nomics literature. (ii) Correlation with real donation decisions. We also show that our sur-
vey measure of moral universalism predicts real donation decisions: while universalists
donate less than non-universalists to local community organizations, they donate more
to nationwide and international charities. (iii) Choice of social groups. We document that
an individual's degree of universalism with respect to the set of fifteen domestic and for-
eign groups that we implement is highly correlated with their universalism with respect
to a more comprehensive set of forty social groups.


4.2.3   Descriptives

Figure 4 shows a histogram of the composite universalism measure, pooled across all
Western countries. Numbers around 50 imply on average equal allocations of money
and trust points to in-groups and strangers. Numbers below 50 indicate a tendency to al-
locate more money and trust points towards in-groups. Numbers above 50 correspond to
the (largely counterfactual) case that someone allocates more money and trust points to
socially more distant individuals. Appendix C.3 shows the corresponding histograms in
each country separately. Table 2 reports correlations with demographics. The strongest
correlations are with age and wealth, both of which correlate negatively with moral
universalism. Similarly, men, higher-income individuals, and the religious exhibit lower
universalism. These results are consistent with those documented in Enke et al. (2020)


                                              19
                                       Heterogeneity in Moral Universalism
                                              Pooled: Western countries


                        .06
                        .04
             Fraction
                        .02
                        0




                              0   10    20   30   40     50       60    70    80   90   100
                                                  Moral universalism


Figure 4: Distribution of the composite measure of moral universalism, pooled across all Western coun-
tries. The amounts reflect allocations to random strangers, so that the measure is decreasing in in-group
favoritism. 50 corresponds to an equal split of money or trust points.


for a U.S. sample. Importantly, these correlations highlight that heterogeneity in univer-
salism does not simply pick up variation in income or education (as in economic stories
of the "left behind") ­ if anything, individuals with higher income and wealth are less
universalist.


4.3     Measurement of Political Attitudes
Measures of Support for Expenditure Categories.                        Respondents were instructed to
imagine they could decide the average amount of money that their federal or national
government collects per year from each citizen to spend on each of eight policy cate-
gories. We asked respondents to assume that all dollar amounts collected for a category
would be spent only on this particular category, without any waste. In addition, we pro-
vided respondents with a reference value: annual per capita spending on education in
their country of residence.
    Respondents were asked to enter eight monetary amounts to indicate their desired
per capita spending levels for each of welfare, universal health care, foreign aid, environ-
mental protection, affirmative action, military, police and law enforcement, and border
control. The order of these categories on the computer screen was randomized.
    Figure 16 in Appendix C.2 provides a screenshot. Naturally, because of the free-entry
format, responses to these questions are subject to large outliers. To account for these


                                                      20
                  Table 2: Individual-level correlates of universalism: Western countries


                                         Correlation between composite measure of universalism and:
                                       Female    Income Index    Wealth Index    College   Religiosity   Urbanicity
                              Age
                                        (0-1)      (z-score)      (z-score)       (0-1)     (z-score)    (z-score)

      Raw correlation        -0.16     0.07        -0.08           -0.12           0.01     -0.10         0.03
        OLS coeff.
                             -0.12     1.78        -0.93           -1.48           0.21     -1.16         0.38
     (w/ Country FEs)
 OLS coeff. (multivariate)
                             -0.09     1.13        -0.54           -0.79         1.14       -1.04          0.19
    (w/ Country FEs)

 Notes. The first row reports the Pearson raw correlation between individual characteristics and the composite
measure of universalism (N = 11, 063). The second row reports OLS coefficients from individual regressions of
the composite measure of universalism on the given characteristic, including country fixed effects; this row thus
presents by how many dollars / trust points universalism increases for a one unit change in the demographic variable.
The third row reports OLS coefficients from a multivariate regression of the composite measure of universalism
on all characteristics at once, including country fixed effects. See Appendix E for details on the construction of
the demographic variables. All z-scores are computed separately within each country.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,

   p < 0.01.


outliers, we winsorize the desired spending levels at +/- 3 standard deviations of the
within-country mean, as specified in our pre-registration (discussed below). That is, we
replace each dollar amount above (below) the amount that corresponds to 3 SD above
(below) the mean with this value. This affects 1.6% of all responses.


Summary statistic of policy views.              As specified in our pre-registration, we compute a
simple summary statistic of policy views across all policy domains, which is computed
from the desired expenditure shares:

             Summary statistic of policy views =                                                             (8)
             Foreign aid + Environment + Aff. action + Welfare + Health care
                                                                             -
                                            5
               Military + Police + Border control
             -
                                3

where each policy denotes share of desired expenditure that goes to a domain. Pooling
data across all countries, this summary statistic exhibits a correlation of  = 0.40 with
respondents' self-positioning on a left-right scale (0­10). We pre-specified the summary
statistic in this particular way because it corresponds very closely to the structure of
policy views in the Western countries discussed in Section 2. We standardize all political
attitudes variables into z-scores, separately within each country. 

      As a second, and complementary measure of policy views, we elicit respondents' level of support
for the eight policy domains above using Likert scale questions. These directly ask participants to indicate
whether they strongly support or strongly oppose a given policy, on a scale from zero to ten. As specified in a
pre-registration (see below), we use these measures as instruments to be able to account for measurement
error using "Obviously-Related Instrumental Variables" analyses (Gillen et al., 2019).


                                                      21
Measures of Support for Specific Policy Proposals. The measures reported in the previ-
ous section aim at capturing a respondent's support for broad policy domains. In addition,
we measured respondents' preferences over more specific policy proposals. After respon-
dents had indicated their desired spending levels for the eight broad policy domains, we
asked them how much money they would like to see collected and spent on two specific
projects or policy proposals within each broader policy domain. We constructed these
proposals such that one was more universalist than the other, yet both focused on the
same policy domain. We present the policy proposals in Table 3. To illustrate, take the
example of welfare payments. We elicited desired spending levels for (i) "Redistributing
local tax revenues as welfare payments across all communities nationwide" and (ii) "Re-
distributing local tax revenues as welfare payments only within the local communities
they were raised." Figure 17 in Appendix C.2 provides a screenshot.
   As pre-registered, we again winsorize the data at +/- 3 sd. of the within-country
mean, which affects 0.1% of all responses. We also standardize these variables into z-
scores, separately within each country.


4.4    Covariates
Even though this paper is descriptive in nature, we seek to assess to which extent a po-
tential relationship between universalism and policy views is driven by omitted variables.
Our survey hence elicits rich measures of covariates, including: age, gender, ethnicity /
race, educational attainment, income (two measures), wealth and asset ownership (three
measures), religiosity (three measures), urbanicity, employment status, marital status,
migration background, belief about whether the government is efficient or wasteful (on
a scale 0­10), beliefs about whether the respondent is likely to personally benefit from
government expenditure in a given category, and measures of altruism, generalized trust,
and equity-efficiency preferences. All of these covariates and their construction are de-
scribed in detail in Appendix E.
   To highlight just a few, we compute income, wealth and religiosity indices using
principal component analyses. An income index is computed as first principal compo-
nent of two questions that ask respondents (i) for a continuous estimate of their house-
hold income and (ii) to place themselves into income buckets. The wealth index is the
first principal component of the z-scores of (i) respondents' estimates of net worth, (ii)
whether they owned a home and (iii) whether they own stocks. The religiosity index is
constructed as first principal component of the z-scores of (i) a self-assessment of reli-
giosity (scale 0­10), (ii) frequency of church attendance, and (iii) a binary indicator for
whether the respondent considers themselves to be an Atheist.




                                            22
                                    Table 3: Specific policy proposals


 Policy domain                      More universalist                        Less universalist
 Military and counterintelligence   Peacekeeping and humanitarian            Ensuring [American, French, etc.]
                                    missions by the military abroad          defense and security

 Welfare payments                   Redistributing local tax revenues as Redistributing local tax revenues as
                                    welfare payments across all commu- welfare payments only within the
                                    nities nationwide                    local communities they were raised

 Effective border control           Identifying and admitting into the       Identifying and admitting into the
                                    country only those immigrants with       country only those immigrants who
                                    the highest need for help                would be good citizens (e.g., be
                                                                             likely to pay taxes and refrain from
                                                                             engaging in criminal activities)
 Environmental protection           Preventing global climate change         Cleaning and conserving forests
                                                                             and rivers in local communities in
                                                                             [the U.S., France, etc.]

 Universal healthcare               Using local tax revenues to fund Using local tax revenues to fund
                                    health insurance across all commu- health insurance only within the lo-
                                    nities nationwide                  cal communities they were raised

 Police and law enforcement         Sensitivity training for the police to   Increasing the capabilities of the po-
                                    ensure justice and equal treatment       lice to prevent and prosecute crimi-
                                    of all                                   nal or suspicious behavior

 Foreign aid                        Sending foreign aid to countries         Sending foreign aid to countries
                                    that are in most need of help            that are our international allies

 Measures to ensure no individual Measures to ensure no individual is        Measures to ensure no one of your
 is disadvantaged in access to ed- disadvantaged in access to educa-         same background (e.g., gender, eth-
 ucation, the labor force, and mar- tion, the labor force, and marriage      nic background or ancestry) is dis-
 riage                                                                       advantaged in access to education,
                                                                             the labor force, and marriage



4.5    Pre-Registration
The survey was pre-registered on EGAP, see http://egap.org/registration/5792.
The pre-registration contained (i) the desired sample size; (ii) the precise construction
of the summary statistics of universalism in altruism and trust; (iii) predictions about
how we expected universalism to be correlated with support for each of the eight policy
domains, based on the model in Section 3; (iv) the construction of the summary statistic
of policy views discussed above; (v) the prediction that universalism would be more
positively correlated with the more universalist implementations of policy domains than
their less universalist counterparts; and (vi) an analysis of whether the patterns in Brazil
and South Korea are different from those in the Western countries.
   Two remarks regarding the relationship between the pre-registration and the analy-
ses in this paper are in order. First, as discussed above, our sample turned out to be larger
than anticipated, for reasons beyond our control. We report robustness checks using the


                                                     23
smaller more representative samples in the Appendix.
    Second, we pre-specified that we expect all of our hypotheses to be true for both
universalism in altruism and universalism in trust. To conserve space and reduce the
dimensionality of the analysis, we mostly work with a composite measure of universalism
that averages universalism in altruism and trust. We replicate these analyses with the
separate universalism measures in the Appendix. The results are always very similar.



5       Survey Results

5.1     Summary Statistic of Policy Views
We begin by considering the summary statistic of policy views, where higher values
indicate higher desired expenditure shares for the canonical left-wing policies. We first
pool the data across Western countries and then disaggregate the results in a second
step.
    Table 4 presents the results of a set of OLS regressions of the summary statistic of
policy views on each of the separate universalism measures detailed in Section 4.2. The
composite universalism measure is constructed as average of universalism in altruism
and trust. The universalism measures are all in [0,1], where zero means that all money
and trust points are allocated to the in-group member in a given game, 0.5 means that
the money and the trust points are split equally, on average, and one corresponds to the
(counterfactual) case that someone always allocates all money and trust points to the
socially more distant individual.
    We find a strong positive relationship between universalism and the summary statis-
tic of policy views. This is true for each individual component of universalism, regardless
of whether it is measured in the altruism or trust space. In fact, as we document in Fig-
ure 21 in Appendix C.4.1, this pattern is even more general than what is suggested by the
results in Table 4: out of the 32 different allocation decisions in our survey from which
we estimate universalism in altruism and trust, all are significantly correlated with the
summary statistic of policy views, such that a higher allocation towards the socially more
distant individual is correlated with a "higher" score on the summary statistic of policy
views. This provides evidence that our results are not driven by a just a few in-groups
but reflect a general psychological tendency. Given the similarity of results across dif-
ferent universalism components, to average out measurement error, and to reduce the
dimensionality of the analysis, we focus on the composite measure of universalism in
what follows.
    As we document in column (10), the relationship between universalism and our
summary statistic of policy views is robust against controlling for age, gender, income,


                                            24
Table 4: Summary statistic of policy views and different universalism measures, pooled across countries

                                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                                        Summary statistic of policy views
                                          (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)      (6)        (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)
                                             
 Domestic universalism in altruism      0.90
                                        (0.06)
 Foreign universalism in altruism                 0.94
                                                  (0.04)
 Global universalism in altruism                            1.19
                                                            (0.06)
 Composite universalism in altruism                                     1.57
                                                                        (0.07)
 Domestic universalism in trust                                                   1.01
                                                                                  (0.08)
 Foreign universalism in trust                                                             0.94
                                                                                           (0.06)
 Global universalism in trust                                                                          1.19
                                                                                                       (0.08)
 Composite universalism in trust                                                                                1.50
                                                                                                                (0.09)
 Composite universalism                                                                                                  2.09     1.64
                                                                                                                         (0.09)   (0.09)
 Country FE                               Yes       Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
 Demographic Controls                     No        No        No         No         No       No         No       No       No       Yes
 Observations                           10881     10881     10881       10881     10881    10881       10881    10881    10881    10881
 R2                                      0.02      0.05      0.04        0.06      0.02     0.03        0.03     0.04     0.06     0.11
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. Data are pooled across all five Western countries. The dependent
variable is the summary statistic of policy views, constructed as described in Section 4.3 and standardized into a z-score within each
country. The construction of each universalism measure is outlined in Section 4.2. Demographic controls include age, gender, income,
wealth, college, urbanicity, religiosity, equity-efficiency preferences, altruism, trust, and beliefs about the efficiency of government.

  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.



wealth, college education, urbanicity, religiosity, equity-efficiency preferences, altruism,
trust, and beliefs about the efficiency of government. Conditional on country fixed effects,
the composite universalism measure exhibits a partial correlation with the summary
statistic of policy views of  = 0.25. While we provide more sophisticated benchmarking
analyses later, it is perhaps informative that the corresponding correlation for the belief
that government is efficient vs. wasteful is  = 0.15, the one for college degree  = 0.05,
for age  = -0.12, for the religiosity index  = -0.10, for the income index  = -0.07,
and for the wealth index  = -0.12.
    The analysis reported here correlates universalism with the pre-registered summary
statistic of policy views. An alternative approach is to link universalism to the first princi-
pal component of desired expenditure shares derived in Section 2. These correlations are
also always positive and statistically highly significant. The correlations range between
 = 0.19 in France and  = 0.33 in Sweden. In other words, universalism is significantly
correlated with an unsupervised summary statistic of the data. In a next step, we study
the different policy issues one-by-one.



                                                                   25
5.2     Separate Policy Views
Figure 5 summarizes the results for the separate policy categories. The underlying OLS
regressions relate the desired share of overall desired expenditure for each policy (stan-
dardized into z-scores) to universalism, separately for each country and all Western
countries combined, for a total of 48 regressions. The left panel shows the results of uni-
variate regressions, while the point estimates in the right panel stem from multivariate
regressions that control for age, gender, income, wealth, college, urbanicity, religiosity,
equity-efficiency preferences, altruism, trust, beliefs about the efficiency of government,
and beliefs about whether one will personally benefit from government expenditure in
each domain.
    As hypothesized, in all Western countries, we observe a strong negative relationship
between universalism and desired expenditure shares for the three "right-wing" policy
domains, while the relationship is generally positive and statistically significant for the
five "left-wing" domains. That is, viewed through the lens of the theoretical framework
in Section 3, lower universalism is associated with decreased support for "risky" policies
that introduce cheating opportunities. In terms of quantitative magnitude, the estimated
regression coefficients suggest that increasing universalism from zero to 1/2 (and hence
moving from 100:0 to 50:50 allocation decisions) is associated with a 0.25­1.0 standard
deviation change in each of the policy views. 
    Overall, universalism is consistently correlated with policy views in the ways we hy-
pothesized. Out of the 40 regression coefficients for the individual countries reported
in the left panel of Figure 5, 37 have the expected sign. Of these, 33 are statistically
significant at least at the 10% level. Once our battery of controls is added in the right
panel, 38 of these coefficients have the expected sign, out of which 31 are statistically
significant at least at the 10% level.
    We proceed by looking at desired expenditure levels. To this effect, Figure 6 repro-
duces the left panel of Figure 5, except that now the dependent variables are desired (log)
expenditure levels rather than implied shares. The results show that universalists desire
higher government spending in the canonical left-wing policy domains, yet lower govern-
ment spending in the canonical conservative domains. Thus, universalists do not always
desire higher government spending than non-universalists ­ just in policy domains that
have a universalist orientation. In this sense, universalism directly reproduces the pattern
reported in Figure 2 in Section 2 that motivates our paper.

     A notable exception occurs in the domain of universal health care, where the relationship is strongly
positive in the U.S. but either not statistically significant or even negative in the other countries. This
pattern might arise because, in contrast to the United States, all of these countries have had versions of
universal health care for decades, which may generate less heterogeneity in views on universal health care
across the political spectrum. It probably also implies that respondents outside the U.S. interpret survey
questions about "universal health care" in a different fashion than Americans.


                                                   26
                                                       Regression: Desired expenditure shares on universalism                                                                         Regression: Desired expenditure shares on universalism, with controls




                                                                                                                                                                                 2




                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                 1




                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                 -1




                                            -1
     Regression coefficient: universalism
                                                                                                                                          Regression coefficient: universalism




27
                                                                                                                                                                                 -2




                                            -2
                                                 Border    Military   Police     Foreign   Affirmative Environ-   Health    Welfare                                                     Border   Military    Police     Foreign   Affirmative Environ-   Health    Welfare
                                                                                   Aid       Action     ment       Care                                                                                                   Aid       Action     ment       Care

                                                 USA      Australia    Germany       France      Sweden           All Western countries                                                  USA     Australia    Germany       France      Sweden           All Western countries




     Figure 5: The left panel plots the OLS regression coefficients of univariate regressions of desired expenditure shares for each policy domain (as a fraction of overall
     desired government spending for the eight policy domains) on composite universalism. The right panel plots the analogous coefficients of multivariate regressions,
     in which we control for age, gender, income, wealth, college, urbanicity, religiosity, equity-efficiency preferences, altruism, trust, beliefs about the efficiency of
     government, and beliefs about whether one will personally benefit from government expenditure in each domain. See Appendix E for details on the construction of
     these variables. Universalism is in [0,1] and the dependent variables are standardized into z-scores within each country. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals
     using robust standard errors. The "All western countries" specifications include country fixed effects.
                                                       Regression: Desired log expenditure levels on universalism


                                               2
        Regression coefficient: universalism
                                               1
                                               0
                                               -1
                                               -2




                                                    Border   Military    Police     Foreign   Affirmative Environ-   Health    Welfare
                                                                                      Aid       Action     ment       Care

                                                    USA      Australia    Germany       France      Sweden           All Western countries



Figure 6: The figure plots the OLS regression coefficients of univariate regressions of desired log expendi-
ture levels for each policy domain on composite universalism. Universalism is in [0,1] and the dependent
variables are standardized into z-scores within each country. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals
using robust standard errors. The "All western countries" specification includes country fixed effects.


5.3     Benchmarking Exercises
An immediate question is whether other individual characteristics could also produce
the patterns we are trying to explain. To address this question, Figure 7 summarizes
the relationship between desired (log) expenditure levels and eleven individual charac-
teristics. For simplicity, we pool the data across Western countries for this analysis. In
terms of demographics, we focus on age, religiosity, income, wealth, completion of a
college degree, and urbanicity. In terms of beliefs and preferences, we consider residual
measures of altruism and of generalized trust, the respondent's preferences over equity
vs. efficiency, strength of belief that the government works efficiently, and strength of
the belief that one might personally benefit from government spending on each policy
domain.  We selected this set of variables for the benchmarking exercise because they
are commonly associated with an individual's position on the political spectrum. Indeed,
in our data, conditional on country fixed effects, a respondent's self-assessment on an
11-point left-vs.-right scale exhibits correlations of:  = 0.07 with income,  = 0.13
with wealth and  = 0.22 with religiosity. This suggests that we measure these variables

     We employ residual measures of altruism and trust because both our dictator game and our elicitation
of generalized trust are framed vis-à-vis a randomly-selected stranger. Thus, by construction, these raw
measures partly include universalism.


                                                                                       28
in meaningful ways and that they are generally predictive of broad ideological views.
    In Figure 7, the leftmost panels serve as reminder and show the pattern we are try-
ing to explain: we are looking for a variable that is negatively correlated with desired
spending levels for military, police and law enforcement and border control, but posi-
tively correlated with desired spending on welfare, health care, environmental protec-
tion, affirmative action and foreign aid. We find that none of the other eleven variables
produces the characteristic pattern that universalism successfully reproduces. In other
words, other variables are often significantly correlated with policy views in meaningful
and known ways ­ we are not trying to argue that they are unimportant for understand-
ing policy views. However, our results show that they do not generate the characteristic
internal structure of ideology that we are interested in here. ¹


5.4     Specific Policy Proposals
The claim of our paper, in particular viewed through the lens of the formal framework in
Section 3, is not that universalists approve or disapprove of certain policy domains per
sé, but rather that this is the case because each domain is implemented in a predomi-
nantly (non-) universalist way. If this was true, then it should be possible to manipulate
people's support for broad policy domains such as the military or welfare by having them
consider particularly universalist or non-universalist counterfactual implementations of
these policies. For this purpose, as described in Section 4.3, we asked respondents to
indicate their desired government spending level for 16 specific policy proposals (two
for each of the eight broad policy domains), where one proposal was more universalist
than the other.
    To analyze whether this affects people's stated policy preferences, Figure 8 plots the
OLS regression coefficients of universalism for each of the specific policy proposals. Here,
the left panel reports the results for the more universalist policies and the right panel
those for the less universalist policies.
    Focusing first on the left panel, we find strong and positive relationships between
desired expenditure levels for each of the eight policy domains and universalism. For
example, in contrast to the baseline analysis above, universalists are now more likely to
endorse a strong military than non-universalists once the military is said to focus on hu-
manitarian missions and peacekeeping abroad. Looking at the right panel, we find that
the relationship between universalism and policy views is substantially shifted down-
wards, relative to the more universalist proposals. That is, the correlations are substan-
tially attenuated and in many cases even reverse. For example, while non-universalists
    ¹ While it may appear puzzling that income and wealth are not correlated with support for welfare
payments, this is merely a result of looking at desired expenditure levels rather than shares; once we look
at shares, support for welfare payments decreases significantly with wealth and income.


                                                   29
                                            Regression: Desired Log-Expenditure Levels on Standardized Preferences / Beliefs
                                           .3
     Standardized regression coefficient
                                           .2
                                           .1
                                           0
                                           -.1
                                           -.2




                                                    Left-Right   Universalism      Residual        Residual   Efficiency vs. Gov't Efficient     Belief in
                                                 Self-Assessment                   Altruism         Trust         Equity                     personal benefit
                                                                                                                                               from policy

                                                                    Border                    Military           Police        Foreign Aid
                                                                    Affirmative Action        Environment        Health        Welfare

                                                 Includes Country Fixed Effects



                                             Regression: Desired Log-Expenditure Levels on Standardized Sociodemographics
                                           .3
     Standardized regression coefficient
                                           .2
                                           .1
                                           0
                                           -.1
                                           -.2




                                                    Left-Right         Age         Religiosity       Income        Wealth          College        Urbanicity
                                                 Self-Assessment

                                                                    Border                    Military           Police        Foreign Aid
                                                                    Affirmative Action        Environment        Health        Welfare

                                                 Includes Country Fixed Effects



Figure 7: Benchmarking analyses. We report the standardized beta coefficients and confidence intervals
for regressions of log desired expenditure level in a category on different individual-level chatracteristics,
conditional on country fixed effects. All variables are standardized into z-scores within countries. The
top panel considers the preferences and beliefs of respondents; the bottom panel considers demographics.
Each estimate corresponds to a separate regression. To obtain residual altruism and trust, we respectively
computed the residuals of dictator game allocations and generalized trust with respect to universalism.




                                                                                                    30
                                               Regression: Desired log expenditure levels on universalism                                                                        Regression: Desired log expenditure levels on universalism
                                                                  (More Universalist)                                                                                                               (Less Universalist)




                          2
                                                                                                                                                            2




                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                      1




                      0
                                                                                                                                                        0




        -1
                                                                                                                                          -1




31
     Regression coefficient: universalism
                                                                                                                                       Regression coefficient: universalism




                          -2
                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                            Border   Military    Police     Foreign   Affirmative   Environ-   Health    Welfare                                              Border   Military    Police     Foreign   Affirmative   Environ-   Health    Welfare
                                                                              Aid       Action       ment      Care                                                                                             Aid       Action       ment      Care

                                            USA      Australia    Germany       France       Sweden            All Western countries                                          USA      Australia    Germany       France       Sweden            All Western countries




     Figure 8: This figure plots the OLS coefficients of regressions of log desired expenditure levels for specific policy proposals on universalism, separately for each country.
     The left panel shows the results for the more universalist policies and the right panel those for the less universalist ones. See Table 3 for the wording of each of the
     policy proposals. Universalism is in [0,1] and the dependent variables are standardized into z-scores within each country. Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals
     using robust standard errors. The "All western countries" specification includes country fixed effects.
are generally opposed to welfare and environmental protection (compare Figure 5), they
are as supportive of local redistribution and protecting the local environment as univer-
salists. ¹¹
    There is only one instance in which the coefficient on universalism is lower in the
left panel than in the right panel (affirmative action in France). Otherwise, the OLS
coefficient of universalism is between 0.16 and 2.29 units of a standard deviation larger
in the left panel than in the right panel. Table 14 and Figure 26 in Appendix C.5 show
that this difference in coefficient magnitudes is statistically significant in almost all cases.
    In summary, this analysis documents that we can manipulate the relationship be-
tween universalism and policy views in predictable ways by asking people to consider
more or less universalist implementations of each expenditure category. These results
suggest that the (moral) conflict between the left and the right is not over abstract no-
tions of the military or redistribution as such, but at least partly about which specific
(non-) universalist form they take.


5.5     Non-Western Countries
Up to this point, our analyses have focused on the five Western countries in our sample.
In this section, we comment briefly on the relationship between policy preferences and
universalism in Brazil and South Korea. Figure 24 in Appendix C.4.2 plots the coefficients
of regressions of desired expenditure shares on universalism in all countries, including
Brazil and Korea. Here, we observe that the relationships between universalism and
policy preferences are all weaker in magnitude and sometimes opposite in sign relative
to those observed in Western countries. Furthermore, Figures 26 and 28 in Appendix C.5
show that policy preferences in Brazil and Korea are not observably affected by whether
these policy domains are implemented in a more or less universalist way through specific
policy proposals, as we did in Section 5.4.
    These patterns might be unsurprising because (as discussed in Section 2 and Ap-
pendix C.4) the very clusters of policy views that we attempt to rationalize in this paper
are absent in these countries. Put simply, if a baseline pattern is not observed, then it
cannot be explained by universalism.
    While we pre-registered that the relationship between universalism and policy views
might look different in Korea and Brazil than in the Western countries, it seems worth
discussing why these differences exist. A possible conjecture is related to a large and
    ¹¹ A related question is whether we can predictably manipulate the link between policy views and
self-reported political orientation. Figure 29 in Appendix C.5 reproduces Figure 8, except that it plots the
relationship between policy preferences and people's self-positioning on an 11-point left-right scale. Here,
very similar patterns hold: left-wingers become much more likely to endorse a policy domain once the spe-
cific policy is universalist, and self-reported right-wingers become much more supportive of redistribution,
health care, foreign aid, and environmental protection once it is implemented in less universalist ways.


                                                    32
influential body of cross-cultural work. Using datasets such as the World Values Survey,
researchers have documented that over the past 50 years Western societies have increas-
ingly moved towards emphasizing "post-material" values rather than purely material
considerations, but that such a transition has not taken place outside the West in a com-
parable fashion (Inglehart, 1997). It is therefore conceivable that the relevance of moral
considerations for political decision making only emerges when a certain level of income
or other broader cultural factors have materialized.
    To investigate this hypothesis, we analyze whether rich and well-educated elites in
Brazil and Korea exhibit patterns that look similar to those established for the Western
countries. As we discuss in detail in Appendix C.4.2, this is indeed the case: the correla-
tions between universalism and policy views are significantly larger for richer and more
well-educated individuals. Moreover, in both Brazil and Korea universalism directionally
correlates with exactly the same cluster of policy views as in the West. In other words,
non-Western elites appear similar to Western populations in terms of how their moral
views relate to policy views. A potential tentative interpretation of these patterns is that
morality may be a "luxury good" (Friedman, 2006) and only matters for voting once a
certain level of economic security is attained.


5.6    Robustness Checks
The Appendix contains three further sets of robustness checks. First, our main analysis
employed the composite measure of universalism. As specified in our pre-registration,
Appendices C.4.1 and Appendix C.5.3 show that very similar results hold if we work
with universalism in altruism or universalism in trust separately.
    Second, as we pre-registered, we employ instrumentation strategies from Gillen et
al. (2019) to address the effects of measurement error in our elicitations of policy views
and universalism. Results using multiple elicitations for both outcome and explanatory
variables are very similar, see Appendix D.
    Third, we contracted with Dynata for N = 1, 700 respondents in each country, strati-
fied to match the population on a number of dimensions. In Appendix C.6, we replicate
the analysis using these more representative samples, with very similar results.



6     Field Evidence
We complement the survey analysis with field evidence. Here, we estimate the aggregate
universalism of entire Congressional Districts (CDs) using large-scale donation data and
link these to administrative data on local vote shares. The objective is to use financially



                                              33
incentivized field choices to study whether ­ in line with the analysis above ­ more
universalist regions vote left in higher proportions.


6.1    Data
To estimate a CD's universalism in altruism, we leverage data from DonorsChoose, an
American non-profit organization providing an online "crowdfunding" platform for pub-
lic school teachers. ¹² On this platform, teachers can post funding requests for a wide
variety of classroom "projects," such as field trips, classroom furniture, and purchases
of basic school supplies or technology. Potential donors visit the website and donate to
individual projects. Appendix F.4 provides screenshots of the layout and functionality
of the platform. Notably, potential donors' ability to search through and filter projects
based on location is a salient (usually, the highest) option available on the website.
   The geographic scope of the data is broad and comprehensive: DonorsChoose re-
ported in June 2019 that since the platform's inception in 2000, teachers in 82% of
public schools in the United States had posted 1.4 million projects, reaching 34 million
students and involving nearly 3.8 million donors, who had contributed $838 million. We
use publicly available data to match all individual donations made on DonorsChoose be-
tween March 2000 and October of 2016 to their recipient projects. These data report
the school's location (latitude and longitude) and the first three digits of each donor's
ZIP code. We drop all observations for which the donor ZIP code is missing. Appendix
F.1 reports summary statistics.
   The geographic measures enable us to investigate how a CD's altruism towards an-
other CD changes as a function of distance to the recipient. To perform this analysis, we
aggregate individual donation data at the CD level to construct a dyadic dataset, where
each observation represents every possible unique donor-recipient CD pair.
   We work with two different measures of distance. First, the simple geographic dis-
tance between the CD's centroids. Second, a measure of friendship distance that was
recently constructed from Facebook data by Bailey et al. (2018). This measure gives the
probability that two randomly drawn individuals from two CDs are friends on Facebook.
We view this measure of friendship distance as a summary statistic of social distance that
aggregates a wide variety of demographic and social dimensions, such as ethnic distance,
age distance, ideological distance, income distance, educational distance, etc.




  ¹² We are indebted to Ray Fisman for suggesting this analysis to us.


                                                  34
                                         Donations as a function of geographic distance                                                                  Donations as a function of geographic distance




                                                                                                                                  6
                               3
Log [1 + Donations] (residual)




                                                                                                                  Log [1 + Donations] (residual)
                                                                                                                                           4
                      2




                                                                                                                               2
            1




                                                                                                                     0
   0             -1




                                                                                                                                  -2
                                   -4            -3             -2            -1             0               1                                     -3               -2                 -1                0                   1
                                        Log [Geographic distance b/w donor CD and recipient CD] (residual)                                              Log [Geographic distance b/w donor CD and recipient CD] (residual)

                                                                CA-22       CA-13                                                                                                NY-21          NY-13




     Figure 9: This figure illustrates regression equation (9) for four CDs. The left panel presents a binned
     scatter plot of all donations from both a Democratic and a Republican CD (based on 2016 presidential
     vote shares) in California against geographic distance to the respective recipient CDs. The right panel
     presents an analogue for New York state. All data are residualized of donor and recipient CD fixed effects.


      6.2                                  Empirical Approach: Identifying Universalism in Altruism
     To begin, we estimate a CD's universalism in altruism as (the negative of) the extent
      to which donations from a given donor CD decline as a function of geographic distance.
      Figure 9 illustrates this approach for four donor CDs from California and New York. For
      each donor CD, we provide a binned scatter plot of the log donation amount as a function
      of geographic distance to the recipient. Our interest is then in the slope of this function,
     where ­ as in the model in Section 3, we define a CD as being less universalist if it exhibits
      a steeper slope. In these scatter plots, the donation and distance data are residualized
      from donor and recipient fixed effects. That is, as explained below, we hold fixed the
      level of donations from and to a given CD, and only exploit variation in the slope.
                                    Formally, for each donor CD i and recipient CD j , denote the log distance measure
      by di , j and the log total dollar amount of donations by pi , j . Further denote by Si  {0, 1}
      an indicator variable for each donor CD i and by R j  {0, 1} an indicator variable for
      each recipient CD j . Our estimating equation is then given by:

                                                                     pi , j =           i di , j × Si +                                            i Si +              jR j +            i, j                                (9)
                                                                                    i                                        i                                     j


     The primary measure of interest is the vector of i , which captures the extent to which
      donations from i to j decline as distance increases.
                                    The estimating equation includes donor and recipient fixed effects to control for spa-
      tial variation in donation rates due to causes unrelated to universalism. For instance, a
      given donor CD may have disproportionately many users of DonorsChoose or be rich on
      average, hence leading to higher overall donation amounts. Similarly, a given recipient
      CD may post many projects on the DonorsChoose website or be very poor and hence


                                                                                                                 35
                                                    CD-level vote shares and universalism in altruism


                                              100
              Effective Democratic vote share
            20       40     60        80




                                                    -3          -2           -1          0           1           2          3
                                                     Universalism in altruism (wrt geographic distance, donation amounts)
                                                            New England          Middle Atlantic   East North Central
                                                            West North Central   South Atlantic    East South Central
                                                            West South Central   Mountain          Pacific



Figure 10: Relationship between universalism in altruism and CD-level vote shares. Universalism is the
negative of ^i in equation (9).


receive many donations. Our specification nets out these level effects and only identifies
the responsiveness of donations to distance, holding fixed both the level of donations
from the donor and the amount of money a given recipient receives. ¹³


6.3     Results: Universalism and Vote Shares
Figure 10 shows the raw correlation between universalism (standardized into a z-score)
and 2016 Democratic vote shares ( = 0.57). Table 5 provides a regression analysis. Us-
ing the baseline measure of universalism developed above, columns (1)­(4) document
that a one-standard-deviation increase in a CD's universalism is associated with a 10
to 13 percent higher Democratic vote share in that CD. Columns (2)­(4) show that the
result is robust to including state fixed effects. The regressions also control for the CD's
level of donations on DonorsChoose, median household income, the fraction of the pop-
ulation with at least a college degree, geographic controls, and racial fractionalization.
    A potential concern is that our results are merely a mechanical result of the differing
geographic distributions of Democratic and Republican CDs--Democratic CDs could lie
farther from projects available for donations. Column (4) shows that the results are
robust to controlling for the average distance from a given CD to all projects.

    ¹³ To mitigate measurement error in the estimation of CD-level coefficients i , we shrink these coef-
ficients to the sample mean by their signal-to-noise ratio, see Appendix F.2.1. Universalism is measured
very precisely at the CD level due to the large underlying sample of donations, so the shrinkage does not


                                                                                 36
            Table 5: Vote shares and universalism in altruism across Congressional Districts

                                                                         Dependent variable:
                                                             Effective Democratic vote share 2016 (in %)
                                                       (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)
                                                                                       
 Universalism in altruism (wrt geographic distance)   10.3      13.5     11.1      9.54
                                                      (0.66)    (1.18)   (1.47)    (1.40)
 Universalism in altruism (wrt friendship distance)                                            8.83     3.55
                                                                                               (0.72)   (1.10)
 Log [1 + Total donations]                                                2.81     1.97                 2.87
                                                                          (1.09)   (0.99)               (1.19)
 Log [Median household income]                                                     -45.1                -45.1
                                                                                    (5.32)               (5.53)
 Fraction of population with college degree                                        79.8                 89.4
                                                                                   (12.84)              (13.13)
 Latitude                                                                          1.08                  0.48
                                                                                   (0.55)               (0.60)
 Log [Distance to coast]                                                           -2.04                -2.06
                                                                                    (0.57)               (0.71)
 Racial fractionalization                                                          18.9                 20.2
                                                                                   (5.84)               (6.03)
 Log [Average distance to all projects]                                            72.2                 64.4
                                                                                   (15.11)              (17.96)
 State FE                                              No         Yes      Yes       Yes        No        Yes
 Observations                                          436       436       436      436         436      436
 R2                                                    0.33      0.48      0.49     0.64        0.25     0.61
Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors in parentheses. Effective Democratic vote shares are given by
Demoractic vote share as a fraction of Democratic and Republican vote share.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


    Finally, we present an extension in which universalism in altruism is computed based
on social rather than geographic distance. When estimating equation (9), we use as di , j
the probability that two individuals from different CDs are friends on Facebook (Bailey
et al., 2018); Appendix F.2.2 describes this measure in greater detail. Columns (5)­(6)
of Table 5 show that very similar results hold with this alternative distance measure.
This shows that our results do not merely reflect the fact that Democrats' friends are
located further away than Republicans' friends. Instead, holding fixed a given level of
friendship distance, Democrats give relatively less if friendship distance is small and rela-
tively more if friendship distance is large. That is, Republicans treat close friends "better"
than Democrats, but Democrats treat distant strangers "better" than Republicans.




meaningfully impact our results ­ the correlation between the raw and shrunk measures is 0.99.


                                                      37
6.4    Robustness Checks
Controlling for local sources of education funding.        A limitation of our analysis is
that we estimate universalism only from DonorsChoose data, and do not observe giving
outside of this platform. This would be problematic if, for example, variation in univer-
salism across CDs was generated only as an artefact of variation in amounts given locally
through other means in each CD. A prime candidate in this respect is the public school
funding system, e.g., payments through local property taxes. Table 16 in Appendix F.3
shows that controlling for the per capita amount of primary and secondary education
spending derived from local revenue sources does not affect the results.


Geographic distributions of CDs by party. Another potential concern pertains to dif-
ferences in the geographic distribution of red and blue CDs. To address this, we im-
plement two robustness checks. First, we re-estimate universalism after re-coding geo-
graphic distance into a binary variable, based on a distance threshold of 50 miles. Thus,
this measure of universalism only leverages variation in whether donations are "local"
or "distant." Long-distance coast-to-coast donations are hence treated just like other
non-local donations. As a second robustness check, we add state-pair fixed-effects to
the baseline analysis. That is, our analysis fixes a donor state and a recipient state and
only leverages variation in distance within these states, say from Massachusetts to Ver-
mont. The results in these two robustness checks are very similar. See Appendix F.3 and
Table 16 for details.



7     Conclusion
This paper has proposed that individual-level heterogeneity in universalism in both al-
truism and trust accounts for the particular structure of policy views observed in the
West. As discussed in Section 2, our analysis is conditional on two restrictions. First, we
only analyze the structure of ideology as it has prevailed over the last 40-50 years. We
do not have much to say about whether or how universalism mattered for policy in more
distant history. This being said, there is some evidence that suggests that the relevance
of universalism for politics has increased over time. The Democratic "loss of the South"
and subsequent polarization were largely tied to ideas related to (non-) universalism
(Kuziemko and Washington, 2018). Furthermore, Enke (forthcoming) documents using
text analyses that Republicans and Democrats used universalist vs. communal moral lan-
guage in roughly equal frequencies until the mid-60's but steadily diverged thereafter,
which could be understood as suggesting that heterogeneity in universalism is more
relevant politically today than in the past.


                                               38
   Second, our analysis deliberately focused on the Western world. As discussed in Sec-
tion 5.5, the connection between the structure of ideology and morality might be dif-
ferent outside the West for various reasons. While we find that for the majority of the
population in Brazil and Korea universalism is not very predictive of policy views, rich
and educated elites appear quite similar to Western populations in how universalism is
related to policy preferences. A possible conjecture is that as these countries get richer
and / or also undergo a transformation towards "post-material" values (Inglehart, 1997),
correlations between universalism and an internally consistent cluster of policy views
may emerge also for the broader population.




                                           39
References
Alesina, Alberto and Edward Glaeser, Fighting poverty in the US and Europe: A world
  of difference, Oxford University Press, 2004.

  , Armando Miano, and Stefanie Stantcheva, "Immigration and redistribution," Tech-
  nical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

  , Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, "Public goods and ethnic divisions," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (4), 1243­1284.

Algan, Yann, Elizabeth Beasley, Daniel Cohen, and Martial Foucault, "The rise of
  populism and the collapse of the left-right paradigm: lessons from the 2017 French
  presidential election," 2018.

Bailey, Michael, Rachel Cao, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong,
  "Social Connectedness: Measurement, Determinants, and Effects," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 2018, 32 (3), 259­280.

Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, "Identity, morals, and taboos: Beliefs as assets," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (2), 805­855.

  , Armin Falk, and Jean Tirole, "Narratives, Imperatives and Moral Persuasion," Tech-
  nical Report, Working Paper 2020.

Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson, "The Rise of Identity Politics," 2019.

Bó, Ernesto Dal and Pedro Dal Bó, "Do the right thing: The effects of moral suasion on
  cooperation," Journal of Public Economics, 2014, 117, 28­38.

  , Frederico Finan, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne, "Economic
  Losers and political winners: Sweden's radical right," Manuscript in preparation, 2018.

Boxell, Levi, Matthew Gentzkow, and Jesse M Shapiro, "Cross-country trends in af-
  fective polarization," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren, "The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenera-
  tional mobility II: County-level estimates," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2018,
  133 (3), 1163­1228.

Draca, Mirko and Carlo Schwarz, "How polarised are citizens? Measuring ideology
  from the ground up," Working Paper, 2020.

Enke, Benjamin, "Kinship, cooperation, and the evolution of moral systems," The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 2019, 134 (2), 953­1019.

                                           40
  , "Moral Values and Voting," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

  , Ricardo Rodríguez-Padilla, and Florian Zimmermann, "Moral Universalism: Mea-
  surement and Heterogeneity," Working Paper, 2020.

Epper, Thomas, Fehr Ernst, and Senn Julien, "Other-regarding preferences and redis-
  tributive politics," Technical Report, Department of Economics-University of Zurich
  2020.

Fehr, Dietmar, Johanna Mollerstrom, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia, "Your Place in the
  World: The Demand for National and Global Redistribution," Technical Report, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research 2019.

Fisman, Raymond, Pamela Jakiela, and Shachar Kariv, "Distributional preferences
  and political behavior," Journal of Public Economics, 2017, 155, 1­10.

Friedman, Benjamin M, The moral consequences of economic growth, Vintage, 2006.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Guido Tabellini, "Identity, Beliefs, and Political Conflict," Work-
  ing Paper, 2019.

Gilens, Martin, Why Americans hate welfare: Race, media, and the politics of antipoverty
  policy, University of Chicago Press, 2009.

Gillen, Ben, Erik Snowberg, and Leeat Yariv, "Experimenting with Measurement Error:
  Techniques with Applications to the Caltech Cohort Study," Working Paper, 2015.

  ,   , and   , "Experimenting with Measurement Error: Techniques with Applications
  to the Caltech Cohort Study," Journal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (4), 1826­1863.

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman, "Identity Politics and Trade Policy," Working
  Paper, 2018.

Guriev, Sergei and Elias Papaioannou, "The political economy of populism," 2020.

Haidt, Jonathan, The Righteous Mind: Why Good People are Divided by Politics and Reli-
  gion, Vintage, 2012.

Hibbing, John R, Kevin B Smith, and John R Alford, "Differences in negativity bias
  underlie variations in political ideology," Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2014, 37, 297­
  350.

Inglehart, Ronald, Modernization and postmodernization: Cultural, economic, and polit-
  ical change in 43 societies, Princeton university press, 1997.


                                           41
Iyengar, Shanto, Yphtach Lelkes, Matthew Levendusky, Neil Malhotra, and Sean J
  Westwood, "The origins and consequences of affective polarization in the United
  States," Annual Review of Political Science, 2019, 22, 129­146.

Jost, John T, Christopher M Federico, and Jaime L Napier, "Political ideology: Its
  structure, functions, and elective affinities," Annual review of psychology, 2009, 60,
  307­337.

Kerschbamer, Rudolf and Daniel Müller, "Social preferences and political attitudes:
  An online experiment on a large heterogeneous sample," Journal of Public Economics,
  2020, 182, 104076.

Kozlowski, Austin and James P Murphy, "Issue Alignment and Partisanship in the
  American Public: Revisiting the'Partisans without Constraint'Thesis," 2019.

Kranton, Rachel E and Seth G Sanders, "Groupy versus non-groupy social preferences:
  Personality, region, and political party," American Economic Review: Papers & Proceed-
  ings, 2017, 107 (5), 65­69.

Kuziemko, Ilyana and Ebonya Washington, "Why Did the Democrats Lose the South?
  Bringing New Data to an Old Debate," American Economic Review, 2018.

Levine, David K, "Modeling altruism and spitefulness in experiments," Review of eco-
  nomic dynamics, 1998, 1 (3), 593­622.

Luttmer, Erzo FP, "Group loyalty and the taste for redistribution," Journal of political
  Economy, 2001, 109 (3), 500­528.

Malka, Ariel, Yphtach Lelkes, and Christopher J Soto, "Are cultural and economic
  conservatism positively correlated? A large-scale cross-national test," British Journal
  of Political Science, 2019, 49 (3), 1045­1069.

Poole, Keith T and Howard Rosenthal, Congress: A political-economic history of roll call
  voting, Oxford University Press on Demand, 2000.

Putnam, Robert D, Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community, Si-
  mon and schuster, 2000.

Rehm, Philipp and Timothy Reilly, "United we stand: Constituency homogeneity and
  comparative party polarization," Electoral Studies, 2010, 29 (1), 40­53.

Shayo, Moses, "A model of social identity with an application to political economy: Na-
  tion, class, and redistribution," American Political science review, 2009, 103 (2), 147­
  174.

                                           42
Tabellini, Guido, "The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives," Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 2008, 123 (3), 905­950.

Waytz, Adam, Ravi Iyer, Liane Young, Jonathan Haidt, and Jesse Graham, "Ideolog-
  ical differences in the expanse of the moral circle," Nature Communications, 2019, 10
  (1), 1­12.

Wu, Alex, "Political polarization," Undergraduate senior thesis, Harvard University, 2020.




                                           43
