                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




USING EQUITY MARKET REACTIONS TO INFER EXPOSURE TO TRADE LIBERALIZATION

                                        Andrew N. Greenland
                                             Mihai Ion
                                         John W. Lopresti
                                          Peter K. Schott

                                         Working Paper 27510
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w27510


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




 We thank Kerem Cosar, Teresa Fort, Justin Pierce, Dan Trefler and seminar participants at
 ASSA, CUHK, Elon University, the Fed Board, FREIT, the Harvard/MIT macroeconomics
 seminar, Hitotsubashi, LSE, the Mid-Atlantic Trade Workshop, the NBER ITI, Princeton
 University, Purdue University, UNC Chapel Hill, the University of Chicago, the University of
 Toronto and the University of Tokyo for helpful comments and feedback. The views expressed
 herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Andrew N. Greenland, Mihai Ion, John W. Lopresti, and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved.
 Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Equity Market Reactions to Infer Exposure to Trade Liberalization
Andrew N. Greenland, Mihai Ion, John W. Lopresti, and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 27510
July 2020
JEL No. E0,F13,F14,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

We outline a method for using asset prices to identify firm exposure to changes in policy. We
highlight the benefits of this approach for studying trade agreements and apply it to two US trade
liberalizations, with China and Canada. We find that abnormal equity returns during key events
associated with these liberalizations are correlated with standard measures of import competition,
vary across firms even within industries, predict subsequent firm outcomes, and provide a more
complete view of distributional implications. In both cases, predicted relative increases in
operating profit among the largest firms dwarf the relative losses of smaller firms.


Andrew N. Greenland                             John W. Lopresti
Elon University                                 College of William & Mary
50 Campus Drive                                 jwlopresti@wm.edu
Elon, NC 27244
agreenland@elon.edu                             Peter K. Schott
                                                Yale School of Management
Mihai Ion                                       165 Whitney Avenue
Eller College of Management                     New Haven, CT 06511
The University of Arizona                       and NBER
McClelland Hall 315H                            peter.schott@yale.edu
1130 E Helen St.
Tucson, AZ 85721
mihaiion@email.arizona.edu
1     Introduction
We propose a new method for measuring firm exposure to changes in policy. Our approach is based
on financial markets' reactions to key events associated with the new regime, such as the legislative
votes during which it becomes law, and assumes that all new information relevant for firm value
is fully reflected in its stock price. Hence, by measuring firms' average abnormal returns (AARs)
relative to the market during these events, we leverage the "wisdom of the crowd" to obtain traders'
assessment of the impact of the policy change on relative firm value.
    We demonstrate the usefulness of our approach by estimating US firms' exposure to two US
trade liberalizations, with China and Canada. Our primary focus is perhaps the most substantial
US trade liberalization in the last few decades, the US granting of permanent normal trade relations
(PNTR) to China in October, 2000. In most of the empirical research focused on this liberalization,
as well as studies of the distributional implications of trade more broadly, exposure to trade is
defined in terms of import competition, measured via changes in tariffs or import volumes among
the set of goods a worker, firm or region produces.1 This standard approach has three disadvantages.
First, by concentrating on import competition, it ignores other, potentially offsetting channels of
exposure, for example the greater availability of low-cost foreign inputs that may allow users of
these inputs to expand (Antr`
                            as et al. (2017); Bernard et al. (2018)). Second, because changes in
trade barriers and import volumes are not easily observed for service firms, the standard approach
generally ignores firms outside goods-producing industries, which often account for the vast majority
of national employment. Such firms can be exposed to trade liberalization directly, via the terms
of the agreement, or indirectly via customers, suppliers, and local labor markets. Finally, the
usual approach may not be possible for trade liberalizations that focus on non-tariff barriers ­
for example, national treatment, the establishment of product standards or changes to intellectual
property protections ­ that are not easily convertible into tariff equivalents.
    Our approach addresses all of these limitations: using readily available stock price data, it
captures the expected net impact of all avenues of exposure, it yields estimates for firms in all
sectors of the economy with publicly traded firms, and it can be used to study any liberalization,
so long as it can be associated with an event. Furthermore, it can provide a direct assessment of
how changes in trade policy affect the return to capital, an important but understudied dimension
of the distributional implications of trade.2
    PNTR, the first target of our method, was a non-traditional trade liberalization in that it
substantially reduced expected, rather than applied US import tariffs on many Chinese goods.
Moreover, as the most important component of China's entry into the World Trade Organization,
it also eliminated substantial uncertainty about US-China relations.3 We compute US firms' AARs
   1
     See, for example, Bernard et al. (2006), Topalova (2010), Autor et al. (2014), Dix-Carneiro (2014), and Hakobyan
and McLaren (2016).
   2
     Grossman and Levinsohn (1989) find that positive shocks to import prices lead to increases in the return to
capital, as measured by abnormally high stock returns. More recently, Tello-Trillo (2015) and Keller and Olney
(2017) examine the relationship between globalization and executive compensation.
   3
     Handley and Lim~ ao (2017) estimate that the reduction in trade policy uncertainty associated with PNTR is equiv-



                                                          1
across five legislative events noted at the time to be critical to PNTR's passage: the introduction
of the bill in the US House of Representatives, the House vote, the Senate vote to invoke cloture
to proceed to a vote, the Senate vote, and President Bill Clinton's signing of PNTR into law.
    We find that US firms' PNTR AARs, hereafter AARP N T R , exhibit substantial heterogeneity,
even across firms within narrowly defined industries. Among computer manufacturers, for example,
Apple and Dell, which made extensive use of Chinese suppliers, have positive AARP N T R , while
those of Gateway, a PC maker whose production was focused in the United States, are negative.
AARP N T R also vary as expected across three, more formal validation exercises. Contemporane-
ously, we show that AARP N T R are negatively related to the policy's mandated decline in expected
tariffs across the business segments in which firms operate. Ex post, we find a similarly negative
correlation between firms' AARP N T R and subsequent import growth from China in those segments.
Finally, for external validation, we demonstrate that AARP N T R exhibit a negative relationship with
comparably constructed abnormal returns in the days following NATO's accidental bombing of the
Chinese embassy in Belgrade in 1999. This reaction is in accord with expectations at the time that
the bombing might derail US-China relations.4
    Consistent with the assumptions underlying our method ­ that PNTR is an important change
in US policy and that, under market efficiency, AARP N T R predict changes in firm value ­ we find
that AARP N T R are positively related to subsequent profitability in terms of both survival and
operating profit. These relationships are evident among both service firms and goods producers
and, lending further support to the idea that exposure to PNTR transcends import competition,
they persist after controlling for standard measures of such competition. Further, we find that
these relationships are large relative to those estimated using AARs computed on randomly chosen
dates in 2000, suggesting PNTR had an outsized impact on firms' cash flows, or represented a more
persistent shock than those occurring on other dates.
    An important contribution of our method is the ability to evaluate exposure across a wider
range of industries, and to measure heterogeneous exposure within those industries. This breadth
offers a more complete picture of the distributional implications of PNTR than prior studies in at
least two ways. First, we find that while the vast majority of firms have negative predicted relative
operating profit after the liberalization, a small group of very large goods and service firms with
positive AARP N T R are predicted to have substantial relative gains, enough to dwarf smaller firms'
relative losses. Furthermore, because these large firms are less labor-intensive than the smaller firms
with negative AARP N T R , the cumulative predicted relative change in employment across all firms
is negative, forecasting a relative increase in labor productivity. This increase suggests that at least
alent to a reduction in tariff rates of approximately 13 percent. Pierce and Schott (2016) show that US manufacturing
industries and establishments facing greater reductions in expected tariffs exhibit relative declines in manufacturing
employment, while Autor et al. (2013, 2014) find that regions more exposed to Chinese import competition during
this period experience relative declines in employment and earnings.
   4
     At the industry level, we find a negative and statistically significant relationship between the average AARP N T R
across firms and the average of similarly constructed AARs in the seven days following the election of President
Donald Trump. That is, industries whose profits were expected to rise with PNTR are those whose profits were
expected to fall with the election of Trump, consistent with the anti-globalization rhetoric of his campaign.



                                                           2
part of the substantial rise in labor productivity in US manufacturing observed during this period
(Fort et al. (2018)) may be driven by a reallocation of activity across firms. The relative decline
of small firms' operating profit and employment also highlights trade as a potential explanation
for the rising share of economic activity attributed to "superstar" firms in Decker et al. (2014)
and Autor et al. (2017). Finally, our findings relate to recent research by Gutierrez and Philippon
(2017), who show that industry "leaders" invest more in response to rising import competition from
China than their followers.
       A second insight offered by our approach relates to our ability to examine exposure among
service providers. While the pattern of results described above holds well for manufacturing, pre-
dicted relative growth in operating profit is more uniform across firms in other sectors. In mining,
for example, almost all firms are predicted to experience relative growth after PNTR, while those
in wholesale and retail are almost uniformly expected to relatively shrink. The latter is consistent
with Wall Street analysts' expectations at the time (e.g., Kurtz and Morris (2000)) that greater
availability of Chinese goods would lead to an increase in competition among retailers, and thereby
an erosion of markups. It also resembles the relationship between the increasing "toughness" of
competition and declining markups following trade liberalization developed in Melitz and Ottaviano
(2008).
       In the final section of the paper, we apply our method to the 1989 Canada-United States Free
Trade Agreement (CUSFTA). This liberalization is another good candidate for our method because
it is well-studied and can be associated with a salient event, the 1988 Canadian federal election.
Moreover, its terms include a substantial loosening of restrictions on services trade, a liberalization
that is difficult to capture using standard measures of exposure. We show that AARCU SF T A are
correlated with objective measures of the liberalization: for goods producers, AARCU SF T A rise with
Canada's import tariff reductions and fall with the United States' import tariff reductions, while
for service providers, AARCU SF T A are higher for firms in industries explicitly covered by national
treatment. As with PNTR, we find that US firms' AARCU SF T A predict future outcomes. Unlike
PNTR, we find that this result is confined to services, perhaps because investors' expectations
about goods markets did not line up well with realizations due to subsequent events, notably the
negotiation and implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
       Beginning with Ball and Brown (1968) and Fama et al. (1969), event studies have been used
extensively in corporate finance to estimate the effect of new information on firm value.5 While
this approach is not widely used in international economics, existing research does examine the
relationship between stock returns and cross-sectional exposure to trade liberalization. In addition
to Breinlich (2014), Thompson (1993) shows that abnormal returns associated with CUSFTA are
higher for firms and industries which ex ante were thought to be positively affected by it, while
Moser and Rose (2014) find that firms' returns rise with regional trade agreements the greater
the intensity of their pre-existing trade with the proposed partners. More recently, Huang et al.
   5
    Khotari and Warner (2006) document that this approach has been used in over 565 articles appearing in the top
finance journals through 2006. For a recent discussion of this literature, see Wolfers and Zitzewitz (2018).



                                                       3
(2018) find a negative relationship between firms' previous sales to China and their abnormal
returns following President Trump's March 22, 2018 memorandum signifying a potential "trade
war" between the US and China. Bianconi et al. (2018) show that industries with greater reductions
in tariff rate uncertainty after PNTR exhibit relatively lower stock returns.
    In contrast to this research, we use average abnormal stock returns as a measure of exposure to
trade liberalization, and show that this measure can be used to predict subsequent changes in firm-
level outcomes. In this respect, our aim is similar to that of prior researchers seeking to identify
the multiple channels by which firms might be exposed to globalization. A number of papers, for
example, examine the impact of trade liberalization on downstream firms' intermediate input costs
and productivity (Amiti and Konings (2007); Fernandes (2007); Goldberg et al. (2010); Topalova
and Khandelwal (2011)). Others emphasize liberalization's effect on investment, product scope and
innovation (Bernard et al. (2006); Bustos (2011); Bloom et al. (2016); Pierce and Schott (2017);
Autor et al. (2017); Gutierrez and Phillipon (2017)) or the transmission of labor demand shocks
through supply chains and exports (Acemoglu et al. (2016); Feenstra et al. (2017); Feenstra and
Sasahara (2017); Wang et al. (2018)). A virtue of our approach is that it identifies the net impact of
all of these forces without requiring any information about firms' actual supply chains, innovative
activity or labor market relationships. Beyond the international trade literature, our approach is
most similar to to Mobarak and Purbasari (2006) and Kogan et al. (2017), who use equity event
studies to identify politically connected firms in Indonesia and the value of new patents among
innovating firms, respectively. Fisman and Zitzewitz (2019) use a similar method to determine
long and short portfolios based on firms' potential sensitivity to the 2016 Presidential election and
the Brexit referendum.
    While useful, the method we propose has two caveats worth noting. First, because it is based
on equity market reactions, it can be implemented only for firms whose shares are traded publicly.
Second, firm AARs surrounding sweeping changes in policy must be interpreted with care, as they
may ignore a portion of the overall systematic impact of the change in policy on the market, e.g.,
via changes in interest rates or exchange rates. To account for confounding macroeconomic shocks,
firm AARs measure event price reactions relative to observed market returns. To the extent that
the policy event has a systematic component, that part of its effect on the firm is not captured by
AARs. Nevertheless, we demonstrate that our primary results are not sensitive to re-incorporation
of plausible aggregate effects of the policy.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we outline the theory behind our approach, deferring
details to the Appendix. Sections 3, 4 and 5 validate and apply our method to PNTR. Section 6
applies our method to the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement. Section 7 concludes.


2    Theory
In this section we outline the conditions under which financial market reactions can be used to
quantify firms' exposure to changes in policy, highlighting the key challenges that must be addressed


                                                  4
for our purposes and outlining approaches that may mitigate them. As with all event studies, we
start with the assumption that markets are informationally efficient, i.e., that the impact of a
particular event on a firm's market value can be estimated via the change in the firm's stock price
during the event period, controlling for all other information relevant for firm value that may have
been released at the same time. To keep our discussion concise, we defer a more detailed description
of asset pricing theory to Section A of the Appendix.
       We assume a firm's stock price at time t is a function of a state space partitioned as (Xt , et ).
Here, et represents the information about the policy event of interest available at time t, and
Xt contains all other information relevant for firm value, including other firm-specific events (e.g.
dividend announcements), or broader events such as the release of macroeconomic information (e.g.
interest rate changes).6 We assume that the policy event under consideration takes place at time 
and, as in our applications below, that the information released is whether the policy is approved
or denied. We assume that the event is unanticipated, deferring discussion of partial anticipation
to Section 5.
       Let Pj,t be the stock price of firm j at time t, and Rj,t = (Pj,t - Pj,t-1 )/Pj,t-1 be the stock
return of the firm during period t.7 The effect of the event on firm j 's stock price is given by

                                             
                                           ARj, = Rj, - E (Rj, |X )                                                    (1)

where E (Rj, |X ) is the "normal" return we would expect to observe if the event did not occur.
   is referred to in the event-study literature as the "abnormal return" of the firm. We use
ARj,
the superscript  to denote that it is the true impact of the change in policy, as distinct from the
estimated effect described below.
       Estimating the normal return function E (Rj, |X ) is crucial. The standard approach relies on
a reduced-form model in which a firm's returns are a linear function of sensitivities to systematic
factors and firm-specific shocks:


                                              Rj,t = j + j Ft +        j,t .                                           (2)

Ft is a (K × 1) vector of systematic factors affecting all firms and j is a (1 × K ) vector of "factor
loadings" quantifying how shocks to the systematic factors affect firm j . The residuals                         j,t   are
referred to as the "idiosyncratic" component of returns.
       Ft are identified using either statistical or economic frameworks. A common statistical approach
uses principal component analysis on the space of realized firm returns. A popular economic
framework is the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), which identifies conditions under which Ft
consists of a single factor ­ the return on the market portfolio (Sharpe (1964); Lintner (1965)). In
   6
      For simplicity, we omit firm subscripts from the state space notation. In that sense, (Xt , et ) can be seen as the
information needed to price all assets in the economy. Throughout our analysis, "at time t" stands for "at the end
of time period t".
    7
      This expression for stock returns assumes that stock prices have been adjusted for dividend payments and stock
splits, as they are in our main dataset.



                                                           5
statistical approaches, model parameters (j , j ) and factors often are estimated simultaneously.
In economic approaches, they are constructed according to theory, and (j , j ) are obtained by
estimating equation (2) on a sample of realized returns prior to, and disjoint from, the event
window. In our applications below we adopt by far the most common approach in the event-study
literature, a statistical model informed by the CAPM, known as the "market model", that uses
the market portfolio as the single factor. We show that our baseline results are robust to using
multi-factor asset pricing models.
   Once the systematic factors Ft are identified and the parameters (j , j ) are estimated, the
"normal" return during the event generally is estimated as E (Rj, |X )  ^j +  ^j F which yields
the standard estimate for abnormal returns:


                                                 ARj, = Rj, - (^
                                                               j + ^j F ).                                             (3)
                                                               ­ only if E (R |X ) = 
Note, however, that this estimate is unbiased ­ i.e. ARj, = ARj,             j,      ^j + ^j F .
That requires two assumptions:

            (A1) Xt do not affect the idiosyncratic component of returns                      j,

            (A2) ej, does not have an effect on the systematic factors F

To see why, decompose F additively into the component FX caused by X , and the component
                                                                    t
Fe caused by the event e , such that F = F X + F e . Similarly, decompose the idiosyncratic term
                                                
as            =   X    +   e .8   Substituting these expressions into equation (2), we obtain
         j,       j,       j,


                                                            X    e           X          e
                                              Rj, = j + j (F  + F  )+        j,t   +    j,t                            (4)

With this substitution, the non-event state space X is summarized by {^j , ^j , F X ,                      X },   implying
                                                                                                           j,
that the normal return absent the event is given by

                                                                     X             X
                                                E (Rj, |X ) = j + j F  +           j,                                  (5)

and the abnormal return estimate in equation (3) can be rewritten as

                                         ^j F X +         X       ^j F e +   X             ^j F e +   X
                       ARj, = Rj, - (^
                                     j +                  j, )   -           j,    = ARj, -           j,               (6)

         Equation (6) shows that the abnormal returns estimate, ARj , equals the true effect of the
event (ARj,   ) less the impact of the event on the firm caused by its influence on systematic factors

(^j F e ) plus the idiosyncratic effect of confounding events that may have occurred at the same
         
time as the policy event (             X ).   Under assumptions A1 and A2, these last two terms are zero, and
                                       j,
ARj, =               .
                  ARj,
     8
    Technically, while these decompositions need not be linear, they can be linearized, with only the interpretation
of the coefficients changing.



                                                                 6
    Mitigating   X    = 0: In our estimations below, we follow the event study literature in using
                 j,
short windows around the policy event and in excluding firms experiencing significant confounding
events during the event window, to increase the likelihood that X    j, = 0.
    Mitigating ^j F e = 0: Avoiding the bias induced by the effect of the event on systematic factors
                   
is more challenging. While the assumption that    ^j F e is close to zero is reasonable for firm-specific
                                                          
events (e.g., a patent grant or an earnings announcement), it is more tenuous for changes in policy
with potential macroeconomic consequences, such as a trade liberalization or a change in the
minimum wage. As a result, our baseline abnormal return estimates must be interpreted as the
effect of the policy on firms relative to its impact on systematic factors.
    If one is willing to assume that no confounding systematic shocks occur at the same time as
the change in policy (i.e. Fx = 0), its systematic component F e can be estimated using the factor
                                                              
realizations themselves (F ).9 This approach might be reasonable if, for example, one is certain that
the entire impact of a policy is absorbed by the market in a very short time window ­ on the order of
minutes rather than days ­ during which it is unlikely any other meaningful macroeconomic shock
has taken place. On the other hand, it has the corresponding drawback that it assumes that all
information about the event is incorporated within that narrow window. In this spirit, we explore
the robustness of our results to narrower event windows in Section 5, where we also re-incorporate
plausible values of ^j F e to our estimates of AR .
                         



3     PNTR
In this section we apply the method outlined above to measure US firms' exposure to the US
granting of permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) to China in 2000.

3.1    Policy Background
The United States has two sets of import tariff rates. The first set, known as "normal trade
relations" or NTR tariffs, are generally low and are applied to goods imported from other members
of the World Trade Organization (WTO). The second set, known as non-NTR tariffs, were set by
the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 and are often substantially higher than NTR rates. While
imports from non-market economies such as China are by default subject to the higher non-NTR
rates, US law allows the President to grant such countries access to NTR rates on a year-by-year
basis, subject to potential overrule by Congress.
    US Presidents began requesting that China be granted such a waiver in 1980. Congressional
approval of these requests was uncontroversial until the Chinese government's crackdown on the
Tiananmen Square protests in 1989, after which it became politically contentious and less certain.
This uncertainty reduced US firms' incentives to invest in closer economic relations with China, and
   9                                                                        X
     Amiti et al. (2020), for example, make both this assumption and that   j,   = 0 in their study of US firms'
investment responses to the recent US-China trade war.




                                                      7
vice versa.10 It ended with Congress' passage of bill HR 4444 granting China permanent normal
trade relations (PNTR) status in October, 2000, which formally took effect upon China's entry
into the WTO in December, 2001.11
       Investment banking reports at the time of PNTR's passage expected that China's entry into the
WTO would benefit US firms in a variety of industries. Goldman Sachs (Hu (1999)), for example,
expected US producers to have an easier time selling into the Chinese market and using China as
an export platform, while US service providers, particularly in telecommunications, insurance, and
banking, would be granted greater access to Chinese consumers via the loosening of restrictions on
FDI. AARs computed during the key legislative milestones associated with the passage of PNTR
are designed to aggregate investors' expectations of the impact of all of such channels.

3.2      Computing AARP N T R
We choose events based on the US legislative process, calculating abnormal returns over the five
steps by which a US bill becomes law: (1) the May 15, 2000 introduction of the PNTR bill in the
US House of Representatives; (2) the May 24, 2000 vote to approve PNTR in the US House of
Representatives; (3) the successful July 27, 2000 cloture motion to proceed with a vote on PNTR
in the US Senate; (4) the September 19, 2000 vote to approve PNTR by the Senate; and (5) the
October 10, 2000 signature of PNTR into law by President Clinton.12 The substantial gap between
cloture and the vote in the Senate is due to that body's August recess.
       The salience of these events was noted among Wall Street analysts and in newspaper articles
at the time. Writing in early 2000, Goldman Sachs, for example, notes that

         "The event that deserves close watch is the forthcoming US Congressional debate on
         permanent normal trading relations (NTR) for China, which is required to bring current
         U.S. trade policies pertaining to China into conformity with the basic WTO principle
         of most favored nation (MFN) treatment for all members." (Kurtz and Morris, 2000)

       Articles in the New York Times noted that the successful vote in the House represented a "stun-
ning victory for the Clinton administration and corporate America" (Schmitt and Kahn (2000)),
and that Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott's decision to proceed to a vote in the Senate removed
a "major hurdle" to considering the policy change: while a majority of Senators were in favor of
  10
      Goldman Sachs, for example, writes in early 1999 that "[T]he annual debate has been a highly politicized process,
posing a substantial threat to Chinese exporters and US importers. Furthermore, as a non-WTO member, China is
also vulnerable to a variety of unilateral trade sanctions, without the protection of a multilateral arbitration process.
The United States and other countries may launch anti-dumping charges against China, treating it arbitrarily as a
non-market economy" (Hu (1999)). Producers made a similar argument to Congress.
   11
      As discussed in Pierce and Schott (2016), PNTR was accompanied by several other substantial changes in policy
in both the United States and China, including reductions in Chinese import tariffs, elimination of China's export
licensing regime, production subsidies, and barriers to foreign investment, and the removal of US quotas on China's
textile and clothing quotas as part of the phasing out of the global Multifiber Arrangement.
   12
      The full text of the PNTR bill (HR 4444) is available at https://www.congress.gov. Appendix Figure A.1
tracks the number of articles appearing in major news outlets jointly containing the phrases "Permanent Normal
Trade Relations," "China" and "United States" during 2000.



                                                           8
PNTR, Lott had been holding up a move of the bill to the floor to achieve greater leverage in
budget negotiations with the Clinton administration (Reuters (2000); Schmitt (2000)).
       As noted in Section 2, to estimate abnormal returns we first calculate "normal" or "expected"
returns using the standard "market model", which, motivated by the CAPM, imposes the market
portfolio return Rm,t as the only systematic factor in equation (2):


                                              Rj,t = j + j Rm,t +         j,t .                                         (7)

We separately estimate this regression for every firm in our sample over all available dates in
1999. We choose this period to ensure that our coefficient estimates ^ j and ^j are not affected
by periods when relevant legislative information about PNTR became known.13 Daily returns
for these regressions come from the Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP).14 We follow
the literature and restrict ourselves to common shares (i.e. CRSP share code 10 or 11) of firms
incorporated in the United States, traded on one of the three main exchanges ­ NYSE, AMEX,
and Nasdaq (i.e. CRSP exchange codes 1, 2, or 3).
       In order to capture any anticipatory movements prior to each event, as well as any lagged
response over the subsequent days, we use a five-day window surrounding each of the legislative
events mentioned above, for a total of 25 days. For each day t in our event windows, we calculate
normal returns for each firm j as ^j + ^j Rm,t and subtract this from the return of the firm on that
day to obtain its abnormal return: ARj,t = Rj,t - ^j + ^j Rm,t .15 Finally, we calculate our primary
                                                           P N T R , by taking an average of all the
measure of the firm's exposure to the policy, hereafter AARj
non-missing abnormal returns of the firm over the 25 days in our event windows.16
    Our procedure yields AARj   P N T R for 5,378 firms that are present during the pre-period used to

estimate ^j and at least one of the five legislative events. Across all five events the mean AARP N T R
                                                                                                                    j
is -0.37 percent, with a standard deviation of 1.04 percent. In chronological order, the means by
event are 0.12, -0.65, -0.25, -0.40, and -0.68 percent, while standard deviations are 1.9, 2.1, 2.1, 1.8
and 2.2 percent. Figure 1 reports the distributions of these returns.17
       Using data from COMPUSTAT, we classify firms into two mutually exclusive categories de-
  13
      We show in Appendix Section H.2 that our results are robust to use of "multi-factor" asset pricing models, and
to utilizing ^ j and  ^j coefficients estimated using the 250 days that end 30 days before each event. To minimize noise
in our coefficient estimates, we keep only firms with at least 120 non-missing dates in 1999.
   14
      Following convention, these regressions are estimates using excess returns (i.e. returns minus the risk-free rate).
Data on the daily market return and the risk-free rate are taken from Kenneth French's website. The risk-free
rate is the yield on the one month T-bill and the market return is the value-weighted return for all firms in CRSP
incorporated in the United States, trading on NYSE, AMEX or NASDAQ, with CSRS share code 10 or 11.
   15
      Once again, following the literature, the returns Rj,t , Rm,t are in fact excess returns with respect to the one-month
T-bill.
   16
      By averaging across events, we treat each day as an independent draw from the distribution of returns. In
Appendix Section H.2, we demonstrate the robustness of our results to use of an alternate "buy-and-hold" average,
i.e., the geometric average of the cumulative abnormal return associated with purchasing firms' stock prior to the
first event and holding them across all five events.
   17
      Appendix Figures A.2 and A.3 report the simple return of the market (Rm,t ) and the total volume of shares
traded in the market across the PNTR event windows. The market-capitalization weighted average abnormal return
across all firms is mean zero by definition. The left skewness in Figure 1 indicates a positive correlation between
                                    P NT R
market capitalization and AARj             .



                                                             9
Figure 1: PNTR Average Abnormal Returns, By Event




    Source: CRSP and authors' calculations. Figure displays distri-
   butions of AARj e across 5 PNTR legislative events, and overall.

   Values below -7.5 and above 7.5 percent are dropped to improve
   readability.




                                 10
pending on the mix of 6-digit NAICS codes spanned by their major business segments.18 We define
firms to be goods producers if their business segments include Manufacturing (NAICS 31 to 33),
Mining, Quarrying, Oil and Gas Extraction (NAICS 21), or Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and
Hunting (NAICS 11). Non-goods (or "service") producers are defined as firms whose segments do
not include these sectors. In 2000, our sample consists of 2,385 goods producers and 2,993 service
                                                       P N T R of goods-producing firms is more
firms. As illustrated in Figure 2, we find that the AARi
left-skewed than service firms. This outcome is consistent with the fact that goods-producing firms
were directly exposed to increased import competition from China following PNTR, while service
firms were not. The means, standard deviations and inter-quartile ranges for the these two groups
of firms are -0.38, 1.00 and 1.16 percent for goods producers and -0.35, 1.06 and 0.97 percent for
service firms.
                    Figure 2: PNTR Average Abnormal Returns, By Type of Firm




                              Source: CRSP and authors' calculations. Figure plots distribu-
                             tion of AARjP N T R for two mutually exclusive firm types: Goods

                             producers, which have business segments in NAICS 11, 21, 3X,
                             and service firms, which do not. Values below -7.5 and above
                             7.5 percent are dropped to improve readability. The means and
                             standard deviations for the two groups of firms are -0.38 and
                             1.00 percent and -0.35 and 1.06 percent respectively.


                                           P N T R are larger along almost every dimension than firms
       We find that firms with positive AARj
with negative relative returns, even within narrow industries, and that these premia are higher
for goods-producers than for service firms.19 These relationships are illustrated in Table 1, which
summarizes the results of a series of OLS regressions of various measures of firm size on a dummy
                               P N T R is greater than zero, as well as 6-digit NAICS industry fixed
variable indicating whether AARj
effects. Each cell in the table reports the coefficient and standard error for the dummy variable of
interest from a different regression. The sample for results in the first column is all firms, while
the samples for results in the second and third columns are goods producers and service firms,
respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the 4-digit NAICS level. As indicated in the table,
  18
      COMPUSTAT reports firms' sales in up to 10, 6-digit NAICS business segments. In 2000, approximately 71, 16
and 7.5 percent of firms have 1, 2 or 3 segments listed, while the remaining 4 percent of firms have up to 10 segments
listed. We classify the 57 firms with missing segment information as goods producers.
   19
      Griffin (2018) also finds that abnormal returns rise with firm size following the house vote on PNTR.


                                                           11
                                 P N T R have size premia of 0.66, 0.60 and 0.88 log points in terms
goods producers with positive AARj
of operating profit, employment and market capitalization, with each of these relationships being
statistically significant at conventional levels. The analogous premia for service firms are 0.35, 0.31
and 0.60.
                                              P N T R > 0 Size Premia
                                  Table 1: AARj
                                                         (1)         (2)         (3)
                                                         All        Goods      Services
                            Sales                     0.497        0.758       0.333
                                                       (0.134)      (0.230)     (0.127)

                            COGS                      0.371        0.607         0.226
                                                       (0.108)      (0.168)     (0.115)

                            Operating Profit          0.458        0.655       0.346
                                                       (0.117)      (0.195)     (0.123)

                            Employment                0.421        0.599       0.314
                                                       (0.102)      (0.185)     (0.098)

                            PPE                       0.513        0.666        0.370
                                                       (0.128)      (0.212)     (0.143)

                            Intangibles               0.374        0.509       0.284
                                                       (0.092)      (0.137)     (0.102)

                            Market Capitalization     0.712        0.877       0.602
                                                       (0.145)      (0.199)     (0.177)
                          Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table
                         presents firm-level OLS regressions of the log of various measures
                         of firm size on an indicator variable for whether AARj  P N T R > 0,

                         a constant, and 6-Digit NAICS fixed effects. Each cell represents
                         the result of a separate regression. Each column focuses on a
                         different set of firms. Goods firms have a business segment active
                         in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service firms have no business
                         segments in these sectors. The maximum number of observations
                         are 5269, 2302, and 2967 for the regressions in columns 1, 2 and
                         3. Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates and
                         are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *, ** and *** indicate
                         statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respec-
                         tively.


   To the extent that firm size is correlated with firm efficiency, the relationships displayed in
Table 1 are consistent with models of international trade predicting that high-efficiency firms are
better able to take advantage of reductions in trade costs by, for example, selling more in foreign
markets or offshoring (Melitz (2003); Breinlich (2014); Antr`
                                                            as et al. (2017); Bernard et al. (2018)).
                                   P N T R vary widely even within 6-digit NAICS industries. Figure
   Finally, we find that firms' AARj
                     P N T R to their major industry's AARP N T R , i.e, the unweighted average
3 compares firms' AARj                                    i
abnormal return of all firms whose largest segment is 6-digit NAICS industry i. Results for goods-
producing firms are in the left panel, while results for service firms are in the right panel, and the
size of the markers is scaled to firms' market capitalization prior to the first PNTR legislative event.
To the extent that import competition in firms' major business segments is the sole determinant
of their exposure to PNTR, the points in this figure would be clustered along the 45 degree line.
Instead, we find a broad cloud of points, potentially reflecting underlying heterogeneity in other


                                                         12
forms of exposure to PNTR. For example, some firms within an industry subject to the same
degree of import competition might be better able to take advantage of freer trade with China.
                                            P N T R , many firms have a positive AARP N T R . This
Even in industries exhibiting a negative AARi                                       j
deviation from industry averages appears to be more pronounced among firms with a larger market
capitalization ­ particularly in the goods-producing sectors.

                  Figure 3: Firm- versus Industry-Level Average Abnormal Returns




                  Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Figure compares firms'
                 AARj  P N T R to the unweighted average industry AARP N T R of their primary 6-digit
                                                                           i
                 NAICS segment. Values below -5 and above 5 percent are dropped to improve read-
                 ability. Firms' marker sizes are scaled to their market capitalization in 2000.


      "Electronic Computer Manufacturing" (NAICS 334111), for example, includes a number of
                                         P N T R . Among them, Apple Computer Inc. and Dell
firms with both positive and negative AARj
Computer Corporation are positive, while Gateway Inc., also a supplier of PCs, is negative. The
former thrived after PNTR, in part by taking advantage of supply chains in China. Gateway, which
focused on producing computers within the United States, shrank in the early 2000s before closing
its US operations in favor of contract manufacturers in Taiwan.20

                        P NT R
3.3      Validity of AARj
To the extent that correlates of the impact of the change in policy are observable, they can be
used to validate the abnormal return measures described in the previous section. In this section
we establish the contemporaneous, ex post and external validity of our approach by demonstrating
        P N T R is correlated with objective measures of the change in policy available at the time,
that AARj
subsequent outcomes, and abnormal returns during an unrelated event in US-China relations.
 20
      For a history of Gateway, see http://www.fundinguniverse.com/company-histories/gateway-inc-history/.



                                                         13
       Contemporaneous Validity : We establish the contemporaneous validity of our measure, i.e., va-
                                                                                              P NT R
lidity vis a vis objective attributes of the policy, by examining the relationship between AARj
and changes in expected US import tariffs, known in the literature as "NTR gaps". These gaps
are defined as the difference between the higher non-NTR rate to which tariffs would have risen if
annual renewal had failed, and the often much lower NTR rates permitted under temporary NTR
status,


                                 N T R Gapi = N on N T R Ratei - N T R Ratei ,                                          (8)

where i indexes 6-digit NAICS industries. These gaps are computed for 1999, the year before
the change in policy, using data on US import tariff rates reported in Feenstra et al. (2002).21
Their mean and standard deviation are 0.29 and 0.15. We summarize their distribution visually in
Appendix Figure A.4.
       Specifically, we use an OLS specification of the form

                                             P NT R
                                          AARj      = N T R Gapj +             j,                                       (9)

where N T R Gapj is the sales-weighted average of the industry-level NTR gap (N T R Gapi ) in firms'
major segments. As N T RGapj is not defined for service firms, estimation is restricted to firms with
sales in at least one goods-producing industry, substituting a gap of zero for any service segments
when computing the sales-weighted averages. To ease interpretation, all variables are de-meaned
and divided by their standard deviation. Standard errors are clustered at the four-digit NAICS
level.
       Results are reported in Table 2. As shown in column 1, we find a negative and statistically
                                                   P N T R . A one standard deviation increase
significant relationship between N T R Gapj and AARj
                                                                                       P N T R of
in the sales-weighted average N T R Gapi facing firms corresponds to a reduction in AARj
0.20 standard deviations. That is, firms more exposed to PNTR via direct import competition are
re-valued downward relative to less-exposed firms.22
       To explore potential supply-chain linkages, we follow Pierce and Schott (2016) in computing
firms' up- and downstream NTR gaps, N T R GapU
                                             j
                                               p3
                                                  and N T R GapDown
                                                               j
                                                                    3 . For each industry i, we

compute weighted averages of the NTR gaps across i's up- and downstream industries, using the
1997 US input-output total-use coefficients constructed by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics as
weights.23 For firms with multiple segments, we compute N T R GapU
                                                                 j
                                                                   p3
                                                                      and N T R GapDown
                                                                                   j
                                                                                        3 as the

  21
     Tariff rates are assigned according to 8-digit Harmonized System (HS) commodity codes. Following Pierce and
Schott (2016), we take the average NTR gap across HS codes within each 6-digit NAICS code, using the concordance
reported in Pierce and Schott (2012).
  22
     In Section C and Table A.1 of the Appendix, we repeat this specification for each of the five events separately.
We find a negative relationship between abnormal returns and N T R Gapj for all events, though the relationship is
only statistically significant for the House vote, the Senate cloture vote, and the Clinton signing.
  23
     Given the the high correlation between an industry's own N T R Gapi and those of other industries within the
same sector, we omit all industries within industry i's 3-digit NAICS root before computing the weighted averages,
yielding N T RGapU  i
                      p3
                         and N T RGapDown
                                       j
                                            3
                                              . The "3" in the superscripts call attention to the omission of these sectors.
The correlations between N T R Gapi and N T R GapU     i
                                                         p
                                                           and N T R GapDown
                                                                         i      when we do not omit sectors are 0.55 and



                                                            14
               P N T R versus the NTR Gap and Firm Attributes
   Table 2: AARj

                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                              AARj P N T R    AARj P N T R    AARj P N T R        est4
  NTR Gapj                     -0.202          -0.244          -0.139          -0.076
                                (0.054)         (0.057)         (0.046)         (0.032)

  NTR Gapj U p3                                   0.114           0.075        0.088
                                                  (0.052)        (0.047)       (0.034)

  NTR Gapj Down3                                   -0.038         -0.028      -0.086
                                                  (0.040)        (0.042)       (0.029)

  MFA Exposure2006
              j                                                   0.006         0.009
                                                                 (0.012)       (0.009)

   China Licensingj                                             -0.219        -0.173
                                                                 (0.064)       (0.038)

   China Import Tariffsj                                        -0.074         -0.040
                                                                 (0.027)        (0.017)

  Ln(PPE per Worker)j                                                          0.071
                                                                               (0.035)

  Ln(Mkt Cap)j                                                                 0.088
                                                                                (0.022)
  CashF lows
    Assets   j                                                                 0.236
                                                                                (0.023)

  Book Leveragej                                                                0.039
                                                                               (0.030)

  Tobins Qj                                                                     0.046
                                                                               (0.035)

  Constant                        -0.018           -0.092         0.091         0.051
                                 (0.058)          (0.074)        (0.091)       (0.052)
  Observations                     2271             2271          2270          2270
  R2                              0.044            0.056          0.076         0.175
  Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents firm-level OLS
regressions of AARj P N T R on N T RGap , other policy variables and a series of year-2000
                                        j
firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level. Policy variables
are expiration of textile and clothing quotas under the global Multi-Fiber Arrangement
(MFA), elimination of export licensing restrictions and decreases in Chinese import tariffs.
All covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation. Goods firms have
a business segment active in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service firms have no business
segments in these sectors. Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates and
are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance
at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                             15
sales weighted average of the respective industry-level gaps across segments. To the extent that
greater upstream exposure lowers firms' input costs, and greater downstream exposure reduces cus-
                                                    P N T R and N T R GapU p3 to be positive and
tomer demand, we expect the relationship between AARj                    j
the one with N T R GapDown
                      j
                           3 to be negative, i.e., greater Chinese import competition among firms'

suppliers is associated with a relative increase in market value while greater import competition
among firms' customers has an adverse impact on relative market value.
                                                                                             P NT R
    Estimates in column 2 are consistent with these expectations: the association between AARj
and own-industry exposure is negative, while the point estimate for N T R GapU
                                                                             j
                                                                               p3
                                                                                  is positive, and
both are statistically significant. The point estimate for N T R GapDown
                                                                    j
                                                                         3 has the expected sign but

is not statistically significant at conventional levels.24
    The third column of Table 2 considers variables capturing three other policy changes associated
with China's entry into the WTO: decreases in Chinese import tariffs, elimination of export licensing
restrictions, and the expiration of the global Multi-Fiber Arrangement (MFA).25 Including these
additional variables does not change the sign and statistical significance of the NTR gap variables,
but it does reduce the magnitude of the own-gap estimate to -0.08. Among the new policy variables,
we find negative and statistically significant relationships with respect to changes in China's import
tariffs and export licensing, and a positive relationship with respect to MFA exposure. The negative
                        P N T R and changes in Chinese import tariffs is consistent with higher
associations between AARj
expected profit in industries where it will be easier for US firms to export to China. The negative
                       P N T R and the share of Chinese firms eligible export is also intuitive, as
association between AARj
removal of these restrictions may increase competition for US producers in the exposed industries.
                                    P N T R and exposure to elimination of MFA quotas may reflect
The positive association between AARj
the ability of some goods-producing firms to take advantage of greater production in China.
    Finally, the fourth column of Table 2 includes a set of firm attributes, based on accounting
variables, commonly included in regressions of abnormal returns in the finance literature as proxies
for firms' investment opportunities and their ability to finance them. They are property, plant
and equipment (PPE) per worker, firm size (as measured by the log of market capitalization),
profitability (cash flows to assets), book leverage, and Tobin's Q.26 To reduce the influence of
outliers, these accounting variables are winsorized at the 1 percent level, i.e., observations below
the first percentile and above the ninety-ninth percentile are replaced with the observations at those
percentiles.
0.08. The analogous correlations for correlations with N T R GapU     i
                                                                        p3
                                                                           and N T R GapDown
                                                                                          j
                                                                                               3
                                                                                                 are 0.38 and -0.01.
   24
      One concern with this regression is that most firms are observed to operate in just one business segment. A
                                                                   P NT R
regression of the market-capitalization weighted average AARj              across firms in each 6-digit NAICS industry on
the industry-level N T R Gapj also yields a negative and statistically significant relationship of similar magnitude.
   25
      Industry-level data on the change in Chinese import tariffs from 1996 to 2005 and the share of Chinese firms
eligible to export are from Brandt et al. (2017) and Bai et al. (2015). As discussed in greater detail in Section B of the
Appendix, we follow Pierce and Schott (2016) in using the import-weighted average fill rate of the quotas removed in
each 6-digit NAICS industry as of the PNTR votes as a control. Fill rates are defined as actual divided by allowable
imports; higher values indicate greater exposure to MFA quota reductions.
   26
      In this section, all firm attributes are measured before the first legislative event we consider, and are drawn from
COMPUSTAT. All columns in the table are restricted to the sample of firms for which all five controls are reported.
Our results still obtain when using the full sample.


                                                           16
       With these additional covariates included, the coefficients on all three NTR gap variables retain
their signs from previous columns. The own-gap coefficient drops further in magnitude, to -0.08,
and all three gap controls are now statistically significant. Among the additional firm attributes, we
find positive and statistically significant relationships for all except book leverage, which is positive
but not statistically significant at conventional levels.
       The results in Table 2 suggest that firms' abnormal returns during the key votes associated with
PNTR are related to aspects of the upcoming changes in policy known at the time, including but
                                                                                           P NT R
not limited to the NTR gap. As a result, in exploring firm outcomes in Section 4 we use AARj
as the sole measure of firms' exposure to the change in policy.
                                                                     P N T R and US import growth
       Ex Post Validity: Table 3 examines the link between firms' AARj
                                                                                         P NT R
from China, an outcome not knowable in 2000, but useful for assessing the validity of AARj
ex post. For each firm, we calculate a weighted average of US import growth across its observed
business segments in 2000. Given that imports are not observed for service firms, the sample for
this analysis is restricted to firms with sales in at least one goods-producing industry. Among
those firms, we assign zero import growth to all service segments in calculating the firm average.
The sample period is from 2000 to 2006, from passage of PNTR until the year before the Great
Recession. As above, all variables are de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation and
standard errors are clustered at the four-digit NAICS level.
       As indicated in the first column of the table, we find a negative and statistically significant
                        P N T R and post-PNTR import growth. In column 2, we add the change
relationship between AARj
in imports between 1990 and 2000 as an additional covariate. The coefficient for import growth
between 2000 and 2006 remains the same in terms of magnitude and significance, while the coef-
ficient for import growth in the prior period is close to zero and statistically insignificant. These
results suggest that investors' reactions during passage of PNTR anticipated an increase in import
competition from China relative to the 1990s, and that this increase is not the continuation of a
prior trend.
       Results in column 3 reveal that these relationships are robust to inclusion of firm attributes
noted in the previous section. As indicated in the table, coefficient estimates for the changes in
Chinese imports retain the same sign and statistical significance pattern as in column 2. The
coefficient estimate on post-2000 import growth from China, -0.093, indicates that a 1 standard
deviation increase in subsequent imports from China is associated with a 0.093 standard deviation
decline in average abnormal returns. This corresponds to a loss in market value of about 2.4
percent.27
       External Validity : As discussed in more detail in Pierce and Schott (2016), several events in US-
China relations during the 1990s likely increased uncertainty regarding annual renewal of China's
NTR status in the United States. One of the more prominent of these events was the accidental
NATO bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade, Yugoslavia on May 7, 1999. The bombing
  27                                                                        P NT R
     Multiplying the coefficient (-0.093) by the standard deviation of AARj        (1.03 percent) provides the daily
effect. Multiplying this number by 25 to account for all 25 days in our event windows yields 2.4 percent.



                                                        17
              P N T R versus Chinese Import Growth
  Table 3: AARj

                                (1)             (2)             (3)
                           AARj P N T R    AARj P N T R    AARj P N T R
 Ln(Imports)j 2000-6        -0.123          -0.123          -0.093
                             (0.045)         (0.045)         (0.030)

 Ln(Imports)j 1990-00                          0.001           -0.009
                                              (0.035)         (0.041)

Ln(PPE per Worker)j                                            0.000
                                                              (0.038)

Ln(Mkt Cap)j                                                 0.113
                                                              (0.021)
CashF lows
  Assets   j                                                 0.232
                                                              (0.034)

Book Leveragej                                               0.080
                                                             (0.034)

Tobins Qj                                                      0.027
                                                              (0.032)

Constant                       -0.081          -0.081         -0.069
                              (0.052)         (0.052)         (0.042)
Observations                    1901            1901           1901
R2                              0.016           0.016          0.121
 Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents
firm-level OLS regressions of AARj     P N T R on US import growth from

China in firms' largest business segment and a series of year-2000 firm
accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level. Re-
gression sample is restricted to firms in goods-producing industries for
which imports are observed. All covariates are de-meaned and divided
by their standard deviation. Goods firms have a business segment active
in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service firms have no business segments
in these sectors. Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates
and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *, ** and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                   18
occurred during an 11-week NATO campaign intended to end Serbian aggression against ethnic
Albanians in Kosovo, and was recognized at the time as a potential threat to China's entry into
the WTO.28 We establish the external validity of AARj
                                                    P N T R by examining how it relates to firms'
                                                                                  Belgrade 29
average abnormal returns in the seven trading days after the bombing occurred, AARj       .
A virtue of this external validity check, relative to the results reported above, is that it can be
performed for both goods-producing and service firms.
                                             Belgrade        P N T R via the following OLS regres-
       We analyze the association between AARj        and AARj
sion:

                                            P NT R      Belgrade
                                         AARj      = AARj        + i.                                              (10)

       Results are presented in Table 4 for all firms, as well as for goods-producing and service firms
separately. We find that the relationship between the AARs is negative and statistically significant
at conventional levels in all three columns, indicating that firms which are expected to benefit
relative to the market from a potential breakdown of US-China relations due to the bombing in
1999 are expected to be harmed in relative terms by the trade liberalization in 2000. Interestingly,
the magnitude and statistical significance of the relationship is larger for service firms.30
                                               P N T R versus AARBelgrade
                                   Table 4: AARj                 j

                                                     (1)                (2)             (3)
                                                AARj P N T R        AARj P N T R   AARj P N T R
                              AARj Belgrade      -0.082              -0.051         -0.121
                                                  (0.020)             (0.022)        (0.034)

                              Constant              0.010              -0.018         0.032
                                                   (0.063)            (0.074)        (0.089)
                              Observations          5055                2269          2786
                              R2                    0.007              0.004          0.012
                              Firm Type              All              Goods          Services
                               Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations.
                                                                              P N T R on
                              Table presents firm-level OLS regressions of AARj
                                    Belgrade
                              AARj           . All covariates are de-meaned and divided by
                              their standard deviation. Goods firms have a business segment
                              active in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service firms have no
                              business segments in these sectors. Standard errors are reported
                              below coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS
                              industries. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the
                              10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
  28
     Three days after the bombing, for example, Brauchli and Cooper (1999) in the Wall Street Journal noted that
"prospects for a speedy end to negotiations on China's accession to the World Trade Organization just got a lot
worse."
  29
     We employ an asymmetric, longer event window to evaluate the bombing given that the event was unanticipated
and that information about it unfolded slowly.
  30
     In Section C and Table A.2 of the Appendix, we document a positive relationship between the N T RGapj and
      Belgrade
AARj           , further supporting the idea that firms expected to be harmed by PNTR respond favorably to the
deterioration of US-China relations that followed the bombing. As an additional validity test, in Appendix Table A.3
                                                                                         P NT R
we find a negative and statistically significant relationship between industry-level AARi       and similarly constructed
                                                                                       T rump
returns in the seven days following the election of President Donald Trump (AARi              ), consistent with the idea
that industries whose expected profits are expected to rise with PNTR are those whose profits are expected to fall
with Trump's election despite the long intervening time interval. We discuss this in more detail in Section D of the
Appendix.



                                                               19
                   PNTR
4         Using AARj    to Predict Firm Outcomes
Standard event studies in the finance literature focus on determining if a particular event has a
significant impact on stock returns. Hence, the object of interest is usually the cross-sectional
average of abnormal returns.31 In this paper we argue that abnormal returns provide an all-in
summary of the impact of a change in policy on the firm. As such, they can be used as an
explanatory variable for firm outcomes, including exit, operating profit and employment. We
consider each in turn.

4.1        Firm Survival
Exit from our sample signifies de-listing from the firm's stock exchange. We group exits into three
categories based on the de-listing codes provided by CRSP: (1) bankruptcy and contraction of firm
assets, equity, or capital below the levels required to be listed; (2) merger; and (3) exit for other
reasons, e.g., protection of investors and the public interest, or failure to meet equity requirements.32
         We investigate the relationship between PNTR and exit in Table 5, which presents results from
the estimation of a multinomial logit regression,

                                                  P NT R
                                 P r(Yj = d) = AARj      + X2000
                                                            j    +              j,                             (11)

where P r(Yj = d) is the probability that firm j exits between 2000 and 2006 due to de-listing
category d.33
         The fundamental attributes of firms that govern success or failure during trade liberalization
may affect firm performance more broadly. For example, firms with higher productivity may
earn greater profit after PNTR (Melitz (2003)), but they may also earn greater profit for other
reasons, e.g., via their easier access to capital markets or their greater ability to achieve operational
efficiencies from investments in technology. If ignored, these attributes would confound our ability
          P N T R to predict subsequent changes in firm outcomes. As a result, the regressions in
to use AARj
this and subsequent sections of the paper continue to include as covariates the accounting variables
employed in Table 2 above, represented here by X2000
                                                j    .34
         The base outcome is survival. As with our previous firm-level regressions, we standardize all
variables by subtracting their mean and dividing by their standard deviations. We report both
coefficients and marginal effects evaluated at the mean of all dependent variables for  ; results for
all other covariates are suppressed to conserve space.
                                                                                                P NT R
         Panel A of the table focuses on the full sample of firms, and indicates that higher AARj
is correlated with reduced exit via contraction and bankruptcy. The marginal effects indicate
    31
     See for example the textbook treatment in Campbell et al. (1997).
    32
     See Appendix Table A.4 for a more detailed breakdown of these flags. We observe 1814 firms de-list between
2000 and 2006. The distribution of these de-listings across the three categories is 743, 893, and 178, respectively.
  33
     We cannot use a difference-in-differences specification to examine exit due to how our sample is constructed.
                                                  P NT R
That is, firms must be present in 2000 for AARj          to be measured.
  34
     Balance sheet information is missing for 771 firms in 2-digit NAICS sector 52. This information is also missing
for 221 firms in other sectors. All of these firms are excluded from the analyses in the remainder of the paper.


                                                        20
                    P N T R and Firm Exit, Multinomial Logit
        Table 5: AARi

                              Survival    Contraction/Bankruptcy       Merger      Other
                                                  Panel A: All Firms
AARj   P NT R                                     -0.268***             0.022       -0.081
                                                   (0.072)             (0.050)     (0.089)

Marginal Effect                 0.017             -0.026***             0.011       -0.001
                               (0.012)             (0.007)             (0.008)     (0.002)


Unconditional Probability       0.586               0.17                 0.204      0.041
 Prob.                          0.028              -0.154                0.054     -0.036
Pseudo R2                       .122                .122                  .122       .122
Observations                    4377                4377                 4377       4377
                                                 Panel B: Goods Only
AARj   P NT R                                     -0.211**             0.146**      -0.129
                                                   (0.090)             (0.066)     (0.084)

Marginal Effect                 -0.006            -0.018**             0.028***    -0.003*
                               (0.013)             (0.008)              (0.010)    (0.002)


Unconditional Probability       0.633               0.148                 0.18      0.039
 Prob.                          -0.01              -0.122                0.152     -0.078
Pseudo R2                        .128                .128                 .128       .128
Observations                    2266                2266                 2266       2266
                                                 Panel C: Service Only
AARj   P NT R                                     -0.299***             -0.048      -0.006
                                                   (0.095)             (0.061)     (0.174)

Marginal Effect                0.031*             -0.034***             0.002       0.001
                               (0.017)             (0.010)             (0.010)     (0.005)


Unconditional Probability       0.535              0.193                 0.229      0.043
 Prob.                          0.057              -0.175                0.007      0.034
Pseudo R2                       .121                .121                  .121       .121
Observations                    2102                2102                 2102       2102
  Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents results of firm-
level multinomial logit model of exit (i.e., de-listing from their exchange) between 2000
and 2006. De-listing codes are described in text and Appendix Table A.4. The base
outcome (column 1) is survival through the end of 2006. Right-hand side variables in-
cluded in the regression but whose estimates are suppressed are a series of year-2000
firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level. All covariates are
de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation. Standard errors are reported below
coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *, ** and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                           21
                                             P N T R is associated with a relative decrease in the
that a one standard deviation increase in AARj
probability of exit for these causes of 2.6 percentage points, an economically meaningful impact
given that the unconditional probability of exit due to these causes, reported in the fourth to last
                                                                                            P NT R
line of the panel, is 16.9 percent. We do not find any significant relationships between AARj
and "other" forms of de-listing.
       In panels B and C, we estimate the multinomial logit separately for goods and service firms.
                                                                         P N T R are negatively
In terms of marginal effects, for goods producers we find that higher AARj
associated with the likelihood of exit via bankruptcy and contraction, as well as for other causes,
though the magnitude of the latter is small. We find a positive association with respect to de-
listing as a result of merger, which may indicate the relative attractiveness of firms with a "China
                                                                           P N T R and survival,
strategy." Among service firms, we find a positive relationship between AARj
                                       P N T R and exit via bankruptcy and contraction.
and a negative relationship between AARj
       This last result provides additional support for our approach, as it suggests investors anticipated
a link between the change in trade policy and firms' future profits. The greater overall importance of
   P N T R in explaining service firm survival may be due to service firms' thinner profit margins.35
AARj
That is, to the extent that less profitable firms are more likely to exit in the face of negative
economic shocks, one might expect the impact of PNTR on exit to be larger among these firms.

4.2       Relative Growth in Operating Profit, Employment and Capital
                                                       P N T R and measures of profitability among
In this section we explore the relationship between AARj
surviving firms using a generalized difference-in-differences specification,


                                                          P NT R
                   ln(OperatingP rof itj,t ) = P ost × AARj      + P ost × X1990
                                                                            j                                   (12)
                                                     +j + t +       j,t .


       The sample period is 1990 to 2006. The left-hand side variable represents one of a range of firm
outcomes available in COMPUSTAT, discussed in detail below. The first term on the right-hand
side is the difference-in-differences term of interest ­ an interaction of firms' average abnormal
return and an indicator variable (P ost) for years after 2000 ­ which captures the relative change
in outcomes among firms with differential exposure to the change in policy after versus before it
occurs. The second term on the right-hand side represents the vector of winsorized initial (here
1990) firm accounting attributes that may influence profitability through channels unrelated to
PNTR, as described above.36 The final terms on the right-hand side are the firm and year fixed
effects required to identify the difference-in-differences coefficient. Firm fixed effects capture the
impact of any time-invariant firm characteristics, while year fixed effects account for aggregate
shocks that affect all firms. As above, all independent variables have been standardized so that the
  35
      This difference is displayed in Appendix Figure A.5, which plots the distribution of both types of firms' prof-
itability, as measured by the log of the firm's operating profit divided by the book value of its assets.
   36
      For firms that enter the sample after 1990, we use their attributes upon entry in constructing Xj .


                                                         22
coefficients may be interpreted as the impact of changing the covariate by one standard deviation,
and standard errors are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industry.
       Sales, Costs and Operating Profit : Estimates for firms' worldwide sales, cost of goods sold
(COGS) and operating profit (i.e., sales less COGS) are reported in Table 6. Columns 1, 4, and
7 contain results for all firms. In the first two of these columns, we find positive and statistically
significant relationships between abnormal returns and both sales and cost of goods sold, indicating
                          P N T R expand after PNTR relative to firms with lower abnormal returns.
that firms with higher AARj
                                     P N T R and operating profit in column 7 suggests that firms
The positive relationship between AARj
with positive returns relative to the market during key PNTR legislative events do in fact exhibit
relatively higher profits through 2006. The coefficient estimates in these columns imply that a one
                                  P N T R is associated with relative increases in sales, COGS and
standard deviation increase in AARj
operating profit of 13.0, 10.5 and 12.9 log points, respectively.
       Columns 2, 5, and 8 report results for goods-producing firms, while columns 3, 6, and 9 are
restricted to service firms. As indicated in the table, we find positive and statistically significant
relationships for all three outcomes among both sets of firms. Magnitudes for sales and operating
profit are larger for goods firms, while the opposite is true for COGS.37
       Employment and Capital : Estimates for firms' worldwide employment, physical capital and
intangible capital are reported in Table 7. Physical capital is defined as the book value of property,
plant and equipment, while intangible capital, following Peters and Taylor (2017), is measured as
the sum of goodwill, capitalized research and development expenditures and capitalized "organiza-
tional" capital, defined as a fixed portion of selling, general and administrative expenses.
                                                             P N T R exhibit relative increases in
       Both goods-producing and service firms with higher AARj
employment after the change in policy versus before. The coefficient estimate for all firms is 0.116,
                                                      P N T R is associated with a relative increase
implying that a one standard deviation increase in AARj
in employment of 11.6 log points in the post period. Perhaps surprisingly, the magnitude of this
point estimate is larger for service-producing firms ­ 15.4 log points ­ than goods firms ­ 8.9 log
points. We return to the implications of this result in Section 4.3 below.
                                                                                   P N T R and both
       The remaining columns of Table 7 indicate positive relationships between AARj
forms of capital. Among goods producers, the coefficient for physical capital is more than twice as
large as that for intangible capital, and both are statistically significant. For service firms, both
associations are positive and of similar magnitude, but only the relationship with physical capital
is statistically significant at conventional levels. These positive relationships may be an indication
of the sort of product or process upgrading in response to low-wage country import competition
found among US and European firms by Bernard et al. (2006), Khandelwal (2010), Bernard et al.
(2011) and Bloom et al. (2016).38
  37
     In Appendix Table A.5 we examine the relationship between operating profit and the average abnormal returns
associated with each event, finding negative and statistically significant relationships except for the the Senate vote.
                                                                                                                U p3
Appendix Tables A.6 and A.7 demonstrate that we find similar results when we add N T RGapj , N T R Gapj              and
N T R GapDown
          j
               3
                 as additional covariates to the baseline specification, suggesting that AARj P NT R
                                                                                                     captures the effects
of PNTR through channels beyond direct import competition.
  38
     Autor et al. (2016) find that increases in Chinese import penetration negatively affect US manufacturers' in-


                                                           23
                                     P N T R and Firm Sales, COGS and Operating Profit (Sales-COGS)
                         Table 6: AARi

                                               Ln(Salesj )                           Ln(COGSj )                            Ln(Profitj OP. )
                                      (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)            (9)
        Post*AARj P N T R           0.130       0.150        0.095        0.105       0.097        0.103        0.129         0.143           0.098
                                     (0.026)     (0.036)      (0.032)      (0.020)     (0.023)      (0.028)      (0.026)       (0.026)         (0.036)
        Post*PPE per Workerj         0.053      0.147          -0.015      0.046       0.129         -0.007       0.037       0.152            -0.040
                                    (0.041)      (0.055)      (0.028)     (0.035)      (0.050)      (0.023)      (0.044)       (0.054)        (0.031)
        Post*Ln(Mkt Cap)j          -0.068       -0.091       -0.062      -0.076       -0.097       -0.072      -0.074         -0.105          -0.058
                                    (0.023)      (0.027)      (0.029)     (0.020)      (0.025)      (0.025)     (0.024)        (0.027)         (0.026)
                    lows
        Post* CashF
                Assets   j         -0.136       -0.198         -0.044    -0.060       -0.098         -0.012    -0.137         -0.212          -0.045
                                    (0.031)      (0.033)      (0.029)     (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.028)     (0.035)        (0.040)        (0.027)
        Post*Book Leveragej         -0.037      -0.095         0.026       -0.027     -0.077         0.024        -0.033      -0.081           0.017




24
                                    (0.019)      (0.021)      (0.023)     (0.020)      (0.024)      (0.025)      (0.023)       (0.024)        (0.025)
        Post*Tobins Qj              0.128       0.163        0.097        0.126       0.143        0.107        0.114         0.156           0.074
                                     (0.023)     (0.042)      (0.024)      (0.021)     (0.035)      (0.025)      (0.025)       (0.040)         (0.028)
        FE                            j&t          j&t          j&t         j&t          j&t          j&t         j&t            j&t             j&t
        Cluster                    NAICS-4      NAICS-4      NAICS-4     NAICS-4      NAICS-4      NAICS-4     NAICS-4        NAICS-4         NAICS-4
        Weights                     Equal        Equal        Equal       Equal        Equal        Equal       Equal          Equal           Equal
        Firm Type                     All        Goods       Services       All        Goods       Services       All          Goods          Services
        Years                       1990-6       1990-6       1990-6      1990-6       1990-6       1990-6      1990-6         1990-6          1990-6
        R2                           .924         .926         .921        .927          .93         .922        .913            .92            .906
        Observations                51121        28694        22427       51205        28778        22427       48551          26928           21623
        Unique Firms                 4516         2340         2176        4517         2341         2176        4360           2237            2123
       Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents firm-level OLS DID panel regressions of noted firm outcomes on
     firms' PNTR average abnormal returns (AARj    P N T R ) and a series of 1990 firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level.

     Sample period is 1990 to 2006. All covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation. Standard errors are reported below
     coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
     levels, respectively.
                                            P N T R and Employment, PPE, and Intangible Capital
                                Table 7: AARi

                                            Ln(Employmentj )                          Ln(PPEj )                            Ln(Intangiblesj )
                                      (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)            (8)            (9)
        Post*AARj   P NT R         0.116        0.089        0.154        0.148       0.133        0.170        0.095          0.074           0.129
                                    (0.022)      (0.026)      (0.038)     (0.029)      (0.035)      (0.044)      (0.022)       (0.024)          (0.041)
        Post*PPE per Workerj         0.042        0.060        0.047     -0.154       -0.121       -0.171        -0.060         -0.061          -0.038
                                    (0.034)      (0.053)      (0.045)     (0.025)      (0.027)      (0.032)      (0.035)       (0.044)         (0.039)
        Post*Ln(Mkt Cap)j          -0.135       -0.138       -0.124      -0.054       -0.079         -0.017    -0.057         -0.062            -0.038
                                    (0.015)      (0.017)      (0.029)     (0.021)      (0.026)      (0.032)     (0.019)        (0.020)         (0.039)
                    lows
        Post* CashF
                Assets   j         0.127        0.142        0.133        0.165       0.211        0.113        0.214          0.218           0.214
                                    (0.022)      (0.027)      (0.034)      (0.024)     (0.032)      (0.035)      (0.027)        (0.040)         (0.040)
        Post*Book Leveragej          -0.031       -0.016      -0.067       -0.035       -0.028       -0.051       0.040         0.038           0.021




25
                                    (0.022)      (0.021)      (0.035)     (0.024)      (0.032)      (0.033)      (0.027)       (0.029)         (0.046)
        Post*Tobins Qj             0.123        0.097        0.134        0.137        0.091       0.169        0.146          0.132           0.162
                                    (0.022)      (0.032)      (0.025)      (0.023)     (0.037)      (0.023)      (0.037)        (0.042)         (0.054)
        FE                            j&t          j&t          j&t         j&t          j&t          j&t          j&t           j&t          j&t
        Cluster                    NAICS-4      NAICS-4      NAICS-4     NAICS-4      NAICS-4      NAICS-4      NAICS-4       NAICS-4      NAICS-4
        Weights                     Equal        Equal        Equal       Equal        Equal        Equal        Equal         Equal        Equal
        Firm Type                     All        Goods       Services       All        Goods       Services        All         Goods       Services
        Years                       1990-6       1990-6       1990-6      1990-6       1990-6       1990-6       1990-6        1990-6       1990-6
        R2                           .922         .936         .903        .936         .945         .922         .924          .944         .891
        Observations                55324        32865        22459       55701        33181        22520        51624         32194        19430
        Unique Firms
       Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents firm-level OLS DID panel regressions of noted firm outcomes on
     firms' PNTR average abnormal returns (AARj    P N T R ) and a series of 1990 firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level.

     Sample period is 1990 to 2006. All covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation. Standard errors are reported below
     coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
     levels, respectively.
    Benchmarking results : Given the forward-looking nature of financial markets, abnormal returns
might be expected to predict subsequent firm operating profit even on days unrelated to PNTR.
As we discuss in detail in Section E of the Appendix, log gross abnormal returns at any time t can
be expressed as changes in expectations regarding the entire future stream of firm profits, as well
as differences in the sequence of future discount rates. As a result, the estimated magnitude of 
is a function of three forces: how PNTR affects firms' cash flows and discount rates, the timing of
its impact on these cash flows, and PNTR's persistence in terms of the rate at which its impact on
firm profits decays over time.
                                                         P N T R to analogous estimates, AARRandom ,
    For context, we benchmark the predictive power of AARj                                  j
derived from randomly chosen non-PNTR dates during our sample period. Specifically, we repeat
the following three steps 1000 times: (i) draw five random trading days in 2000; (ii) compute av-
                                                                                        Random
erage abnormal returns for the 5-day windows around these dates; and (iii) use these AARj
in our baseline DID specification.39 This procedure yields a "benchmark" distribution of  Random
coefficients to which our baseline PNTR estimates, referred to as  P N T R for the remainder of this
section, can be compared.
    The two coefficient distributions are plotted in Figure 4.40 The highlighted point on each
indicates the location of  P N T R . Two results stand out. First, the mean of the "benchmark"
distributions for both operating profit and employment are positive, indicating that higher AARs
are, on average, associated with subsequent relative expansion. Second, the equivalent estimates
for our baseline results lie in the far right tails of the distributions. As noted above, this outcome
suggests that the effects of PNTR are more persistent than the shocks on randomly chosen days,
that they are more of a cash-flow shock than a discount rate shock, or that they are more front-
loaded. We leave disentangling the relative contributions of these forces to future research.41 Of
course, it is possible that subsequent shocks magnified the effects of PNTR, such that firms with
            P N T R benefited more than anticipated, while firms with negative AARP N T R were
positive AARj                                                                     j
hurt more than anticipated. Such an outcome would have the effect of inflating the estimated
difference-in-differences coefficients, and would not be unique to our approach; it is a consideration
in any study of policy changes.
novative activities. Examining US manufacturing establishments, Pierce and Schott (2017) find that investment
among continuing firms with greater exposure to PNTR via the NTR gap exhibits relative declines after the change
in policy, and that these declines are relatively moderate for establishments with relatively high levels of initial la-
bor productivity, skill intensity and capital intensity. Gutierrez and Philippon (2017) document relative increases
in investment and innovation among industry leaders in response to PNTR. Similarly, Bombardini and Li (2016)
document a heterogeneous patenting response to import competition.
  39                                                                                                     P NT R
     We sample dates so that none of the resulting event windows overlap those used to calculate AARj           .
  40
     In contrast to our baseline results, we use non-standardized covariates to generate the coefficients displayed in
                                                                                                Random            P NT R
Figure 4. As a result, they should be interpreted as the impact of a one percent increase in AARj       or AARj          .
This switch is necessary for an apples-to-apples comparison, since a one standard deviation increase in AAR on days
with a greater variance would represents a larger increase in AAR in levels than a one standard deviation increase
on days with lower variance.
  41
     We note that the relationship between stock returns and subsequent firm outcomes, and how such relation-
ships vary across time and market conditions, is largely unexplored. We intend to pursue these topics further in
complementary research.




                                                           26
                                             Random Estimates vs AARP N T R
                      Figure 4: Benchmark AARj                      j




                       Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Figure presents
                       the distribution of (non-standardized) DID coefficient estimate from equa-
                       tion (12) using AARj Random in place of AARP N T R . The vertical lines indi-
                                                                       j
                       cate the non-standardized version of the coefficient estimates obtained in our
                       baseline results (Tables 6 and 7), and the percentiles at which they would
                       fall in the benchmark coefficient distribution.


4.3      The Distributional Implications of PNTR
A large body of recent research has focused on the distributional implications of trade liberalization
with China across US workers and regions. In this section we use our baseline DID estimates to
examine the distributional implications of PNTR across firms. As with all DID exercises, this
analysis provides an estimate of the relative gains and losses among firms vis a vis the market,
before versus after PNTR.42
   For each firm j , we compute the predicted relative operating profit for 2001 to 2006 using
the coefficient ^ from a DID specification analogous to equation (12), but estimated using non-
standardized covariates:


                   Op P rof itP ost P eriod = exp(^ × AARP N T R ) - 1 × Op P rof it2000                       (13)
                              j                          j                          j

The product of ^ and AARP N T R is the predicted growth in operating profit in the post-PNTR
                        j
period relative to the pre-PNTR period, in log points. It is exponentiated and reduced by 1 to
convert it into percentage terms, and then multiplied by operating profit in 2000 to convert it into
levels. As we are focusing on investors' expectations at the time of the policy change, we compute
these levels for all firms, even if they subsequently exit the sample. In performing these calculations,
we use separately estimated     ^'s for goods and service firms.
       Figure 5 plots the cumulative predicted relative operating profit in the post period, calculated
  42
     The trends here can be interpreted as level effects only under the very strong assumptions noted in Section 2.
Alternatively, level effects can be identified via other approaches, such as structural general equilibrium modeling
(e..g, Dix-Carneiro (2014); Caliendo et al. (2015)).



                                                            27
by summing the fitted value from equation (13) along the firm size distribution, against the market
capitalization, ordering firms by size. Goods producers are represented by large black dots, while
service firms are indicated by the small red x's. Cumulative profit generally declines with firm
size until market capitalization reaches approximately 10 billion dollars. Firms larger than that
threshold exhibit modest relative increases in expected operating profit until market capitalization
reaches around 100 billion dollars, at which point it rises substantially. This reversal is driven
primarily by goods producers: while both goods and service firms populate lower levels of market
capitalization, the balance shifts toward goods firms as firm size rises. Above 20 billion dollars, 55
percent of firms are goods producers. Above 50 and 100 billion dollars, their share is two-thirds.43
Overall, the differential expected relative growth of large firms suggests a potential role for trade
liberalization in the rising share of economic activity attributed to large, old (i.e., "superstar")
firms documented in Decker et al. (2014) and Autor et al. (2017).

        Figure 5: Cumulative Relative Change in Operating Profit: Service Firms Highlighted




                        Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and authors' calculations. Figure displays
                       the predicted cumulative relative change in goods versus service firms' op-
                       erating profit implied by the baseline difference-in-differences estimates in
                       Table 6. Firms' market capitalization is from 2000, prior to PNTR.


       As we discuss in Section 2, a potential complication of our approach is that large changes in
                                                      P N T R are underestimated if the policy
policy may affect the market return. In that case, AARj
affects the market positively (Fe > 0), and over-estimated if the impact is negative (F e < 0).
                                                                                       
Equation (13) reveals that this bias affects firms' predicted relative operating profit through both
AARP N T R and, consequently, through the estimated difference-in-differences coefficients  ^. As we
        j
do not observe Fe , we are unable to correct for this directly. Nevertheless, we can characterize the

qualitative impact such an adjustment would have by considering a range of plausible values for
F e . For each value, we adjust AARP N T R , re-estimate ^, and compute predicted relative changes
                                            j
in firms' operating profit given these new estimates. As shown in Figure A.9 of the Appendix, the
  43                                                                                                            P NT R
    As discussed further in Section F of the Appendix, large firms' size as well as their generally positive AARj
contribute to their predicted relative growth vis a vis small firms in Figure 5.


                                                            28
distributional implications are largely unchanged by these adjustments. Specifically, we show that
for values of Fe between -1.5 and 1.5 percent, the finding that relative declines in operating profit

among smaller firms are dwarfed by relative increases among the largest firms is unchanged.44
    We do not find similarly large increases among the largest firms' predicted relative growth in
employment. As illustrated in the top right panel of Figure 6, which combines goods producers and
service firms for legibility, relative growth in employment is zero or moderately negative among the
largest firms, implying a positive relationship between firm size and predicted relative growth in
labor productivity. Physical and intangible capital, displayed in the bottom two panels of Figure 6,
by contrast, more closely resemble the distribution of outcomes observed for operating profit, with
predicted relative increases in physical capital among large firms being rarer than for operating
profit, but more common for intangible capital. The latter result is consistent with recent research
by Gutierrez and Philippon (2017), who show that industry "leaders" invest more in response to
rising import competition from China than their followers.

                       Figure 6: Cumulative Relative Change in Firm Outcomes




                        Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and authors' calculations. Figure displays
                       the predicted cumulative relative change in four firm outcomes implied by
                       the baseline difference-in-differences estimates in Table 6. Firms' market
                       capitalization is from 2000, prior to PNTR.


    Figure 7 reports the cumulative relative change in each outcome for two-digit NAICS sectors
for which we observe a large number of firms. The y -axis in each panel of the figure reports the
  44
     For context, we note that the market, i.e., the market capitalization weighted average return during our five event
windows is 0.98%, -0.6%, -0.6%, -0.54%, -1.7%



                                                          29
cumulative relative change in each outcome as a share of its initial (year 2000) level so that the four
outcomes can be plotted against each other. Sectors vary substantially in their predicted relative
changes. Almost all mining firms, for example, exhibit predicted relative increases in the four
outcome variables, while the opposite is true in Wholesale/Retail. The latter is consistent with
analysts' expectations at the time that China's entry into the WTO would reduce US wholesale
and retail markups, and that these reductions would not be offset by greater profit in China, at
least initially.45
                             Figure 7: Cumulative Relative Changes by Sector




  Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and authors' calculations. Figure displays the predicted cumulative relative change in 4
  firm outcomes implied by the baseline difference-in-differences estimates in Table 6 by noted 2-digit NAICS sector. Y-axis
  reports the cumulative predicted relative change as a share of the initial total of each outcome across firms in 2000, prior
  to PNTR. Each firm appears only in one panel, according to the NAICS code of largest business segment in 2000. Firms'
  market capitalization is from 2000, prior to PNTR.


       Two other sectors of note in Figure 7 are Information and Professional Services. The Infor-
mation sector, which includes publishing, motion pictures, broadcasting, telecommunications, and
data processing, exhibits a large cumulative relative decline across all four outcomes. These trends
may be influenced by the fact that while China agreed to substantial liberalization of its telecommu-
nications sector as part of its WTO accession, this liberalization would be phased in gradually and
subject to a number of limitations, such as temporary restrictions on foreign ownership shares.46
  45
      For example, while Goldman Sachs anticipated a near tripling of Chinese sales for Wal-Mart in the first five
years after PNTR, it predicted that this growth would not make a meaningful contribution to Wal-Mart's bottom
line (Kurtz and Morris, 2000).
   46
      For a detailed discussion of telecommunications liberalization in China, see Pangestu and Mrongowius (2002)


                                                              30
This delay may have affected the timing of revenues versus costs, substantially backloading oper-
ating profit beyond our time horizon.
    Professional Services, which includes business services such as accounting and law as well as
engineering and research and development, exhibit a large cumulative relative gain. This increase
may be driven by an anticipated, post-PNTR shift in the United States toward the design, en-
gineering, sourcing, marketing and distribution of goods whose physical production would begin
migrating to China (Ding et al., 2019).


5     PNTR Robustness Exercises
In this section we examine the robustness of the results presented above in several ways. First, we
re-estimate our findings using a more flexible difference-in-differences strategy to search for pre-
trends. Second, we discuss concerns related to partial anticipation of the event and describe several
approaches to mitigating these concerns. Finally, we summarize a number of additional robustness
tests which are described in more detail in Section H in the Appendix.

5.1    Annual Specifications
If changes in firm outcomes are attributable to PNTR, abnormal returns should be correlated
with firm outcomes after passage of PNTR but not before. To determine whether such a pattern
does exist, we replace the single difference-in-differences term in equation (12) with interactions of
   P N T R and a full set of year dummies. We also include the interaction of firms' initial (1990)
AARj
attributes, similarly interacted with a full set of year dummies:


                                     2006                                         2006
                                                                    P NT R
           ln(Outcomej,t ) =                  y × 1{t = y } ×    AARj        +             1{t = y } × Xj y   (14)
                                    y =1990                                      y =1990
                                    +j + t +        j,t .


In all other respects, the estimation of equation (14) resembles that of equation (12).47
    Results are reported in Figure 8, where, to conserve space, we focus on four of the outcomes
discussed in the previous section ­ operating profit, employment and physical and intangible capital
­ and the sample of all firms. Within each panel, a series of 95 percent confidence intervals traces
out the sequence of t from 1990 to 2006, with 2000 omitted. As indicated in the figure, we find
that estimates are not statistically significant prior to 2000, but positive and generally statistically
significant afterwards.
and Whalley (2003).
  47
     Results are qualitatively similar when including NAICS-2 by year fixed effects or additional controls.




                                                            31
                                   P N T R and Firm Outcomes: Annual Specification
                      Figure 8: AARj




  Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Figure displays a series of 95 percent confidence intervals for the
difference-in-difference term of interest in equation (14). Each panel is from a separate, firm-level OLS regression of noted
firm outcome on PNTR average abnormal returns (AARj         P N T R ) interacted with a full set of year dummy variables as well as a

series of initial (1990) firm accounting attributes, also interacted with year dummy variables and winsorized at the 1 percent
level. Sample period is 1990 to 2006. Sample includes 4505 firms. All covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard
deviations. Standard errors used to construct confidence intervals are clustered at the 4-digit NAICS level.



5.2     Controlling for Partial Anticipation of Events
One concern regarding the use of event studies to estimate the impact of a policy change is that such
changes are generally discussed in the public arena prior to passage, often for a prolonged period
of time. As a result, anticipatory trading may lead stock returns measured in the days following
the event to understate the true effect of the policy. In this section we formally characterize this
"partial anticipation" bias and show that our main results are in fact not affected by it.
    We assume a single event to simplify exposition, but note that we generalize the approach to
multiple events in our implementation below. For every firm j , the effect of the policy event on
                                    Y        N              Y
the firm's stock price is given by Pj, -1 - Pj, -1 , where Pj, -1 is the price that we would observe
immediately prior to the event if investors were certain that the policy would be approved at  ,
     N
and Pj, -1 is the price we would observe if investors believed that the policy would be rejected.
Neither is observed. Instead, we have only realized prices Pj, -1 and Pj, .
                                       Y        N
    We construct an approximation for Pj, -1 - Pj, -1 from observed prices. The observed price
immediately prior to the event can be written as

                                                Y    Y            Y     N
                                       Pj, -1 =  -1 Pj, -1 + (1 -  -1 )Pj, -1 ,                                                (15)
      Y
where  -1 is the time  - 1 probability that the policy will be approved at  . Re-arranging and
        Y
adding Pj, -1 to both sides, we obtain




                                                                32
                            Y                     Y      Y        N
                           Pj, -1 - Pj, -1 = (1 -  -1 )(Pj, -1 - Pj, -1 )                         (16)
                                                                                                Y
If the policy is approved at time  , the realized price immediately after the event Pj, equals Pj,
                                       Y to the left hand side, we can rewrite equation (16) as
by definition. Hence, by adding Pj, - Pj,

                                      Y     Y              Y      Y        N
                  (Pj, - Pj, -1 ) - (Pj, - Pj, -1 ) = (1 -  -1 )(Pj, -1 - Pj, -1 ).               (17)

Dividing both sides by the realized price prior to the event recasts this equation in terms of returns:

                                   Y - PY                     Y          N
                     Pj, - Pj, -1 Pj,     j, -1        Y
                                                             Pj, -1 - Pj, -1
                                 -              = (1 -  -1 )                 ,                    (18)
                        Pj, -1       Pj, -1                       Pj, -1
                                                        Y      
                               Rj, - E (Rj, |X ) = (1 -  -1 )ARj,                                 (19)

   Going from equation (18) to equation (19), we use the notation introduced in the Section 2
                             Y - PY
and the understanding that (Pj,   j, -1 )/Pj, -1 captures the return we would expect if only the
non-event state variables change, from X -1 to X . This is equivalent to the "normal" returns
term E (Rj, |X ). Equation (19) shows that ARj, = Rj, - E (Rj, |X ) is an unbiased estimate of
   only if the event is completely unanticipated ­ that is, if  Y
ARj,                                                            -1 = 0.
   Equation (19) makes clear that partial anticipation bias, even if it exists, does not affect our
                                                                 P N T R by (1 -  Y ) leads to a simple
difference-in-differences or distributional results: dividing AARj                -1
                                               ^
rescaling of our DID coefficient of interest,  (equation (12)), while our computation of predicted
                                                                            P N T R . Nevertheless, in
relative operating profit (equation (13)) is invariant to a rescaling of AARj
Appendix G, we outline and implement a procedure for estimating ex ante event probabilities, and
find that, under the assumption that no relevant information was released between our events, the
                                    P N T R measure is quite low: investors' ex ante assessment of
partial anticipation bias in our AARj
the ultimate passage of PNTR was about 12 percent prior to the introduction of the bill in the
House. While we are unaware of any events whose stature is equivalent to those we study, we
speculate that this partial anticipation may reflect investors' reactions to various comments about
the bill made by influential legislators or the President prior to the start of the formal legislative
process.

5.3   Additional Robustness Tests
In Section H of the Appendix, we demonstrate that our baseline difference-in-differences estimates
are robust to a number of changes in our estimation strategy, including: (1) re-estimation of
equation (12) for each of our five policy events separately; (2) weighting each regression by the
1990 level of the dependent variable; (3) including 2-digit NAICS by year fixed effects; (4) using
                                                                               P N T R ; (5)
a one-day [-1, 1] rather than two-day window around each event in computing AARj
              P N T R using a popular alternative to the CAPM, the Fama and French (1993)
estimating AARj
three-factor model; (6) eliminating observations in our event windows that occur at the same time


                                                  33
as earnings, dividend announcements, mergers and acquisitions (M&A), stock repurchases, and
seasoned equity offering (SEO) announcements; (7) using buy-and-hold abnormal returns rather
than average abnormal returns; and (8) using bootstrapping to address sampling error in firms'
estimated factor loading in the CAPM, ^j s.


6     CUSFTA
We further assess the usefulness of our method by applying it to a second important liberalization:
the 1989 Canada-US Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA). CUSFTA eliminated most tariffs between
the two countries over a ten-year period, and is an attractive target for our method for at least two
reasons. First, it was the largest bilateral trade agreement in history at the time of its passage.
Trefler (2004), for example, documents substantial reallocation between sectors and plants within
the Canadian manufacturing sector following passage. Second, in addition to specifying import tariff
reductions in both countries, it explicitly targeted service sectors via the application of national
treatment, a change which, unlike tariffs, is difficult to quantify with traditional measures.48
    We follow Breinlich (2014) in focusing on the November 21, 1988 Canadian federal election
as the key event associated with ultimate passage of CUSFTA. This election revolved around the
agreement, and its outcome was uncertain in the weeks leading up to it. While Prime Minister Brian
Mulroney and the Progressive Conservative party favored CUSFTA, his opponent John Turner and
the Liberal Party proposed abandoning it.
                                                             CU SF T A , around the Canadian
    We compute US firms' average abnormal CUSFTA returns, AARj
election analogously to those calculated for PNTR. In Table 8 we perform a contemporaneous
validation of these abnormal returns by comparing them to the agreement's terms using the same
specification employed in Table 2 for PNTR. First, for each US firm j , we compute the weighted
                            Canada ) and US ( U S ) tariffs, using the firms' sales across its
average change in Canadian (j                j
goods-producing business segments as weights.49 This validation exercise omits service firms. As
indicated by the coefficient estimates in the first column of the table, we find that goods-producing
          CU SF T A respond intuitively to variation in both sets of tariffs: a one standard deviation
firms' AARj
                                                                  CU SF T A of 0.048 standard
reduction in Canadian tariffs corresponds to an increase in US AARj
deviations, while a commensurate reduction in US tariffs corresponds to 0.061 standard deviation
                   CU SF T A . These relationships highlight AARs ability to capture multiple
reduction in US AARj
channels of exposure in a single measure. Firms in industries facing reduced tariffs in export markets
are expected to take advantage of increased foreign market access, while those in industries with
declining import tariffs are expected to suffer from increased competition in the domestic market.
Firms with substantial exposure to tariff cuts in both countries might face significant, but offsetting,
exposures. Indeed, we find that the correlation of the two sets of tariff changes within firms is 0.58.
  48
     In this case, "national" treatment" means that the US and Canada must treat the service firms in each others'
countries symmetrically, for instance, with respect to professional licensing standards or access to telecommunications
services.
  49
     Sales are as of 1978 or the first year in which the firm appears in our sample. Business segments are recorded
according to four-digit SIC industries.


                                                          34
       Another important feature of our proposed method is its ability to examine service firms'
exposure to trade liberalization. In the second column of Table 8 we regress US service firms'
   CU SF T A on an indicator variable which takes the value of 1 for service industries covered by
AARj
national treatment.50 As indicated in the table, we find that firms in covered sectors' AARj
                                                                                           CU SF T A

are on average 0.92 standard deviations greater than those for firms in non-covered sectors.
                                   CU SF T A versus Tariff Changes and Firm Attributes
             Table 8: US Firms' AARj

                                                          (1)                    (2)
                                                   USA AARj CU SF T A      USA AARj CU SF T A
                          CAN
                          j                            -0.048
                                                        (0.021)
                          U SA
                          j                               0.061
                                                          (0.024)

                         Affected Service                                         0.092
                                                                                  (0.039)

                         Ln(PPE per Worker)j               -0.012                 0.039
                                                          (0.037)                 (0.020)

                         Ln(Mkt Cap)j                      0.024                   0.017
                                                          (0.025)                 (0.018)
                          CashF lows
                            Assets   j                   0.103                   0.084
                                                          (0.036)                 (0.027)

                         Book Leveragej                    0.044                   -0.014
                                                          (0.031)                 (0.019)

                         Tobins Qj                         0.003                   -0.021
                                                          (0.034)                 (0.018)

                         Constant                          -0.036                 -0.036
                                                          (0.023)                 (0.020)
                         Observations                       2065                   3938
                         R2                                 0.017                  0.012
                       Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT, Trefler (2004) and authors' calculations. Ta-
                      ble presents firm-level OLS regressions of AARjCU SF T A on US and Canadian

                      tariff changes between 1988 and 1996 and a series of year-1978 firm account-
                      ing attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level. Tariffs are defined
                      at the 4-digit SIC level, and are weighted by segment sales within firms. All
                      covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation. Standard
                      errors are reported below coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit
                      NAICS industries. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5
                      and 1 percent levels, respectively.

                                                                                               CU SF T A
       We estimate the relationships between US firms' outcomes from 1978 to 1993 and their AARj
using the baseline difference-in-differences specification discussed in Section 3, and outlined in equa-
tion (12). Results are reported in Table 9. To conserve space, we report only the difference-in-
differences coefficients of interest. In contrast to our results for PNTR, we do not report results
for intangible capital as those data, from Peters and Taylor (2017), are not available during this
sample period.
       There are two trends worth noting. First, as indicated in the first and second panels of the
  50
    These industries are listed in Section 14, Annex 1408 of the CUSFTA. Transportation, basic telecommunications,
doctors, dentists, lawyers, childcare, and government-provided services were not included.



                                                           35
            CU SF T A and Firm Sales, COGS and Operating Profit (Sales-COGS)
Table 9: AARi

                   Ln(Sales)    Ln(COGS)      Ln(Operating Profit)    Ln(Employment)       Ln(PPE)
                                                         All Firms

     CU SF T A
  AARj                0.019        0.011              0.025                  0.022           0.012
                     (0.019)      (0.019)            (0.016)                (0.016)         (0.017)
  R2                  .938          .939                 .927                .942             .953
  Observations       43954         43968                42492               43597            43976
  Unique Firms       4143           4145                4066                 4143             4153
                                                     Goods Firms

     CU SF T A
  AARj                -0.025       -0.022             -0.003                 0.007           -0.009
                     (0.022)      (0.021)            (0.019)                (0.021)         (0.021)
  R2                  .947          .946                 .934                .954             .957
  Observations       25134         25145                24335               25053            25283
  Unique Firms       2255           2255                2208                 2265             2267
                                                     Service Firms

     CU SF T A
  AARj              0.077         0.055              0.063                   0.036           0.042
                     (0.028)      (0.029)            (0.025)                (0.026)         (0.030)
  R2                  .926          .928                 .917                .925             .948
  Observations       18820         18823                18157               18544            18693
  Unique Firms       1888           1890                1858                 1878             1886
  FE                  j&t           j&t                j&t                   j&t              j&t
  Cluster            SIC-3         SIC-3              SIC-3                 SIC-3            SIC-3
  Weights            Equal         Equal              Equal                 Equal            Equal
  Years            1978-1993     1978-1993          1978-1993             1978-1993        1978-1993
  Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents firm-level OLS DID panel
 regressions of noted firm outcomes on firms' CUSFTA average abnormal returns (AARj      CU SF T A ) and

 a series of 1978 firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level. Sample period
 is 1978 to 193. All covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation. Standard errors
 are reported below coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *, ** and ***
 indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                   36
                                          CU SF T A and outcomes among goods-producing firms.
table, we find no relationship between AARj
This unexpected result may be due to CUSFTA's long time horizon, or to subsequent events. As
noted in our discussion of the PNTR difference-in-differences regressions, and discussed in more
detail in Section E of the Appendix, the difference-in-differences term is a function of the future
stream of firm profits and discount rates. US and Canadian tariff reductions were to be phased in
over ten years, and there is some evidence that most of the change in trade associated with the
agreement occurred in the later years (Besedes et al. (2020)). Assessment of this trend, however, is
complicated by the fact that during the CUSFTA phase-in period, the United States, Canada and
Mexico negotiated and implemented the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Thus,
it also is possible that any gains for US goods producers anticipated in 1989 were subsequently offset
by NAFTA's provisions.51 As noted in our discussion of PNTR, our approach's susceptibility to
                                                                                           Canada
such reversals is not unique. In fact, in Table A.11 of the Appendix, we find that neither j
    U S are predictive of subsequent operating profit. To the best of our knowledge, no other
nor j
research has documented significant effects of CUSFTA on US manufacturing firms either.
       In contrast to the results for US goods producers, we do find, in the third panel of Table 9, a
                                                               CU SF T A and the subsequent sales,
positive and statistically significant relationship between AARj
cost of goods sold, and operating profit of US service firms. This relationship is consistent with
the agreement's provisions with respect to national treatment of services noted above, and US
comparative advantage more generally (Fort et al. (2018)). Together, these results suggest that
a standard analysis of CUSFTA which relies on traditional measures of exposure, such as tariffs,
offers an incomplete picture of this liberalization.
       Finally, we examine the distributional implications of CUSFTA across firms in Figure 9, which
plots the cumulative relative change in operating profit and employment across US firms. The
patterns are broadly similar to those displayed for PNTR: firms with smaller market capitalization
exhibit relative declines in both outcomes, while larger firms exhibit relative increases. The most
noticeable difference between Figure 9 and the analogous Figure 6 for PNTR is the substantial
increase in relative employment among the largest firms following CUSFTA. As was the case with
   P N T R , firm size is positively correlated with AARCU SF T A . However, the relative employment
AARj                                                    j
among the largest firms was substantially higher during the CUSFTA period than during the
PNTR period. Thus, employment growth among such firms had a much larger effect on cumulative
employment growth.
  51
     NAFTA is another potentially attractive application for our approach. However, the primary source of uncertainty
in NAFTA's passage ­ the November 17, 1993 vote in the House of Representatives ­ occurred the day after a Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting. FOMC meetings have been shown to play an outsized role in firm returns
(e.g. Bernanke and Kuttner (2005), Lucca and Moench (2015)), and, as noted in Section 2, the existence of such
a confounding event is problematic for our approach. While we currently are unable to separate the information
revealed by the House vote from that of the FOMC meeting, we hope to address this issue in future research.




                                                         37
    Figure 9: Cumulative Relative Change in Operating Profit and Employment: US Firms




                     Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and authors' calculations. Figure displays
                    the predicted cumulative relative change in goods versus service firms' op-
                    erating profit implied by the baseline difference-in-differences estimates in
                    Table 6. Firms' market capitalization is from 2000, prior to PNTR.



7    Conclusion
We introduce a method for gauging firms' exposure to changes in policy based on abnormal equity
returns, and use this method to measure US firms' exposure to trade liberalizations with China
and Canada.
    With respect to China, we find that firms' average abnormal returns during key legislative
milestones associated with the liberalization vary widely within industries, that they are correlated
with standard variables used to assess import competition, and that they provide explanatory
power beyond these standard measures. Among both service and goods-producing firms, we find a
strong relationship between firm size and predicted relative gains in operating profit, employment
and capital. We also find stark differences in traders' assessment of subsequent relative operating
profit across broad two-digit NAICS sectors. For CUSFTA, we demonstrate that goods firms'
average abnormal returns are correlated with US and Canadian tariff changes, while for service
firms they are higher in industries subject to national treatment. For service firms, we also find
that firms' average abnormal returns predict future operating profit, highlighting our method's
ability to evaluate the removal of trade restrictions outside the manufacturing sector.
    Our study highlights several important advantages to using equity market reactions to assess
the impact of policy changes. First, these reactions capture direct as well as indirect channels of
exposure. Second, they are readily available for firms in all sectors of the economy in which firms
are publicly traded. Finally, they can be used to quantify the effect of non-tariff barriers, which are
notoriously difficult to capture using standard measures of exposure (Goldberg and Pavcnik (2016)).
Our approach may also prove useful for evaluating firm sensitivity to other policy shocks, such as


                                                         38
changes in domestic labor laws, monetary policy surprises, or the introduction of new technologies.
Using a broader set of assets, it is also amenable to studies beyond firms, e.g., using municipal bond
prices to measure regional exposure to changes in policy. We are currently exploring applications
along these lines.




                                                 39
References
Acemoglu, D., D. Autor, D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and B. Price (2016). Import Competition and
  the Great U.S. Employment Sag of the 2000s. Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1), S141­S198.

Ahn, J., A. Khandelwal, and S. Wei (2011). The role of intermediaries in facilitating trade. Journal
  of International Economics 84 (1), 73­85.

Amiti, M., S. H. Kong, and D. Weinstein (2020, May). The effect of the u.s.-china trade war on
  u.s. investment. Working Paper 27114, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007). Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity:
  Evidence from Indonesia. American Economic Review 97 (5), 1611­1638.

Antr`
    as, P., T. C. Fort, and F. Tintelnot (2017). The margins of global sourcing: Theory and
  evidence from u.s. firms. American Economic Review 107 (9), 2514­64.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, G. Pisano, and P. Shu (2016, December). Foreign competition
  and domestic innovation: Evidence from u.s. patents. Working Paper 22879, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, G. Pisano, and P. Shu (2017). Foreign Competition and
  Domestic Innovation: Evidence from U.S. Patents. NBER Working Paper #22879 .

Autor, D., D. Dorn, G. H. Hanson, and J. Song (2014). Trade adjustment: Worker-level evidence.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, 199­1860.

Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson, and J. Van Reenen (2017, May). The fall of the
  labor share and the rise of superstar firms. Working Paper 23396, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013). The china syndrome: Local labor market effects
  of import competition in the united states. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2121­68.

Bai, X., K. Krishna, and H. Ma (2015, May). How you export matters: Export mode, learning and
  productivity in china. Working Paper 21164, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ball, R. and P. Brown (1968). An empirical evaluation of accounting income numbers. Journal of
  accounting research , 159­178.

Bernanke, B. S. and K. N. Kuttner (2005). What explains the stock market's reaction to federal
  reserve policy? The Journal of Finance 60 (3), 1221­1257.




                                                40
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. Redding, and P. Schott (2011). Multi-product firms and trade
  liberalization. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3), 1271­1318.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2018, June). Global firms. Journal
  of Economic Literature 56 (2), 565­619.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, and P. K. Schott (2006). Survival of the best fit: Exposure to low-
  wage countries and the (uneven) growth of u.s. manufacturing plants. Journal of International
  Economics 68, 219­237.

Besedes, T., T. Kohl, and J. Lake (2020). Phase out tariffs, phase in trade? Working Paper .

Bianconi, M., F. Esposito, and M. Sammon (2018). Trade policy uncertainty and stock market
  performance.

Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. V. Reenen (2016). Trade induced technical change: The impact
  of chinese imports on innovation, diffusion, and productivity. Review of Economic Studies 83,
  87­117.

Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. Van Reenen (2016). Trade Induced Technical Change? The Impact of
  Chinese Imports on Innovation, IT, and Productivity. Review of Economic Studies (83), 87­117.

Bombardini, M. and B. Li (2016, November). Trade, pollution and mortality in china. Working
  Paper 22804, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Brambilla, I., A. K. Khandelwal, and P. K. Schott (2010). China's experience under the multi-fiber
  arrangement (mfa) and the agreement on textiles and clothing (atc). In China's Growing Role
  in World Trade, pp. 345­387. University of Chicago Press.

Brandt, L., J. Van Biesebroeck, L. Wang, and Y. Zhang (2017, September). Wto accession and
  performance of chinese manufacturing firms. American Economic Review 107 (9), 2784­2820.

Brauchli, M. W. and H. Cooper (1999, May). Nato bombing of chinese embassy hurts china's talks
  to enter wto. Wall Street Journal .

Breinlich, H. (2014). Heterogenous Firm-Level Responses to Trade Liberalization: A Test Using
  Stock Price Reactions. Journal of International Economics 2014 (93), 270­285.

Bustos, P. (2011). Trade liberalization, exports and technology upgrading: Evidence on the impact
  of mercosur on argentinian firms. American Economic Review 101 (1), 304­340.

Caliendo, L., M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2015). Trade and labor market dynamics. NBER Working
  Paper 21149.

Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and A. C. MacKinlay (1997). The Econometrics of Financial Markets.
  Princeton University Press.

                                               41
Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2014). The role of entrepreneurship in u.s.
  job creation and economic dynamism. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, 3­24.

Ding, X., T. C. Fort, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2019). Structural change within versus
  across firms: Evidence from the united states. Technical report, Technical Report, Discussion
  Paper). Dartmouth College.

Dix-Carneiro, R. (2014). Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics. Econometrica 82 (3),
  825­885.

Fama, E. F., L. Fisher, M. C. Jensen, and R. Roll (1969). The Adjustment of Stock Prices to New
  Information. International Economic Review 10.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
  Journal of financial economics 33 (1), 3­56.

Feenstra, R. C., H. Ma, and Y. Xu (2017). US Exports and Employment. NBER Working Paper
  No. 24056 .

Feenstra, R. C., J. Romalis, and P. K. Schott (2002). Us imports, exports, and tariff data, 1989-
  2001. Working Paper 9387, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Feenstra, R. C. and A. Sasahara (2017). The "China Shock," Exports and U.S. Employment: A
  Global Input-Output Analysis. NBER Working Paper No. 24022 .

Fernandes, A. M. (2007). Trade Policy, Trade Volumes, and Plant-Level Productivity in Columbian
  Manufacturing Industries. Journal of International Economics 71 (1).

Fisman, R. and E. Zitzewitz (2019, December). An event long-short index: Theory and applications.
  American Economic Review: Insights 1 (3), 357­72.

Fort, T. C., J. R. Pierce, and P. K. Schott (2018). New perspectives on the decline of us manufac-
  turing employment. Journal of Economic Perspectives 32 (2), 47­72.

Goldberg, P. K., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010). Imported Intermediate
  Inputs and Domestic Productivity Growth: Evidence From India. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 125 (4), 1727­1767.

Goldberg, P. K. and N. Pavcnik (2016). The effects of trade policy. mineo.

Griffin, T. (2018). Globalization and U.S. Industry Concentration. Working Paper .

Grossman, G. M. and J. A. Levinsohn (1989). Import competition and the stock market return to
  capital. The American Economic Review 79 (5), 1065­1087.

Gutierrez, G. and T. Philippon (2017, July). Declining competition and investment in the u.s.
  Working Paper 23583, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                 42
Gutierrez, G. and T. Phillipon (2017). Declining Competition and Investment in the U.S.

Hakobyan, S. and J. McLaren (2016). Looking for Local Labor Market Effects of NAFTA. The
  Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (4), 728­741.

Handley, K. and N. Lim~
                      ao (2017). Policy Uncertainty, Trade, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence
  for China and the U.S. American Economic Review 107 (9), 2731­83.

Hu, F. (1999). WTO Membership: What This Means for Greater China. Goldman Sachs.

Huang, Y., C. Lin, S. Liu, and T. Heiwai (2018). Trade Linkages and Firm Value: Evidence from
  the 2018 U.S.-China "Trade War". working paper .

Keller, W. and W. W. Olney (2017, May). Globalization and executive compensation. Working
  Paper 23384, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Khandelwal, A. (2010). The long and short (of) quality ladders. Review of Economic Studies 77,
  1450­1476.

Khotari, S. and J. B. Warner (2006). Econometrics of Event Studies. Handbook of Corporate
  Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance A(1).

Kogan, L., D. Papanikolau, A. Seru, and N. Stoffman (2017). Technological Innovation, Resource
  Allocation, and Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (2).

Kurtz, S. and R. Morris (2000). The World (Trade Organization) is Not Enough. Goldman Sachs.

Langer, A. and D. Lemoine (2019). Preliminary and incomplete.

Lintner, J. (1965). The journal of finance. 20 (4), 587­615.

Lucca, D. O. and E. Moench (2015). The pre-fomc announcement drift. The Journal of Fi-
  nance 70 (1), 329­371.

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry
  productivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695­1725.

Melitz, M. J. and G. I. P. Ottaviano (2008). Market size, trade, and productivity. Review of
  Economic Studies 75 (1), 295­316.

Mobarak, A. M. and D. P. Purbasari (2006). Protection for Sale To Firms: Evidence from Indonesia.
  Yale mimeo .

Moser, C. and A. Rose (2014). Who Benefits from Regional Trade Agreements? The View from
  the Stock Market. European Economic Review 68, 31­47.

Pangestu, M. and D. Mrongowius (2002). Telecommunications in china: Facing the challenges of
  wto accession. Washington, DC: The World Bank, mimeo .

                                                43
Peters, R. H. and L. A. Taylor (2017). Intangible Capital and The Investment-q Relation. Journal
  of Financial Economics 123 (2), 251­272.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2012). A concordance between ten-digit u.s. harmonized system codes
  and sic/naics product classes and industries. Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 37,
  61­96.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2016). The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing
  Employment. American Economic Review 106 (7), 1632­1662.

Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2017). Investment responses to trade liberalization: Evidence from
  u.s. industries and establishments. NBER Working Papers #24017 .

Reuters (2000, J). Lott removes hurdle for vote on china trade bill. New York Times .

Schmitt, E. (2000, July). Bill on trade with china faces delay, lott predicts. New York Times .

Schmitt, E. and J. Kahn (2000, May). The china trade vote: A clinton triumph. New York Times .

Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under Conditions of
  Risk.

Tello-Trillo, C. (2015). The impact of trade on managerial incentives and productivity.

Thompson, A. J. (1993). The anticipated sectoral adjustment to the canada - united states free trade
  agreement: An event study analysis. The Canadian Journal of Economics / Revue canadienne
  d'Economique 26 (2), 253­271.

Topalova, P. (2010). Factor Immobility and Regional Impacts of Trade Liberalization: Evidence
  on Poverty from India. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (4), 1­41.

Topalova, P. and A. K. Khandelwal (2011). Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case
  of India. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93 (3), 995­1009.

Trefler, D. (2004). The long and short of the canada-us free trade agreement. American Economic
  Review 94 (4), 870­895.

Vuolteenaho, T. (2002). What drives firm-level stock returns?      The Journal of Finance 57 (1),
  233­264.

Wagner, A. F., R. J. Zeckhauser, and A. Ziegler (2018). Company Stock Price Reactions to the
  2016 Election: Trump, Taxes, and Trade. Journal of Financial Economics Forthcoming.

Wang, Z., S.-J. Wei, X. Yu, and K. Zhu (2018). Re-examining the Impact of the China Trade Shock
  on US Labor Market: A Value Chain Perspective. Working Paper .




                                                44
Whalley, J. (2003). Liberalization in china's key service sectors following wto accession: some
  scenarios and issues of measurement. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Wolfers, J. and E. Zitzewitz (2018). What Can We Learn From Financial Market Response to the
  2016 Election? The Standard Error of Event Studies: Lessons from the 2016 Election. AEA
  Papers and Proceedings 108, 584­589.




                                              45
Online Appendix (Not for Publication)
This Online Appendix contains additional empirical results as well as more detailed explanations
of data and methods used in the main text.


A     Basic Asset Pricing Framework
A stock is a claim to an infinite stream of uncertain future dividends {dt+s }s=1 . The marginal
investor prices this asset by maximizing his/her lifetime utility over the amount  of the asset
purchased today (time t):
                                                         
                                     max u(ct ) +             Et [ s u(ct+s )]                  (A.1)
                                       
                                                        s=1

subject to the usual budget and market clearing constraints:


                                                 ct = ft - pt                                   (A.2)

                                                       
                                            ct+s =           (ft+s + dt+s  )                    (A.3)
                                      s=1              s=1

    Here, u is the investor's increasing and concave utility function,  accounts for investor impa-
tience (intertemporal substitution), {ct+s }s=0 is the consumption stream after an amount  of the
stock is purchased and {ft+s }s=0 is their consumption without the purchase. The investor's first
order condition gives the price of the asset at time t (i.e. pt ):

                                                  
                                   pt u (ct ) =         Et [ s u (ct+s )dt+s ]                  (A.4)
                                                  s=1

                                             
                                                             u (ct+s )
                                     pt =         Et  s                dt+s                     (A.5)
                                                              u (ct )
                                            s=1

    The term multiplying dividends is often referred to as the stochastic discount factor, and is a
function of the investor's willingness to substitute consumption across time and across states of
nature:

                                                              u (ct+s )
                                            mt,t+s =  s                                         (A.6)
                                                               u (ct )
    This yields the familiar formula describing stock prices as the expected discounted value of their
future dividends:

                                                  
                                          pt =         Et [mt,t+s dt+s ]                        (A.7)
                                                 s=1




                                                         46
   Writing this formula for time t + 1 prices, substituting it back into equation 7 and using the
law of iterated expectations, we obtain the two-period pricing formula


                                           pt = Et [mt,t+1 (dt+1 + pt+1 )]                             (A.8)

   Dividing through by pt we obtain a pricing formula written in terms of returns (which are much
more widely used in empirical asset pricing due to their superior statistical properties):


                                                   1 = Et [mt,t+1 Rt+1 ]                               (A.9)

   Note that this formula applies to the returns of any tradeable financial asset, not just stock
                                                                                               f
returns. In particular, writing the same equation for a risk free asset with (certain) return Rt+s
        f
yields Rt+1 = 1/Et [mt,t+1 ] (in fact this holds for any time horizon t + s).
   Returning to equation 7 and expanding the expectation term on the right, we can re-write stock
prices in terms of several important primitives:

                                     
                            pt =          (Et [mt,t+s ]Et [dt+s ] + covt [mt,t+s , dt+s ])            (A.10)
                                    s=1

                                                                     
                                                Et [dt+s ]
                                  pt =                      +           covt [mt,t+s , dt+s ]         (A.11)
                                               Et [mt,t+s ]
                                         s=1                     s=1

                                                                
                                               Et [dt+s ]
                                  pt =            f
                                                            -         covt [-mt,t+s , dt+s ]          (A.12)
                                         s=1     Rt+s           s=1

   In the last equation we use the already established fact that, for any particular horizon, the
risk free rate equals the expectation of the stochastic discount factor with the same horizon. This
equation shows that stock prices equal the risk-neutral valuation of the firm (i.e. the first term on
the right, which discounts expected dividends using risk free rates), minus a penalty for risk (i.e.
the second term on the right). Firms with dividend streams that covary negatively with marginal
utility (and hence positively with consumption) will have lower prices because they result in a
more volatile consumption stream for the investor. We can extend this intuition a bit further by
rewriting the covariance terms in equation 12:

                                                   
                                  Et [dt+s ]
                     pt =            f
                                               -         corrt [-mt,t+s , dt+s ]t [mt,+s ]t [dt+s ]   (A.13)
                            s=1     Rt+s           s=1

   This equation shows that stock price changes can be caused by changes in any of the following
                                                                              f
variables: expectations about future dividends (Et [dt+s ]), interest rates (Rt+s ), volatility of future
dividends (t [dt+s ]), volatility of future marginal utility of consumption (t [mt,+s ]), and the correla-
tion of the firm's dividends with the investor's marginal utility of consumption (corrt [mt,t+s , dt+s ]).
Also note that the stock price pt is in fact relative to the price of a unit of the consumption good
(normalized to 1 above), so changes in the price level can also cause the nominal stock price to


                                                                47
move. In this study, we do not attempt to identify which of these variables contribute significantly
to the observed price reaction surrounding our events. We simply point out that a virtue of our
method is the fact that stock price reactions capture the various effects that the event may have
on the economy.


B     The End of the Global Multi-Fiber Arrangement
During the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, the United States, the EU and Canada agreed
to eliminate quotas on developing country textile and clothing exports in four phases starting in
1995 (Brambilla et al. (2010)). While the first three phases of quota expirations took place as of
January 1 of 1995, 1998 and 2002, imports from China remained under quota until its accession
to the WTO. Upon entering the WTO on December 31, 2001, quotas were eliminated on U.S.
imports from China of products covered by the first three phases. Quotas on Phase IV products
were eliminated on schedule on January 1, 2005. As discussed in Brambilla et al. (2010), the
distribution of textile and clothing goods across phases was not random: the United States, like
other countries, reserved their more import-sensitive product categories for the final phase.
    As noted in the main text, we follow Pierce and Schott (2016) in controlling for expiration of
MFA quotas on US imports from China using a time-varying measure that reflects the import-
weighted fill rates of the quotas, where fill rates are defined as actual divided by allowable imports.
These measures capture both the timing of the different phase of quota expirations as well as how
restrictive the quotas had been prior to removal.
    We construct these measures using ten-digit HS-level (HS10) data from Ahn et al. (2011) that
identify the products covered by the MFA, their phase of quota expiration and their tariff fill rate
by year. These HS10 data are then aggregated to industries using the concordance in Pierce and
Schott (2016). For each industry, the measure is set to the import-weighted fill rate of the matching
HS10 products in the year prior to tariff removal. For China, these measures are set to zero (i.e.,
no exposure to MFA quota reductions) prior to 2002. For Phase I, II and III products, beginning
in 2002, the measures are set to the import-weighted fill rates observed in 2001. For Phase IV
products, beginning in 2005, the measures are set to the import-weighted fill rates observed in
2004. A higher value indicates greater exposure to MFA quota reductions.
    We then use the firm's sales at the segments level from 1990 to 1997 to calculate the average
share of sales coming from any segment in the pre-MFA period. These shares were then used as
the weights to calculate the time varying exposure discussed above.


         PNTR      Belgrade
C     AARj    , AARj        and the NTR Gap
We investigate the relationship between firms' average abnormal returns during each legislative
event e and the sales-weighted average NTR gap of their major segments (N T R Gapj ) using an




                                                  48
OLS specification of the form
                                             e
                                          AARj = N T R Gapj +            ji .                                  (A.14)

Results are reported in Table A.1. We find negative and statistically significant relationships
between N T R Gapj and average abnormal returns for three of the five legislative events, with the
exceptions being the introduction of the bill in the House of Representatives and the Senate vote.
The sign for these two events is also negative, though the magnitudes are small. Column 6 reveals
                                                  P N T R , the average abnormal return across all five
that this negative relationship also holds for AARj
events. The coefficient estimate in that column implies that the relationship is also economically
significant, with a one standard deviation increase in N T R Gapj associated with a 0.200 standard
                        P N T R . This drop is equivalent to a 5 percent decline in market value, or
deviation decline in AARj
about 167 million dollars.52
                                       Belgrade
    We investigate the link between AARi        and the NTR gap via the OLS regression,

                                      Belgrade
                                   AARj        = N T R Gapj + Xj  + i ,                                        (A.15)

where Xj represents firm attributes in 2000 and, as in the main text, all variables have been
de-meaned and divided by their standard deviations. Results, reported in Table A.2, indicate
                                                                          Belgrade
that firms' own-industry NTR gaps exhibit a positive relationship with AARj        , while their
upstream gaps exhibit a negative relationship, both in a simple bi-variate regression and when
the additional controls are included. The relationships for the own NTR gap is consistent with
the idea that firms that receive greater protection from pre-PNTR US trade policy towards China
might benefit in terms of relative market value from a breakdown in US-China relations due to
the bombing, e.g., if protests in China prompt the US Congress to reject China's temporary NTR
status. Likewise, the result for the upstream gap suggests that firms that rely on suppliers that
might receive greater protection are associated with declines in relative market value. The negative
                        Belgrade
relationship between AARj        and the market capitalization in Column 3 suggests that larger
firms' market value declined relatively more following the bombing. This is also consistent with
                                                                       P N T R.
tables in the main text which find that larger firms exhibit higher AARj


D      PNTR and the 2016 Presidential Election
During his campaign for President, Donald Trump emphasized his intent to overturn what he
perceived to be "bad deals" in international trade, particularly those with respect to China and
the North American Free Trade Agreement.53 As a consequence, his surprise victory offers another
  52                                                                       P NT R
     Multiplying the coefficient of -0.200 by the standard deviation of AARj       (1.03 percent) yields a reduction in
market value of about 5.15 percent over 25 days. The average market value of a firm in 2000 in our sample is 3.25
billion dollars.
  53
     For example, in a 2016 campaign rally in Staten Island, NY, Trump stated, "China's upset because of the way
Donald Trump is talking about trade with China. They're ripping us off, folks, it's time. I'm so happy they're upset."
Similarly, when discussing NAFTA, Trump stated, "NAFTA is the worst trade deal maybe ever signed anywhere,
but certainly ever signed in this country Wagner et al. (2018)," shows that firms' abnormal returns in the days



                                                          49
                                                   P N T R . Here, however, we conduct the analysis
opportunity to examine the external validity of AARj
at the industry level given the degree of firm attrition and industry-switching that occurs between
                                                                        P N T R across firms'
2000 and 2016. We compare the market capitalization weighted average AARj
                     P N T R , to similarly constructed returns in the seven days54 following the
major industries, AARi
             T rump
election, AARi      , using an OLS specification of the form

                                           T rump      P NT R
                                        AARi      = AARi      + i.                                            (A.16)

As above, i indexes 6-digit NAICS industries, all variables are de-meaned and divided by their
standard deviations, and standard errors are clustered at the four-digit NAICS level.55
    Results, reported in Table A.3, are consistent with the idea that industries whose expected
profits might rise with PNTR are those whose profits might fall with Trump's election. That is,
                                                                         P N T R and AART rump ,
we find a negative and statistically significant relationship between AARi              i
where the coefficient estimate in the first column implies that a one standard deviation increase
      P N T R is associated with a 0.128 standard deviation decrease in AART rump . Results in the
in AARi                                                                    i
second column reveal that this relationship is also statistically and economically significant among
goods producing firms. The relationship, while negative, is insignificant among service firms.


E     Interpreting DID Point Estimates
Following Vuolteenaho (2002) and omitting firm subscripts, we can write abnormal returns as:


                                                                                    
        rt - Et-1 [rt ] = (Et - Et-1 )[         s (gt+s - ft+s )] - (Et - Et-1 )[         s rt+s ] + kt       (A.17)
                                          s=0                                       s=0

                          f                   f
where rt = log (1 + Rt + Rt ), ft = log (1 + Rt ), gt = log (1 + ROEt ), and ROEt is net income divided
by lagged book value of equity in year t. In this expression, kt is an approximation error and  is an
approximating constant close to, but smaller than 1.56 Equation (A.17) is an accounting identity
that requires only the standard assumption that the change in firms' book value of equity equals
their net income minus dividend payments. It reveals that abnormal returns relate linearly to news
about both cash flows (the first term on the right hand side) and discount rates (the second term
on the right hand side).
surrounding Donald Trump's election are negatively correlated with their exposure to international markets, and
that more internationally exposed sectors exhibit declines relative to more domestically oriented sectors.
   54
      We choose this window to reflect the unexpected nature of his election and uncertainty over how he might
react in the first few days after election. At the beginning of the Trump campaign in 2015, betting markets were
offering 25:1 odds against his success. These odds never became shorter than 5:1, even on the day before the election
(7http://fortune.com/2016/11/09/donald-trump-president-gamble/).
   55
      These attributes are for 2000 and are drawn from COMPUSTAT. They represent market capitalization weighted
averages of each attribute across firms within each six-digit NAICS industry. As before, all accounting ratios derived
from COMPUSTAT are winsorized at the 1 percent level.
   56
      E.g., Voulteenaho (2002) finds and optimal value of  = 0.967



                                                         50
       More broadly, it illustrates that the estimated magnitude of our difference-in-differences coef-
ficients,  (see equation (12)), is a function of three forces. First, it will depend on the extent to
which our shock is predominantly a cash flow shock or a discount rate shock. Specifically, because
our dependent variable is operating profit, shocks with a more predominant cash flow component
(i.e. the first term on the right hand side of equation (A.17) is significantly larger than the second,
discount rate, term) will have a higher  . Second, the  coefficient, will depend on the persistence of
the PNTR shock. If the change in policy were subsequently reversed, for example, one would expect
 to be zero.57 Finally, ^ depends on the timing of PNTR's impact on firms' cash flows. Because
our regressions use data on operating profits only up to five years in the future, the  coefficient will
be higher the more front-loaded the effects of the shock considered. While we leave disentangling
the relative contributions of these forces to future research, we emphasize that ^ does not represent
a simple mechanical relationship between current expectations and future realizations.


F       Distributional Effect Counterfactuals
                                                                                P N T R contribute
As noted in Section 4.3 of the main text, large firms' size as well as their AARj
to their predicted relative growth vis a vis small firms in Figure 5. Two simple counterfactual
predictions, plotted in Appendix Figure A.6, provide insight into the relative importance of these
two margins. The first, represented by the blue, long-dashed line, plots the cumulative predicted
relative change in operating profit across all firms using firms' actual operating profit in 2000, but
                           P N T R across all firms for their actual AARP N T R . The second, traced
substituting the median AARj                                            j
                                                         P N T R in combination with the median
out by the red, short-dashed line, uses firms' actual AARj
operating profit across all firms. The relative height of the latter (red) compared to the former
                                                P N T R generally are positive, it is their size rather
(blue) reveals that while the largest firms' AARj
than the magnitude of their AARs that is most influential in determining the magnitude of their
relative gains.


G        Using Call Options to Estimate Ex Ante Event Probabilities
This section describes the technique for estimating ex ante event probabilities referred to in Section
5.2 of the main text. We follow Langer and Lemoine (2019) who show that the ex ante probability
of an event, Y , can be estimated using deep-out-of-the-money call options. The intuition is
              -1
straightforward: if investors' beliefs about the impact of the change in policy do not change during
the event window, increases in the prices of deep-out-of-the-money call options for firms standing
  57
     One might be tempted to believe that a more persistent shock would simply result in higher abnormal returns
in absolute value rather than a larger  . This outcome is true only if investors know the persistence parameter
for the shock process. If, instead, investors learn about the persistence of shocks in a Bayesian process, changes in
expectations after each shock, and hence abnormal returns, will depend on both the persistent component and the
transitory component of the shock (adjusted for the perceived signal to noise ratio). By contrast, realized profitability
will depend only on the persistent component of the shock, as the transitory component, by definition, averages out
to zero. Hence, for shocks that are more transitory in nature, the coefficient in equation (12) will be smaller than for
shocks of a more persistent nature.


                                                           51
to benefit from PNTR correspond to increases in investors' assessment of the probability of its
final passage. As explained in greater detail below, the calculation of an ex-ante event probability
requires knowledge of the ex-post event probability. This ex-post probability is known for the last
event, the Clinton signing: it is 1. For the rest of the events, we assume the ex post event probability
is equal to the ex ante probability of the subsequent event.
     Let Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K ) be the price at time  - 1 of a call option on stock j with strike price
K and expiration T >  . This price can be written

                                 Y              Y                  Y               N
        Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K ) =  -1 Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K ) + (1 -  -1 )Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K )    (A.18)

where Y , PY            N
       -1  j, -1 , and Pj, -1 are defined in Section 5.2.
     Y
      -1 can be estimated for firms meeting two criteria: (i) the effect of the policy on the their
stock price is large and positive; and (ii) at  - 1, there exist call options written on these firms that
are deep out of the money (i.e. the call option strike price is significantly higher than the current
stock price). These options derive most of their value from the states of the world in which the
                                    N
policy is approved (i.e. Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K )  0), and equation (A.18) is reasonably approximated
by

                                                    Y              Y
                            Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K )   -1 Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K ),                   (A.19)

which implies
                                       Y       Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K )
                                        -1                Y
                                                                      .                           (A.20)
                                               Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K )
                          Y
     Note that Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K ) is not observed but can be approximated by the realized call
option price after the event (Cj,,T (P , K )), under the standard event-study assumption that we
can control for all changes in non-event state variables (from X -1 to X ). Hence, we can obtain
an approximation for the call-option price ratio on the right hand side of equation (A.20) as

                      Y        Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K )    Cj, -1,T (Pj, -1 , K )
                       -1                             -E                        |X                (A.21)
                                 Cj,,T (Pj, , K )          Cj,,T (Pj, , K )
where the expectation term on the right hand side of the equation measures the expected effect on
the call-price ratio caused by non-event state variables (X ).
     We aim to estimate not only the probability of PNTR right before the Clinton signing, but also
before each of the other four events we consider in our empirical analysis. To this end, note that
the arguments above can easily be generalized to show that the ratio of deep out of the money
call option prices around each of our events provides an estimate for the ratio of perceived PNTR
probabilities around those events. Hence, for each of our five events i = 1, ..., 5, we estimate:

                                           Y
                                            i -2
                                                      Cj,i -2,T (Pi -2 , K )
                                   CRi =   Y
                                                                                                  (A.22)
                                            i +2
                                                      Cj,i +2,T (Pi +2 , K )



                                                      52
   Note that we use five-day windows around each of our events to remain consistent with the
baseline results in our analysis. While, technically, only one call option is required to obtain the
above estimate for each event, this relies on the assumption that we have correctly identified a firm
which stands to substantially benefit from PNTR, and a call option on that firm which is so deep
out of the money that it is worth virtually 0 if PNTR does not pass. Since we have no clear way
to make sure we can satisfy this assumption, we use several firms in our tests, and we estimate the
CRi terms by using a panel regression for each event i:

                            Cj,t-2,T (Pt-2 , K )
                      log                          = j + i Ii -2,i +2 + Xj,t +   j,t            (A.23)
                            Cj,t+2,T (Pt+2 , K )
   Here, j indexes firms, t indexes time (in days), and j is a firm fixed effect. For each event, the
above regression uses dates from 100 days before event i to seven days before the expiration (T ) of
the call option C (excluding the dates that occur during the event windows of any of the other four
events). We attempt to identify firms that stand to benefit from PNTR by restricting the sample to
firms that have positive abnormal returns for all five events. The term Ii -2,i +2 is a dummy variable
that equals one in the five-day event window around event i. Xj,t is a vector of six dummy variables,
one for each of the confounding events used in our analysis above (announcements of dividends,
earnings, repurchases, SEO's, acquisitions, and being acquired). We include these dummy variables
to control for any other changes that may have had a confounding effect on call prices.
   Data on call option prices comes from OptionMetrics. For each event i, for each firm, we keep
only the call options that, for all days of the event window, are out of the money, have positive bid
price, and positive volume. Of the remaining options, we select the ones with the closest expiration
date to the event, but not closer than 7 days to it. Of the remaining set of options, we pick the
one with the highest strike price (i.e. the most out of the money one), and this is the option Cj we
use in equation (A.23). We use the i coefficient from this regression to obtain an estimate of CRi
in equation (A.22):

                                                    Y
                                                     i -2
                                           CRi =    Y
                                                             ei
                                                     i +2

   Since, by definition, the probability of PNTR after the Clinton signing (i = 5) is 1, the above
equation implies the probability prior to the signing is Y     = e5 . As mentioned above, we assume
                                                          5 -2

the ex post probability for each event is equal to the ex ante probability of the subsequent event.
This implies that Y     = Y       for all i = 1, ..., 4. Using this result, we can recursively back out
                   i +2    i+1 -2

the remaining four probabilities as Y     = e5 +4 and so on until Y     = e5 +4 +...+1 . To allow
                                     4 -2                          1 -2

for cross-correlation between the five equations in (A.23), we estimate them jointly as a system of
equations to obtain our i estimates and then use them to calculate the ex-ante event probabilities
Y
      as explained above.
 i -2

   The results are reported in Table A.8. The coefficient reported in each column represents the
estimated ex ante probability of PNTR's ultimate passage, i.e., the probability at the start of the
noted five-day window. The first interesting message in Table A.8 is that there is an increase in

                                                    53
the probability of PNTR's ultimate passage after each event of around 10 to 30 percent, with the
largest occurring with the conclusion of the legislative process, the vote in the Senate.58 The second
interesting message in Table A.8 is that passage of PNTR seems to have been anticipated prior
to the first event, with probability 0.118. While this estimate is only statistically different from 0
at the 10 percent level, it nevertheless suggests a modest amount of partial anticipation bias, and
that there may have been one or more earlier events that were influential in changing investors'
expectations regarding PNTR. While we are unaware of any such events whose stature is equivalent
to those we study, we speculate that investors may have reacted to various comments about the
bill made by influential legislators or the President leading up to the start of the formal legislative
process.


H      Additional Robustness Exercises
In this section we examine the robustness of the results presented in our study in several ways.
First, we explore the robustness of our primary findings to alternative weighting strategies and a
more restrictive set of fixed effects. Second, we address issues specific to financial market analysis,
including alternative asset pricing models, potentially confounding events, and event window size.
Finally, we re-estimate our results using a bootstrap to account for sampling error associated with
estimation of firms' ^j s.


H.1     Sector-Year Fixed Effects and Weighting
In this section we consider two extensions of our baseline DID specifications. First, we re-estimate
equation (12) for each outcome, weighting each regression by the 1990 level of the dependent
variable. Results are displayed in the upper three panels of Figure A.7 for all, goods-producing and
service firms, respectively. To conserve space, we report only the DID coefficients of interest and
their 95 percent confidence intervals. As indicated in the figure, the sign pattern and statistical
significance are similar to the baseline estimates reported in Tables 6 and 7, though we now find
                                  P N T R and both forms of capital are statistically significant
that the relationships between AARj
                                                        P N T R and both COGS and intangible
among service firms, while the relationships between AARj
capital are less precisely estimated among goods producers.
    Second, while our baseline specification employs firm and year fixed effects, one may be con-
cerned that these estimates do not sufficiently control for broad trends such as the collapse of the
tech bubble in 2000. To account for such sector-year-specific outcomes, we include 2-digit NAICS
by year fixed effects. Results are displayed in the bottom three panels of Figure A.7. As indicated
in the figure, coefficient estimates are generally smaller in magnitude, but remain statistically
significant, save for intangible capital among service firms.
  58
     The high likelihood of PNTR passing immediately prior to the Clinton signing is not surprising given the Presi-
dent's public support for the bill throughout the process.




                                                        54
H.2       Financial Market Concerns
In this section we re-estimate our baseline specifications employing alternative event windows, using
a different asset pricing model, omitting firms with potentially confounding announcements during
the relevant event windows, and using buy-and-hold (rather than average) abnormal return.
       Reduced Event Windows: Thus far we have assumed that PNTR-based information enters equity
markets in the five-day trading day window surrounding each legislative event. To the extent that
markets responded within a narrower window, our baseline regressions are mis-specified. Here, we
re-estimate our baseline findings using a [-1, 1] window around each event. As in the main text,
we report only the DID coefficients of interest and their 95 percent confidence intervals to conserve
space. The top panel of Figure A.8 reveals that the sign and statistical significance patterns of the
coefficient estimates are broadly similar to those in our baseline specification.
       The shortened event window also yields similar results with respect to PNTR's distributional
implications. This outcome can be seen in Figure A.10, which also contains results for two additional
exercises: (1) restricting the event window to the day of the event; and (2) imposing the same
restriction but using raw returns rather than abnormal returns to generate cumulative predicted
relative operating profit. As indicated in the figure, all three exercises yield similar distributional
implications, though the predicted relative losses of small firms are more muted when using raw
returns.
       Alternate Asset Pricing Model:         The asset pricing literature proposes a number of asset pric-
ing models beyond the CAPM which question the prediction that the market portfolio captures
all sources of systematic risk. Here, we examine the robustness of our results to using a popular
alternative to the CAPM: the 3-factor model proposed by Fama and French (1993). This model
augments CAPM with two additional risk factors: Small Minus Big (SMB), which measures the
return difference between small firms and large firms, and High Minus Low (HML) which mea-
sures the return difference between firms with high versus low book-to-market value of equity.59
Exposures to these two new factors, as well as to the market portfolio can be estimated using the
following statistical model:

                                                      SM B         HM L
            (Rj,t - Rf t ) = j + j (Rmkt,t - Rf t ) + j    SM Bt + j    HM Lt +                     j,t .         (A.24)

       As before, the returns on these portfolios are taken from Kenneth French's website.60 We
estimate this model separately for each firm using the full set of trading days in 1999 and calculate
                                                    P NT R
abnormal returns as before, defining AARj                    as the average abnormal return based on equation
  59
      The motivation behind these factors is the empirical observation that, even when accounting for their exposure to
the market, small firms have significantly higher average returns than large firms and high book-to-market firms have
significantly higher average returns than low book-to-market firms. This suggests that these two return differentials
must constitute compensation for exposure to systematic risk factors that are not captured by firms' exposure to the
market.
   60
      To the extent that firm size is related to firms' ability to benefit from globalization, as is assumed in many models
of international trade (e.g., Melitz (2003)), using the Fama and French (1993) model would strip abnormal returns
of their exposure to this policy as captured by the SMB factor.



                                                             55
(A.24).61 As illustrated in the second panel of Figure A.8, results are similar to those in our baseline
specifications.
                                                                  P N T R may include changes
       Potentially Confounding Announcements: Our estimates of AARj
in stock prices driven by unrelated occurrences that coincidentally take place during our event
windows. The corporate finance literature has focused on five types of such events: earnings
announcements, dividend announcements, mergers and acquisitions (M&A), stock repurchases,
and seasoned equity offerings (SEOs).
       To examine the sensitivity of our results to the potential impact of such announcements, we
identify all occurrences of each of the above events for all firms in our sample. Earnings an-
nouncement dates are obtained from the COMPUSTAT quarterly dataset, while M&A, SEO and
repurchase announcements are obtained from the Securities Data Corporation (SDC) Platinum
                             P N T R , omitting any PNTR legislative event for which a firm has
database. We re-calculate AARj
any of the aforementioned announcements within 10 trading-days of that event. For example, for
a firm with an earnings announcement 9 trading-days before or after the House vote, we would
             P N T R as the average abnormal return among the remaining legislative dates. As
calculate AARj
discussed previously, using AAR versus cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) allows us to make
this adjustment without altering our sample size substantially.
                                               P N T R are reported in the final panel of Figure A.8.
       Results based on these re-calculated AARj
                                                                         P N T R and subsequent
As indicated in the figure, the estimates of the relationship between AARj
firm outcomes are robust to the exclusion of these event dates.         62

       Buy-and-hold abnormal returns:      Finally, we examine if our main baseline results are robust
to using buy-and-hold returns (BHARs) rather than average returns (AARs) as an alternative
method of aggregating pricing information over multi-day event windows. BHARs are calculated
by compounding daily abnormal returns across all days in our five event windows for which we have
                                                                                          P NT R
non-missing abnormal returns. We find that the results reported in the main text using AARj
                                    P N T R . To preserve space, we focus on our main distributional
are very similar to those using BHARj
result with respect to cumulative predicted relative operating profit. Figure A.11 shows that the
relative predicted growth of large firms when using BHARs ("Average Buy-and-Hold") is similar
to the one using AARs ("Baseline"), albeit slightly more muted.

H.3       Generated Regressors
Thus far we have ignored the sampling error associated with a key input to the calculation of
AARjP N T R , the firms' ^j s. Failing to account for this error can give rise to a classic generated-
regressor problem where standard errors are biased downwards by an amount which is an increasing
function of the sampling error in ^j . In this section, we address this issue using a bootstrap. To
allow standard errors to be clustered by 4-digit NAICS industry, we employ a clustered bootstrap
                                       P NT R
  61                                                     P NT R
    The simple correlation between AARj         and AARj        is over 0.96.
  62
    In unreported results, we also re-estimate column 1 of Table 2 in where we find that each of these alternate
                   P NT R
calculations of AARj      are similarly correlated with N T RGapj .



                                                      56
as follows. First, we construct 1000 sets of ^j by drawing the requisite number of trading days,
with replacement, in the pre-period for each firm. Second, we sample the requisite number of
4-digit NAICS industries, with replacement, from the full set of industries in our data. Third, we
re-estimate equation (12) using this draw. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated 1000 times, each time using
a different set of ^j s (from step 1) to construct the AARP N T R to account for the sampling error.
                                                          j
   Appendix Tables A.9 and A.10 report a re-estimation of the results in Tables 6 and 7 using
this procedure. For each covariate, the first line reports the baseline coefficient, the second line
reports the bootstrap standard error, and the third line reports the average bootstrap coefficient,
                P N T R for the DID term of interest. Comparison of the bootstrap estimates to the
e.g., P ost  AARj
baseline indicate that the bootstrap standard errors are very similar, suggesting that the sampling
errors in firms' ^j are likely quite small. The average bootstrap coefficients also are very close to
the baseline coefficients, suggesting that the sampling errors in firms' ^j do not induce significant
attenuation bias in our results, though it is important to note that bootstrap bias estimates can
have a very large variance.




                                                 57
          Figure A.1: Count of Articles Mentioning "Permanent Normal Trade Relations"




Source: Noted media outlets and authors' calculations. Figure reports the number of unique articles which mention PNTR
during calendar year 2000 from the following sources: the Associated Press, BBC Monitoring International Reports, the
Boston Globe, the Chicago Tribune, CNN Transcripts, the Financial Times, the Los Angeles Times, the New York Times, the
Washington Post, PR Newswire and the the Wall Street Journal. Segments in bold indicate the five legislative event windows
considered in our analysis: the introduction of the bill in the House, the House vote, the Senate vote to bring the bill to the
floor, the Senate vote and Clinton's signing, in that order.




                                                              58
                            Figure A.2: Market Return During PNTR Windows




Source: CRSP and authors' calculations. Figure reports the daily market return during 2000. Segments in bold indicate the
five legislative event windows considered in our analysis: the introduction of the bill in the House, the House vote, the Senate
vote to bring the bill to the floor, the Senate vote and Clinton's signing, in that order.




                                                              59
                            Figure A.3: Market Volume During PNTR Windows




Source: CRSP and authors' calculations. Figure reports the daily market volume during 2000. Segments in bold indicate the
five legislative event windows considered in our analysis: the introduction of the bill in the House, the House vote, the Senate
vote to bring the bill to the floor, the Senate vote and Clinton's signing, in that order.




                                                              60
                      Figure A.4: Distribution of the NTR Gap




Source: Feenstra et al. (2002) and Pierce and Schott (2016). Figure displays the distribution of
N T R GapOwn
          i    across goods-producing 6-digit manufacturing industries populated by firms in our
sample. Goods-producing sectors are defined as: Manufacturing (NAICS 31-33), Mining (NAICS
21), and Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting (NAICS 11).




                                              61
       Figure A.5: Distribution of Ln( OperatingP
                                           Assets
                                                  rof it
                                                         ) by Firm Type in 2000




Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Figure displays the distribution of firm-
level Ln( OperatingP
              Assets
                     rof it
                            ) among all goods and service producing firms in our sample in the year
2000. Goods firms have a business segment active in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service firms
have no business segments in these sectors.




                                                62
            Figure A.6: Counterfactual Cumulative Relative Change in Operating Profit




                          Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and authors' calculations. Figure displays
                         the predicted cumulative relative change in firms' operating profit implied
                         by the baseline difference-in-differences estimates in Table 6 along with two
                         coarse counterfactuals. The first plots the cumulative predicted relative
                         change in operating profit using firms' actual operating profit in 2000, but
                         substituting the median across all firms for their actual AARj      P N T R . The

                         second uses firms' actual AARj   P N T R in combination with the median oper-
                         ating profit across all firms in place of their actual initial operating profit in
                         2000. Firms' market capitalization is from 2000, prior to PNTR.


                               P N T R and Firm Outcomes: Robustness Specifications
                Figure A.7: AARj




 Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Figure displays a series of 95 percent confidence intervals for the
difference-in-difference term of interest from equation (12). Each interval is from a separate regress. Top panel weights
observations by firms' initial value of the dependent variable. Bottom panel includes 2-digit NAICS by year fixed effects
reflecting firms' primary activity. All covariates are standardized by subtracting their means and dividing by their standard
deviations. Sample period is 1990 to 2006. Sample includes up to 4517 firms, depending on year. Regression include initial firm
accounting attributes, winsorized at the 1 percent level, interacted with P ost. Standard errors used to construct confidence
intervals are clustered at the 4-digit NAICS level.



                                                                63
                          P N T R and Firm Outcomes: Finance Robustness Specification
           Figure A.8: AARj




  Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Figure displays a series of 95 percent confidence intervals for the
difference-in-difference term of interest from equation (12). Each interval is from a separate regress. Top panel uses narrower
event windows, middle panel uses Fama-French 3-Factor asset pricing model in place of CAPM, and bottom panel eliminates
firms with confounding events during windows. All covariates are standardized by subtracting their means and dividing by their
standard deviations. Sample period is 1990 to 2006. Sample includes up to 4517 firms, depending on year. Regression include
initial firm accounting attributes, winsorized at the 1 percent level, interacted with P ost. Standard errors used to construct
confidence intervals are clustered at the 4-digit NAICS level.




                                                              64
     Figure A.9: Cumulative Relative Changes Using Different Aggregate Assumptions




Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and authors' calculations. Figure displays the predicted cumulative relative change in
firm operating profit implied by the difference-in-differences estimates performed by adding j  F   e to AARP N T R where
                                                                                                            j
F  e is the effect of PNTR on returns over the 25 days in our and takes on values ranging from -1.5% to 1.5%. The value

0.0% corresponds to our baseline assumption of no aggregate impact of the policy on the market. Y-axis reports the
cumulative predicted relative change as a share of the initial level across firms in 2000, prior to PNTR. Firms' market
capitalization is from 2000, prior to PNTR.




                                                           65
              Figure A.10: Cumulative Relative Changes using Alternate Windows




Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and authors' calculations. Figure displays the predicted cumulative relative change in
firm operating profit implied by the baseline difference-in-differences estimates performed separately for three alternate
measures of abnormal returns: (1) the baseline (-2,2) window; (2) a (-1,1) window; (3) a window consisting just of the
day of the event and (4) the realized returns using only the day of each event. Y-axis reports the cumulative predicted
relative change as a share of the initial level across firms in 2000, prior to PNTR. Firms' market capitalization is from
2000, prior to PNTR.




                                                           66
                                                                         P NT R
            Figure A.11: Cumulative Relative Changes using Alternate BHARj




Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and authors' calculations. Figure displays the predicted cumulative relative change in firm
                                                                                                                P N T R : (1)
operating profit implied by the baseline difference-in-differences estimates using alternate calculations of AARj
the baseline; (2) a version that omits events for firms if they encompass a dividend announcement, merger announcement,
SEO, or repurchase announcement within 7 days of the event; (3) a version based on Fama and French (1993) 3-factor
asset pricing model; and (4) a buy-and-hold return version. Y-axis reports the cumulative predicted relative change as a
share of the initial level across firms in 2000, prior to PNTR. Firms' market capitalization is from 2000, prior to PNTR.




                                                            67
                                             P N T R versus the NTR Gap
                               Table A.1: AARj

                      (1)                (2)                (3)                 (4)               (5)            (6)
                AARj HouseIntro    AARj HouseV ote   AARj SenateCloture   AARj SenateV ote   AARj Clinton   AARj P N T R
 NTR Gapj           -0.017           -0.133             -0.125                -0.020          -0.192         -0.200
                   (0.039)            (0.048)             (0.030)            (0.024)           (0.048)        (0.053)

 Constant           0.113               -0.080              -0.055             -0.010           -0.005         -0.021
                     (0.035)           (0.063)             (0.045)            (0.024)          (0.043)        (0.058)
 Observations         2315               2315                2315               2315             2315           2315
 R2                   0.000             0.018               0.017               0.000            0.036          0.044
 Source: CRSP and authors' calculations. This table presents firm-level OLS regressions of average abnormal returns
during five PNTR legislative milestones on N T RGapj . The regression sample is restricted to firms in goods-producing
industries,i.e., NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. All variables are de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation.
Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *, ** and
*** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                         68
                     Belgrade
       Table A.2: AARj        versus the NTR Gap

                            (1)               (2)            (3)
                        AARj Belgrade    AARj Belgrade   AARj Belgrade
NTR Gapj                  0.076            0.105           0.073
                          (0.031)           (0.033)        (0.032)

NTR Gapj U p3                              -0.080           -0.080
                                            (0.029)          (0.028)

NTR Gapj Down3                              -0.073          -0.063
                                             (0.033)         (0.031)

Ln(PPE per Worker)j                                           -0.019
                                                             (0.035)

Ln(Mkt Cap)j                                                -0.123
                                                             (0.035)

CashF lows
  Assets   j                                                  0.013
                                                             (0.027)

Book Leveragej                                                -0.030
                                                             (0.025)

Tobins Qj                                                   0.149
                                                             (0.048)

Constant                    0.002            0.054           0.078
                           (0.043)          (0.044)          (0.037)
Observations                2222             2222             2222
R2                          0.005            0.014            0.028
 Source: CRSP and authors' calculations. This table presents firm-
                               Belgrade
level OLS regressions of AARj           on the N T R Gapj and a a series
of 1990 firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent
level. Sample period is 1990 to 2006. All covariates are de-meaned
and divided by their standard deviation. Goods firms have a business
segment active in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service firms have no
business segments in these sectors. Standard errors are reported below
coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *,
** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent
levels, respectively.




                                  69
                  P N T R versus AART rump
    Table A.3: AARi                 i

                      (1)              (2)           (3)
                 AARi T rump      AARi T rump   AARi T rump
 AARi P N T R     -0.165           -0.350          -0.063
                   (0.060)          (0.100)       (0.046)

 Constant           0.014            0.022        0.022
                   (0.059)          (0.085)      (0.077)
 Observations        379              204          175
 R2                 0.026            0.069        0.006
 Firm Type           All            Goods        Services
  Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations.
Table presents 6-digit-NAICS-level OLS estimates from re-
gressing average abnormal returns surrounding the 2016
                             T rump
Presidential election (AARi         ) on average abnormal re-
turns during key legislative events associated with PNTR
       P NT R
(AARi         ). All covariates are de-meaned and divided
by their standard deviation. Goods firms have a business
segment active in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service
firms have no business segments in these sectors. Standard
errors are clustered at the NAICS 4-digit level and are re-
ported below coefficient estimates. *, ** and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels,
respectively.




                             70
                                                               Table A.4: CRSP De-Listing Codes

     Code   Description                                                                                                                  Category                 N
     450    Issue liquidated, final distribution verified, issue closed to further research.                                             Contraction/Bankruptcy   2
     470    Issue liquidated, no final distribution is verified, issue pending further research.                                         Contraction/Bankruptcy   2
     550    Delisted by current exchange - insufficient number of market makers.                                                         Contraction/Bankruptcy   3
     551    Delisted by current exchange - insufficient number of shareholders.                                                          Contraction/Bankruptcy   8
     560    Delisted by current exchange - insufficient capital, surplus, and/or equity.                                                 Contraction/Bankruptcy   61
     580    Delisted by current exchange - delinquent in filing, non-payment of fees.                                                    Contraction/Bankruptcy   61
     561    Delisted by current exchange - insufficient (or non-compliance with rules of) float or assets.                               Contraction/Bankruptcy   67
     574    Delisted by current exchange - bankruptcy, declared insolvent.                                                               Contraction/Bankruptcy   105
     584    Delisted by current exchange - does not meet exchange's financial guidelines for continued listing.                          Contraction/Bankruptcy   199
     552    Delisted by current exchange - price fell below acceptable level.                                                            Contraction/Bankruptcy   235
     232    When merged, shareholders primarily receive common stock or ADRs.                                                            Merger                   1
     252    When merged, shareholders primarily receive common stock or ADRs, preferred stock, warrants, rights, debentures, or notes.   Merger                   1
     251    When merged, shareholders primarily receive common stock or ADRs and cash.                                                   Merger                   1




71
     261    When merged, shareholders primarily receive cash and preferred stock, or warrants, or rights, or debentures, or notes.       Merger                   2
     243    When merged, shareholders primarily receive common stock, issue on CRSP file and other property, issue on CRSP file.         Merger                   2
     241    When merged, shareholders primarily receive common stock and cash, issue on CRSP file.                                       Merger                   93
     231    When merged, shareholders primarily receive common stock or ADRs.                                                            Merger                   229
     233    When merged, shareholders receive cash payments.                                                                             Merger                   564
     575    Delisted by current exchange - company request, offer rescinded, issue withdrawn by underwriter.                             Other                    1
     500    Issue stopped trading on exchange - reason unavailable.                                                                      Other                    1
     583    Delisted by current exchange - denied temporary exception requirement.                                                       Other                    1
     587    Delisted by current exchange - corporate governance violation.                                                               Other                    4
     573    Delisted by current exchange - company request, deregistration (gone private).                                               Other                    8
     582    Delisted by current exchange - failure to meet exception or equity requirements.                                             Other                    16
     585    Delisted by current exchange - protection of investors and the public interest.                                              Other                    22
     520    Issue stopped trading current exchange - trading Over-the-Counter.                                                           Other                    60
     570    Delisted by current exchange - company request (no reason given).                                                            Other                    65
      -     -                                                                                                                            Survivor                 2563
       Source: CRSP and authors' calculations. Table presents presents the CRSP de-listing codes used for categorizing the firm exits between 2000 and 2006
      among the firms included in the exit regessions reported in Table 5.
                                          e and Operating Profit
                            Table A.5: AARj

                                                       Ln(Operating Profit)
                        (1)            (2)                (3)              (4)           (5)          (6)
                     House Intro    House Vote       Senate Cloture    Senate Vote     Clinton       PNTR
                                                    All Firms

   AARj                 0.141         3.170             3.381            1.291         3.752       12.471
                       (0.096)         (0.856)           (0.704)         (0.730)        (0.893)     (2.472)
   R2                    .913           .913               .913            .912          .913         .913
   Observations         48486          48463              48465           48311         48259        48551
   Unique Firms         4353            4351               4347            4325          4317        4360
                                                 Service Producers

   AARj                 0.138         3.507             2.674             0.236        5.152       13.804
                       (0.112)         (1.092)           (0.801)         (0.829)        (1.135)     (2.519)
   R2                    .919           .919               .919            .919           .92         .92
   Observations         26912          26901              26894           26804         26784        26928
   Unique Firms         2235            2234               2232            2222          2219        2237
                                                  Service Firms

   AARj                 0.114          2.465            3.554            2.475         1.765        9.418
                       (0.131)         (1.224)           (1.113)         (1.101)       (0.851)       (3.461)
   R2                    .906           .906               .906            .906          .906         .906
   Observations         21574          21562              21571           21507         21475        21623
   Unique Firms         2118            2117               2115            2103          2098        2123
 Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents firm-level OLS DID panel regres-
sions of firm operating profit on the abnormal returns associated with each legislative event (AARj     e ) and a

series of 1990 firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level. In contrast to the results
reported in the main text, variables are not standardized, e.g., the coefficients indicate the log-point impact
on operating profit of a 1 percentage point increase in AARj     e . AAR for the individual events have been

divided by the change in probability associated with PNTR's passage which are estimated as described in
section G and reported in table A.8. Results for variables other than AARj    e are suppressed. Sample period

is 1990 to 2006. Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS
industries. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                                        72
                                                                   P N T R and the NTR Gap
          Table A.6: Goods Firms: Relative Explanatory Power of AARi

                                 Ln(Salesj )   Ln(COGSj )   Ln(Profitj OP. )   Ln(Employmentj )   Ln(PPEj )   Ln(KInt.
                                                                                                                  j    )
                                                                          Panel A
         Post*NTR Gapj           -0.066         -0.073         -0.065                -0.020       -0.075        0.021
                                  (0.025)        (0.022)        (0.032)             (0.019)        (0.029)     (0.026)
         Post*NTR Gapj U p3        0.011          0.020          -0.035              0.004          -0.043    -0.067
                                  (0.019)        (0.020)        (0.036)             (0.019)        (0.026)     (0.031)
         Post*NTR Gapj Down3     -0.087         -0.059        -0.143                -0.063        -0.068      -0.052
                                  (0.019)        (0.020)       (0.031)               (0.020)       (0.027)     (0.024)
         R2                         .927          .930            .92                 .942          .949        .943
         P-value (Gaps)               0             0              0                  .007          .001        .048
                                                                          Panel B
         Post*AARj   P NT R      0.130          0.079          0.112                0.077         0.096       0.053
                                  (0.037)        (0.023)        (0.025)              (0.025)       (0.025)     (0.019)




73
         Post*NTR Gapj            -0.045        -0.060          -0.051               -0.008       -0.060        0.030
                                  (0.023)        (0.021)        (0.030)             (0.020)        (0.028)     (0.026)
         Post*NTR Gapj U p3        -0.002         0.012          -0.041              -0.004        -0.053     -0.072
                                  (0.019)        (0.020)        (0.035)             (0.020)        (0.028)     (0.032)
         Post*NTR Gapj Down3     -0.075         -0.051        -0.129                -0.056        -0.059       -0.047
                                  (0.019)        (0.020)       (0.031)               (0.020)       (0.028)     (0.025)
         R2                         .927          .931           .921                 .942          .949         .943
         P-value (Gaps)               0           .003             0                  .033          .002         .062
         Observations              28378         28457          26649                28456         28637        27995
         Unique Firms               2313         2314           2212                  2320          2320        2290
      Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents firm-level OLS DID panel regressions of
                                                                               P NT R
     noted firm outcomes on firms' PNTR average abnormal returns (AARj                ), their NTR gaps, and a suppressed
     series of 1990 firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level. Sample period is 1990 to 2006.
     All covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation. Goods firms have a business segment active in
     NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit
     NAICS industries. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                       P N T R and the NTR Gap
            Table A.7: Service Firms: Relative Explanatory Power of AARi

                                    Ln(Salesj )   Ln(COGSj )   Ln(Profitj OP. )   Ln(Employmentj )   Ln(PPEj )   Ln(KInt.
                                                                                                                     j    )
                                                                             Panel A
           Post*NTR Gapj    U p3       0.052         0.036          0.026               0.006          0.055        0.110
                                      (0.044)       (0.038)        (0.062)             (0.042)        (0.059)      (0.076)
           Post*NTR Gapj Down3       -0.081        -0.071         -0.084               -0.050          -0.028       -0.012
                                      (0.020)       (0.023)        (0.027)              (0.020)       (0.023)      (0.024)
           R2                          .922          .923           .908                 .927          .940          .89
           P-value (Gaps)                0           .008           .001                 .018          .461          .35
                                                                             Panel B
           Post*AARj   P NT R        0.083         0.092          0.082                0.092           0.058      0.064
                                      (0.031)       (0.029)        (0.035)              (0.030)       (0.036)     (0.031)




74
           Post*NTR Gapj U p3          0.061         0.046          0.033               0.015          0.061        0.114
                                      (0.045)       (0.038)        (0.065)             (0.045)        (0.061)      (0.078)
           Post*NTR Gapj Down3       -0.072        -0.061         -0.075               -0.040          -0.022       -0.005
                                      (0.021)       (0.023)        (0.029)             (0.021)        (0.023)      (0.024)
           R2                          .922          .924           .908                 .928           .940         .89
           P-value (Gaps)              .003          .032           .009                 .125           .560        .309
           Observations               21903         21903          21132                21697          21738       19797
           Unique Firms                2128         2128           2076                  2127           2127       2041
       Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents firm-level OLS DID panel regressions of noted
                                                                         P NT R
     firm outcomes on firms' PNTR average abnormal returns (AARj                ), their NTR gaps, and a suppressed series of 1990
     firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level. Sample period is 1990 to 2006. All covariates are
     de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation. Service firms have no business segments in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and
     3X. Standard errors are reported below coefficient estimates and are clustered by 4-digit NAICS industries. *, ** and ***
     indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
                  Table A.8: Ex-ante Event Probabilities

                     (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)
                  HouseIntro    HouseVote      SenateCloture     SenateVote     Clinton
 Probability        0.118         0.266           0.447           0.620         0.928
                    (0.060)       (0.108)          (0.140)         (0.184)       (0.221)
 FE                  Firm          Firm             Firm            Firm          Firm
 Cluster             Firm          Firm             Firm            Firm          Firm
 Observations        2512          2512             2512            2512          2512
 This table reports the call-option implied probability ­ estimated before each of our five
events ­ that PNTR will pass. We assume that these probabilities do not change in the
time before the five events. For example, the estimates in the first two columns suggest
that prior to the introduction of the bill in the House, the probability that PNTR will pass
was 11.8 percent, and right after the introduction, the probability had increased to 26.6
percent. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. *, ** and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.




                                            75
                                       P N T R and Firm Sales, COGS and Operating Profit (Sales-COGS)
            Table A.9: Bootstrapped AARi

                                              Ln(Salesj )                         Ln(COGSj )                         Ln(Profitj OP. )
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)            (8)            (9)
         Post*AARj    P NT R       0.127       0.145        0.094      0.104       0.095       0.102      0.129         0.144           0.096
                                    (0.026)     (0.037)     (0.031)    (0.020)      (0.024)    (0.028)    (0.025)        (0.026)         (0.035)
         P ost  AARj P N T R         0.119       0.138       0.085      0.097        0.089      0.093      0.117          0.134           0.086

         Post*PPE per Workerj        0.054     0.150         -0.015     0.046       0.130       -0.005     0.036         0.151           -0.041
                                    (0.039)     (0.058)     (0.029)    (0.034)      (0.054)    (0.024)    (0.044)        (0.059)        (0.031)
         P ost  P P EperW orkerj     0.049       0.127       -0.016     0.041        0.109      -0.007     0.029          0.127          -0.038

         Post*Ln(Mkt Cap)j         -0.067      -0.092       -0.058     -0.075      -0.099      -0.067     -0.072        -0.106          -0.054
                                    (0.022)     (0.028)      (0.030)    (0.020)     (0.026)     (0.026)    (0.024)       (0.028)         (0.026)
         P ost  Ln(M ktCap)j         -0.063      -0.082       -0.056     -0.071      -0.089      -0.065     -0.068        -0.095          -0.054

                     lows
         Post* CashF
                 Assets   j        -0.138      -0.199        -0.046    -0.060      -0.096       -0.015    -0.138        -0.212          -0.046
                                    (0.034)     (0.038)     (0.031)     (0.022)     (0.026)    (0.030)     (0.035)       (0.042)        (0.027)
                  CashF lows
         P ost                      -0.134      -0.193       -0.045     -0.058      -0.093      -0.013     -0.134         -0.203         -0.045




76
                    Assets

         Post*Book Leveragej        -0.037     -0.096        0.027      -0.026     -0.077       0.024      -0.033       -0.083           0.018
                                    (0.020)     (0.022)     (0.024)    (0.021)      (0.025)    (0.026)    (0.023)        (0.026)        (0.024)
         P ost  BookLeveragej        -0.037      -0.097      0.025      -0.026       -0.077     0.023      -0.032         -0.081         0.016

         Post*Tobins Qj            0.127       0.163        0.093      0.125       0.144       0.103      0.111         0.157           0.069
                                    (0.024)     (0.045)      (0.026)    (0.022)     (0.041)     (0.026)    (0.025)       (0.041)        (0.030)
         P ost  T obinsQj            0.128       0.164        0.098      0.125       0.146       0.106      0.113         0.156          0.073
         Observations                50960      28589        22371      51043       28672       22371      48420          26848          21572
         Unique Firms                4505       2336          2169       4506        2337       2169        4350           2234           2116
      Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents bootstrapped firm-level OLS DID panel regressions of
                                                                              P NT R
     noted firm outcomes on firms' PNTR average abnormal returns (AARj               ) and a series of 1990 firm accounting attributes that
     are winsorized at the 1 percent level. Sample period is 1990 to 2006. All covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard
     deviation. Goods firms have a business segment active in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service firms have no business segments
     in these sectors. Bootstrapping procedure is detailed in section H.3. Reported bootstrapped standard errors are clustered at the
                                                                                                                                    P NT R
     NAICS 4-digit level and are reported below coefficient estimates. Average of the 1000 bootstrapped coefficients (P ost  AARj          )
     is reported the standard error. Right-hand side variables also include firm and year fixed effects. *, ** and *** indicate statistical
     significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
                                                 P N T R and Employment, PPE, and Intangible Capital
                     Table A.10: Bootstrapped AARi

                                             Ln(Employmentj )                      Ln(PPEj )                        Ln(Intangiblesj )
                                      (1)           (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)            (8)            (9)
         Post*AARj    P NT R       0.097         0.085      0.101       0.091      0.111        0.060     0.060         0.052           0.061
                                    (0.019)       (0.023)   (0.029)     (0.023)     (0.025)    (0.034)    (0.018)        (0.018)        (0.028)
         P ost  AARj P N T R         0.091         0.083     0.090       0.084       0.103      0.054      0.054          0.049          0.053

         Post*PPE per Workerj       0.036        0.103       -0.006      -0.061       0.013    -0.130      0.010         0.072           -0.012
                                    (0.020)       (0.024)   (0.028)     (0.044)     (0.069)     (0.026)   (0.026)        (0.031)        (0.033)
         P ost  P P EperW orkerj     0.035         0.097     -0.005      -0.068      -0.014      -0.131    0.005          0.061          -0.012

         Post*Ln(Mkt Cap)j         -0.069        -0.091     -0.063      -0.075     -0.117       -0.033     -0.021       -0.058           0.011
                                    (0.015)       (0.018)    (0.025)     (0.024)    (0.030)    (0.026)    (0.020)        (0.017)        (0.038)
         P ost  Ln(M ktCap)j         -0.067        -0.087     -0.060      -0.071     -0.104     -0.032     -0.020         -0.054         0.010

                     lows
         Post* CashF
                 Assets   j          -0.025      -0.056      0.032      -0.031     -0.043       -0.005    -0.037        -0.062           0.005
                                    (0.022)       (0.023)   (0.030)     (0.018)     (0.022)    (0.028)    (0.022)        (0.022)        (0.031)
                  CashF lows
         P ost                      -0.022        -0.052        0.033    -0.029     -0.041      -0.003     -0.031        -0.055          0.006




77
                    Assets

         Post*Book Leveragej       -0.052        -0.091      -0.011     -0.049     -0.108       0.023     -0.049        -0.077           -0.027
                                    (0.018)       (0.021)   (0.026)      (0.022)    (0.026)    (0.025)     (0.017)       (0.022)        (0.023)
         P ost  BookLeveragej        -0.052        -0.092    -0.013       -0.048     -0.107     0.020       -0.048        -0.075         -0.027

         Post*Tobins Qj            0.117         0.167      0.080       0.169      0.230       0.129      0.189         0.232           0.146
                                    (0.016)       (0.032)    (0.019)     (0.028)    (0.047)     (0.030)    (0.035)       (0.034)         (0.049)
         P ost  T obinsQj            0.118         0.172      0.082       0.172      0.233       0.136      0.193         0.234           0.150
         Observations               50840         28669         22171    51052      28853       22199      48449         28195           20254
         Unique Firms               4511           2343          2168     4511       2343       2168       4389          2309             2080
      Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents bootstrapped firm-level OLS DID panel regressions of
                                                                              P NT R
     noted firm outcomes on firms' PNTR average abnormal returns (AARj               ) and a series of 1990 firm accounting attributes that
     are winsorized at the 1 percent level. Sample period is 1990 to 2006. All covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard
     deviation. Goods firms have a business segment active in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service firms have no business segments
     in these sectors. Bootstrapping procedure is detailed in section H.3. Reported bootstrapped standard errors are clustered at the
                                                                                                                                    P NT R
     NAICS 4-digit level and are reported below coefficient estimates. Average of the 1000 bootstrapped coefficients (P ost  AARj          )
     is reported the standard error. Right-hand side variables also include firm and year fixed effects. *, ** and *** indicate statistical
     significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
                  CU SF T A and Profit, Employment, PPE, and Intangible Capital
      Table A.11: j

                         Ln(Sales)    Ln(COGS)      Ln(Operating Profit)    Ln(Employment)       Ln(PPE)
                                                     Panel A

        U SA
        88                 0.007         0.024              -0.009                0.024           0.039
           ,94
                          (0.017)       (0.017)            (0.017)               (0.018)          (0.021)
        Can
        88                 -0.014        -0.010             -0.019                -0.041           -0.033
           ,94
                          (0.023)       (0.023)            (0.023)               (0.025)          (0.024)
        R2                  .949         .950                .936                  .951             .961
        Observations       21764        21775               21180                 21682            21843
        Unique Firms        1955         1955               1915                   1958            1959
                                                     Panel B

        U SA
        88                 -0.001        0.018              -0.021                -0.000           0.020
           ,94
                          (0.013)       (0.014)            (0.014)               (0.014)          (0.017)
        R2                  .949         .950                .936                  .951             .961




78
        Observations       21764        21775               21180                 21682            21843
        Unique Firms        1955         1955               1915                   1958            1959
                                                     Panel C

        Can
        88                 -0.010        0.003              -0.024                -0.027           -0.011
           ,94
                          (0.018)       (0.018)            (0.019)               (0.019)          (0.020)
        R2                  .949         .950                .936                  .951             .961
        Observations       21764        21775               21180                 21682            21843
        Unique Firms        1955         1955               1915                   1958            1959
        Cluster           SIC-3         SIC-3              SIC-3                  SIC-3            SIC-3
        Years           1978-1993     1978-1993          1978-1993              1978-1993        1978-1993
      Source: CRSP, COMPUSTAT and authors' calculations. Table presents firm-level OLS DID
     panel regressions of noted firm outcomes on firms' CUSFTA tariff change exposure. Tariff changes
     and a series of 1978 firm accounting attributes that are winsorized at the 1 percent level. Sample
     period is 1978 to 1993. All covariates are de-meaned and divided by their standard deviation.
     Goods firms have a business segment active in NAICS sectors 11, 21 and 3X. Service firms have
     no business segments in these sectors. Right-hand side variables also include firm and year fixed
     effects. *, ** and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels, respectively.
