                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          A THEORY OF SOCIAL IMPACT BONDS

                                       Daniel L. Tortorice
                                        David E. Bloom
                                          Paige Kirby
                                          John Regan

                                       Working Paper 27527
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27527


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We thank Lindsey Bennett for excellent research assistance. We thank Raymond Farkouh, Joseph
Kelly, Sarah Pugh, and James Wassil for helpful discussions. Dan Tortorice thanks the Robert L.
Ardizzone ('63) Fund for tenure track faculty excellence for research support. This paper is based
in part on earlier research funded by Pfizer, Inc. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27527.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Daniel L. Tortorice, David E. Bloom, Paige Kirby, and John Regan. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Theory of Social Impact Bonds
Daniel L. Tortorice, David E. Bloom, Paige Kirby, and John Regan
NBER Working Paper No. 27527
July 2020
JEL No. G12,H41

                                         ABSTRACT

Social impact bonds (SIBs) are an innovative financing mechanism for public goods. In a SIB, an
investor provides capital to a service provider for a social intervention. The investor receives a
return based on the outcome of the intervention relative to a predetermined benchmark. We
describe the basic structure of a SIB and provide some descriptive statistics for these financial
instruments. We then consider a formal model of SIBs and examine their ability to finance
positive net present value projects that traditional debt finance cannot. We find that SIBs expand
the set of implementable projects if governments are pessimistic (relative to the private sector)
about the probability an intervention would succeed or if the government is particularly averse to
paying costs associated with a project that does not generate offsetting benefits. As both these
features are present in various public programs, we conclude that SIBs are a real innovation in
public finance and should be considered for projects when traditional debt finance has been
rejected.

Daniel L. Tortorice                                       Paige Kirby
Department of Economics                                   Data for Decisions, LLC
1 College St                                              681 Main St #3
Worcester, MA 01610                                       Waltham, MA 02451
dtortori@holycross.edu                                    pkirby@datafordecisions.net

David E. Bloom                                            John Regan
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health                 Data for Decisions, LLC
Department of Global Health and Population                681 Main St #3
665 Huntington Ave.                                       Waltham, MA 02451
Building 1, Suite 1202                                    jregan@datafordecisions.net
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu
1         Introduction

Impact investing, financial investing that values positive social or environmental impact and
traditional financial returns, is a growing field in asset management.1 In 2018, professionals
who considered environmental and social factors in their investment choices managed (USD)
12 trillion dollars of assets, representing a 38% increase over the previous two years (Aitken
et al., 2018). One type of impact investing is the social impact bond (SIB), an arrange-
ment where investors in a project receive financial returns based on the project outcomes,
specifically the accomplishment of prespecified social objectives.
        In a traditional social impact bond, a government attracts financing from an investor.
The investor passes the financing on to a service provider who implements a project designed
to solve a specific social problem. If the project meets specified social goals, e.g., test scores
for an education intervention, the investor receives the initial investment back plus interest
payments. In many of these arrangements, investors do not receive any money back if the
goals are not met. For payments to be made, a third-party assessor must certify that the
intervention achieved the prespecified goals. Given the complexity of these arrangements,
an additional entity, known as the intermediary, often co-ordinates the various parties to the
SIB arrangement.2
        Social impact bonds have been growing since their initial launch in September of 2010.
For example, 2017 saw the launch of 41 unique SIBs. Currently 81 SIB projects are ongoing
with a total of (USD) 375 million invested.3
        Despite the growth of social impact bonds as a vehicle for financing public programs, with
the exception of Pauly and Swanson (2017), we have been unable to find a theoretical analysis
of the benefits of SIBs. Our paper address this disparity. Specifically, within the context of
an economic model, we compare SIBs to debt finance and characterize the conditions under
    1
     For academic work on impact investing see Bialkowski and Starks (2016) or the survey of Renneboog
et al. (2008).
   2
     Many reports describe the structure of SIBs. For one example, see Gustafsson-Wright et al. (2015).
   3
     Statistics are authors' calculations based on data from the Social Finance Impact Bond Global Database,
https://sibdatabase.socialfinance.org.uk/. See Social Finance (2019).


                                                     2
which SIBs can expand the set of projects that a government can finance.
   We find that social impact bonds have advantages over traditional debt finance. Specifi-
cally, when the government is unduly pessimistic or particularly averse to states of the world
when project costs cannot be offset with project benefits, then SIBs can finance positive net
present value projects that debt finance cannot. We conclude that SIBs are a useful form of
finance and should be considered for projects when debt finance has been rejected.
   The intuition for our main results are straightforward. First, when governments are
pessimistic about the probability a project will be successful, a social impact bond that pays
off only when a project is successful will have low ex ante expected financing costs. However,
an optimistic private sector will view this bond as a good investment opportunity. Second,
when the government is averse to states of the world where the project fails and it must make
interest payments associated with the project, it will prefer a financing arrangement that
has it make larger payments when the project is successful in exchange for lower payments
if the project fails.
   Pauly and Swanson (2017) conduct a theoretical analysis of social impact bonds. Like
that paper, our paper contains an equivalency result, i.e., debt finance and SIBs are equiva-
lent in a world with perfect information and no risk aversion. However, we differ from Pauly
and Swanson in how we break the equivalency. Specifically, they consider models where
effort is unobservable and SIBs can incentivize effort. We consider a model where there is
asymmetric information about the probability of project success and where governments,
because of electoral concerns, are particularly averse to states of the world when they must
pay costs associated with a project in excess of benefits.
   This equivalency approach links to the theoretical literature on corporate social respon-
sibility (CSR). There, Small and Zivin (2005) argue that firms engaged in CSR and those
that are not will be priced the same when firm-provided public goods are substitutes for
nonprofit provided services. In contrast, Baron (2008) allows for unobservable effort and
consumer and manager affinity for providing public goods and demonstrates that some level


                                              3
of CSR is optimal for the firm. However, SIBs differ from CSR. With CSR the firm is pro-
viding a public good. With a SIB, a for-profit firm provides financing, but the service is
carried out by a not-for-profit entity.
      A key mechanism in our model is a desire for governments to avoid states of the world
when they must pay costs associated with a project (e.g., financing costs), but receive no
benefits from the project (e.g., a failed educational initiative). This mechanism relates to the
literature on optimal debt management e.g., (IMF and the World Bank Staff, 2001; Missale,
1997; Filardo et al., 2012; Vajs, 2014), which stresses the need to incorporate long-term debt
in country portfolios to avoid the risk of funding crises. While we do not consider projects
large enough that failure could lead to a public debt crisis, we show how careful structuring
of a SIB can reduce the government's risk exposure.
      Interestingly, this approach parallels the static theory of optimal corporate capital struc-
ture, e.g., Scott Jr. (1976). In this theory, firms issue equity despite its tax disadvantages
(Miller, 1977) to lower the probability of financial distress.4 Similarly, to avoid high debt
payments in bad states of the world a government would wish to issue equity. However, the
government cannot issue ownership shares. SIBs can provide an equity-like instrument that
allows interest payments to depend on the state of the world. The benefit of conditioning in-
terest payments on the state of the world is also stressed in the literature on state-contingent
sovereign debt, which argues that governments should issue bonds where interest payments
depend on the state of the macroeconomy, (IMF and the World Bank Staff, 2017).
      Finally, our work relates to the theoretical literature on public-private partnerships:
Maskin and Tirole (2008); Iossa and Martimort (2015); Hart (2003); Reich (2000). How-
ever, there is a key difference. With a public-private partnership, the government contracts
with a for-profit firm to provide a service. With a SIB, typically a nonprofit firm provides
the service, and the for-profit firm provides the financing.
      The next section provides background on social impact bonds and section provides de-
  4
      See also Fischer et al. (1989); Hennessy and Whited (2005); Marsh (1982); Stein (1992).



                                                      4
scriptive statistics. Section 4 describes the main model of the paper. Section 5 derives and
discusses our key insights about SIBs. Section 6 concludes.



2       Background on Social Impact Bonds

A social impact bond is "a multi-stakeholder partnership in which private investors, phil-
anthropic funders and impact investors--not governments--take on the financial risk of ex-
panding preventive programs that help poor and vulnerable people" (Callanan et al., 2012).
All SIBs require four core agents to function: the issuer, investors, service providers, and a
third-party assessor. The issuer is the entity that issues the SIB. The issuer is most often a
public entity, i.e., the government, so much so that hereafter we will use "issuer" and "govern-
ment" interchangeably. In traditional public financing of social programs, the government
provides up-front funding to service providers and shoulders the financial risk associated
with the funded program. Under a SIB arrangement, private investors provide the up-front
capital and the government agrees to repay them for the program's cost (plus an agreed-upon
rate of return) if the program achieves predefined outcomes. This allows the government to
(1) pay only for successful programs, (2) pay with a portion of the realized benefits from
the program (e.g., cost savings), and (3) align payment with the realization of benefits. Pri-
vate investors provide up-front funding for the administration, execution, and evaluation of
the program. Investors accept the risks associated with program failure in exchange for a
commensurately higher rate of return than that of traditional public debt. Private investors
could include impact investors (both small- and large-scale) and philanthropic individuals
or organizations.5
    5
    See, among others, Gustafsson-Wright et al. (2015); Lower-Basch (2014) for descriptions of the function-
ing of SIBs.




                                                     5
2.1       Examples

2.1.1      Peterborough Recidivism Impact Bond

The world's first social impact bond, the Peterborough Recidivism Impact Bond, was pio-
neered in the UK in 2010 as part of an effort by the Ministry of Justice to reduce re-conviction
rates among nonviolent offenders (Disley et al., 2015). The bond funded work by the One
Service to operate at Peterborough Prison and provide three cohorts of 1,000 male pris-
oners with pre- and post-release support in housing, training and employment, parenting,
substance abuse, and mental health. Social Finance, a nonprofit organization, acted as the
intermediary to coordinate the project and raised capital from a total of 17 investors (princi-
pally charitable trusts and foundations) who would receive outcome payments if re-conviction
rates fell by an average of 7.5% or more across the targeted cohorts.
       The Peterborough Impact bond was highly successful on several fronts. First, re-conviction
rates fell by an average of 9% across the cohorts, triggering repayment in full for all investors
plus a return of 3% interest per annum.6 Second, the program led to sustained, ongoing
services that continued to operate at Peterborough after the end of the pilot. Third, assess-
ments of the program reported that the service provider found that the SIB funding, with
its focus on outcomes-based payments, allowed it more ability to alter services to achieve
the stated objectives and respond to feedback from program monitors.


2.1.2      The ABLE Project for Incarcerated Youth

The ABLE Project for Incarcerated Youth was established in 2013 with the goal of reducing
recidivism among incarcerated youth at Riker's Island jail and has been described by Olson
et al. (2013); MDRC (2015). At the program's inception, almost 50% of 18-year-old men
released from Riker's returned to jail within two years. The intervention provided young men
   6
    Originally intended to operate until 2017, the Peterborough Impact Bond was ended early in 2015 to
avoid any duplication in services after roll-out of the nationwide Transforming Rehabilitation program that
mandated statutory supervision for short-sentenced offenders. Outcome payments were ultimately based on
average recidivism rate reduction across the first two cohorts (9%).



                                                    6
aged 16 through 21 job training, transitional employment, and job placement services. A
successful outcome was defined as a 10% reduction in the number of days participants were
jailed during the subsequent year. Goldman Sachs and Bloomberg Philanthropies invested
(USD) 9.6 million to fund the program and could have earned up to (USD) 11.7 million in
repayment (22% rate of return) from the City of New York's Department of Corrections.
Preliminary results found no statistically significant reduction in recidivism between those
who received the intervention and a matched control group. Therefore, while the program
was intended to last four years, it shut down early and investors were not repaid.


2.1.3    Massachusetts Juvenile Justice Pay for Success Initiative

As described in Rangan and Chase (2015), the Commonwealth of Massachusetts launched
in 2014 the "Massachusetts Juvenile Justice Pay for Success Initiative" to address recidivism
among young adults. An estimated 55% of young adults who are on probation or age out
of the juvenile justice system will be imprisoned at least once within three years. The
program targets roughly one thousand individuals and aims to reduce re-incarceration rates
by 40% and increase job readiness and employment. Massachusetts partnered with Roca
Inc., a nonprofit focused on addressing recidivism, to provide outreach and skill-building
interventions. Third Sector Capital Partners acted as the intermediary and raised (USD) 28
million from a host of private investors to cover 85% of Roca's costs upfront. The project was
expected to run for six years and the investors, Goldman Sachs and the Kresge Foundation
for Living Cities, will only be repaid if the aforementioned incarceration reduction outcomes
are achieved, at an interest rate of 3-5% depending on the investor. Incarcerating one
inmate costs approximately (USD) 55,000 per annum, so reducing prison populations through
social programs could lead to significant savings for Massachusetts taxpayers. Reducing
incarceration by 40% is estimated to generate (USD) 22 million in budgetary savings, and a
55% reduction would yield (USD) 33 million in savings.7
   7
     For more information on this SIB see https://www.thirdsectorcap.org/portfolio/massachusetts-juvenile-
justice-pfs-initiative/ .


                                                    7
2.1.4       Additional Examples

While prison recidivism has been a popular issue area for social impact bonds, over the past
decade these mechanisms have been used in a wide array of other contexts that highlight
their versatility and customizability.8 For example, the Educate Girls Development Impact
Bond, operating in Rajasthan, India, aimed to address issues of educational access and
attendance among schoolgirls. Payments for the Educate Girls bond were structured around
two performance measures: learning levels and enrollment rates. The program achieved
160% of its target learning outcomes and threshold investors were repaid their principal
investments in full and received an impressive 15% return, which is set to be reinvested in
future development programs.9
        Another social impact bond, issued in Cameroon in 2017, focuses on ophthalmic health.10
The Cameroon Cataract Development Bond is a financing vehicle to fund as many as 18,000
cataract surgeries over five years. This bond structures its payment thresholds around three
outcome categories: volume of completed surgeries, quality of completed surgeries, and fi-
nancial sustainability of the surgical hospital. Scheduled to conclude in 2023, it is currently
on target to meet all three outcomes goals, and the highest potential return to investors is
8%.



3        Data and Descriptive Statistics

3.1        Data Description

We obtain data from the Social Impact Bond Global Database as compiled and maintained
by Social Finance.11 This data set is regularly updated and intended to include all issued
    8
     Responding to the COVID-19 threat, Palandjian and Brest (2020) argue they are a useful mechanism
to finance pandemic response.
   9
     Results for the Educate Girl's SIB are obtained from UBS Optimus Foundation (2018) available at:
https://instiglio.org/educategirlsdib/about-the-dib/ .
  10
     Oroxom et al. (2018) provide a detailed description of the Cameroon bond. Their paper is available at:
https://golab.bsg.ox.ac.uk/knowledge-bank/case-studies/cameroon-cataract-bond/ .
  11
     The data are available at: https://sibdatabase.socialfinance.org.uk/ .


                                                    8
SIBs. We have data for 131 projects on the following variables for each SIB project: tar-
get population, location, launch date, duration of bond, capital raised, maximum outcome
payments, investors, outcomes funder, service provider, and intermediary (if applicable). In
constructing the dataset for this paper, we convert all local currencies to USD and include
a variable categorizing each SIB location country by its World Bank income classification.
       While the Social Finance database includes information on metrics and outcomes when
this information is publicly available, key data are missing for many SIB projects in our
database. For example, 30 projects have undisclosed values for capital raised and 24 projects
have unspecified investor counts. Of all the projects, only six completed projects have a
published return on investment.12


3.2       Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for completed and ongoing social impact bond projects.
The vast majority (95%) of SIB projects are located in high-income countries, with the high-
est concentration in Europe and Central Asia (56%) followed by North America (23%) and
East Asia and the Pacific (12%) (Table 1). Only three SIB projects have been located in
Latin America (Peru, Argentina, and Colombia), four in Sub-Saharan African (South Africa,
Cameroon, Uganda, Kenya, the Congo, Mali, and Nigeria), two in the Middle East (both in
Israel), and three in South Asia (all in India). These projects cover a broad set of issue ar-
eas, from affordable housing programs to medical procedures to sanitation infrastructure to
wildlife conservation programs. Most projects, however, fall under the umbrellas of workforce
development, child and family welfare, or housing and homelessness. One possible expla-
nation for such concentration in these issue areas is that they often involve shorter-term
intervention programs. Programs with shorter durations may lend themselves to earlier
evaluation and faster repayment for investors.
       Following their initial launch with the Peterborough Impact Bond in 2010, new social
  12
    We are in the process of updating the data based on other publicly available information for each project.
This work is ongoing and will be used to supplement the Social Finance database.

                                                      9
Table 1: Social Impact Bond Project Distribution by Issue Area, Country Income Classifi-
cation, and Region
                 Project Characteristic               Count Percent
                   Issue Area
                     Workforce Development                         41        31%
                     Child and Family Welfare                      20        15%
                     Housing/Homelessness                          22        17%
                     Health                                        22        17%
                     Criminal Justice                              12         9%
                     Education and Early Years                     11         8%
                     Poverty and Environment                        3         2%
                   Country Income Classification
                     High income                                 122         95%
                     Upper middle income                           3          2%
                     Lower middle income                           4          3%
                     Low income                                    0          0%
                   Region
                     Europe and Central Asia                       73        56%
                     North America                                 30        23%
                     East Asia and Pacific                         16        12%
                     Sub-Saharan Africa                             4         3%
                     Latin America and the Caribbean                3         2%
                     South Asia                                     3         2%
                     Middle East and North Africa                   2         2%
Source: Authors' calculations based on the Social Finance Impact Bond Global Database. This table
excludes two projects undertaken in multiple countries of different income classifications, including
work in one low-income country, Uganda, which is not reflected in the above aggregation.




                                                 10
impact bond projects began gaining traction. The number of new bonds peaked in 2017,
with 51 launching in that year alone. 2018 saw a drop to 11 new bonds ­ the lowest since
2014. Additionally, 2019 launches to date appear consistent with this decline. Whether the
drop in recent years will be indicative of future trends in the creation of new SIB is unclear.
The first health-focused SIB launched in 2015. Health became an increasingly popular issue
area for SIBs over the next two years, increasing from two new launches in 2015 to 12 in
2017. Though the number of launches, including health-focused launches, declined sharply
in 2018, health-focused launches comprised 27% of all new SIBs ­ the highest percentage to
date.

           Figure 1: SIB Projects by Launch Year and Issue Area (2010 - 2019)




Source: Authors' calculations based on Social Finance Impact Bond Global Database.


   Total investment in social impact bonds has increased almost every year since their in-
ception in 2010 with the Peterborough Impact Bond (in 2011 there were no new bonds).
2012-2017 saw steady increases in total investment, with new investment peaking in 2016.
Although the growth rate of investment levels has slowed in recent years, total global invest-
ment in SIBs is the highest it has ever been at 403 million USD. Total global investment is
1.5 times higher than it was in 2016 when new investment peaked.


                                              11
                                Figure 2: Global SIB Investment Level (2010-2019)


                               400       New
                                         Cumulative
                               350

                               300
                Millions USD

                               250

                               200

                               150

                               100

                                50

                                 0
                                     2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
                                                           Year
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from Social Finance Impact Bond Global Database.
Collection for 2019 is ongoing; amount shown does not yet fully reflect to-date 2019 investment
levels.


   Table 2 provides summary statistics for some of the key variables in the data set. The
average investment in a social impact bond is (USD) 3.8 million, although the largest project
involved a (USD) 30 million dollar investment and the smallest (USD) 100,000. Projects tend
to have larger investment values in the US than they have in the UK or globally. Outcome
payments average about (USD) 6 million but clearly vary by project. A typical project
has multiple investors, with the average number of investors being three. Finally, average
maturity of these bonds is 4.5 years, although the maturity is longer in the US at roughly
6.5 years.




                                                           12
             Table 2: SIB Project Investment Data by Country (2010 ­ 2019)
 Country       Capital Raised        Max Outcomes         Number of        Time to Maturity
               (USD Millions)            Payments          Investors           (Years)
                                     (USD Millions)
      UK              1.64                  3.59                3                3.97
                 [0.37 - 6.10]         [0.10 - 12.2]        [1 - 17]           [2 - 10]
      US              8.77                  9.95                5                6.56
                  [0.15 - 30]           [0.15 - 34]         [1 - 40]           [3 - 30]
    Other              2.9                  4.32                4                 4.3
                  [0.11 - 27]         [0.23 - 15.81]        [1 - 59]           [1 - 10]
    Global            3.81                  5.85                3                 4.5
                   [0.1 - 30]           [0.1 - 34.5]        [1 - 17]            [1-10]
Source: Authors' calculations based on data from the Social Finance Impact Bond Global Database.
Average values listed, min and max in brackets.




4     Model

This section sets forth our model of social impact bonds. It first describes a project the
government could potentially finance. Next, it describes the objectives of the government
and the investor who may finance the project. Then we define the financing instruments:
a debt contract and a SIB. Finally, we describe the incentive compatibility conditions that
are required for the government to provide payment and the investor to provide financing
sufficient to implement the project.


4.1    Project

Consider a situation where the government is deciding to finance a public project. The
project costs c, this period, to implement and has a potential benefit of b next period. Next
period there are two possible states of the world: the good state and the bad state. In the
good state the government receives the benefit b; in the bad state the government receives
zero. The good state of the world occurs with unknown probability denoted by p . Figure 3
summarizes the project.




                                              13
                                  Figure 3: Potential Project




4.2    Financing

There are two possible mechanisms to finance the project. The first, debt finance, constrains
the government's payments to be constant across the two states. The second, a social impact
bond, allows the payments to be conditional on the benefits the government receives and
therefore on the state of the world.


4.3    Agents

The model contains two types of agents: a risk-neutral investor and the government. The
risk-neutral investor will only invest in a project if she expects to get a return greater than
or equal to her required return. Her required return is given by


                                             r - .                                           (1)


   Here r is the expected return on comparable government debt and  represents the
discount an investor is willing to take to invest in a socially responsible project. The investor
also believes that the project will succeed with probability p, which may or may not equal
p (the true probability).
   The second type of agent is the government. The government maximizes the expected
present value of benefits minus costs from implementing the project. However, the gov-
ernment has an added preference for avoiding unfunded costs. It is specifically averse to

                                               14
experiencing states of the world when it must pay costs associated with a project (e.g., debt
payments) when no corresponding benefits materialize. While we do not currently model
why this is the case, one potential explanation is that failed projects can be portrayed as
wasteful spending by political opponents, reducing a politician's reelection probability. The
magnitude of this aversion is captured with the parameter .13
       Subsequently, the government's expected utility is given by

                         1                              
E (U ) = -(1+)c1 +          q (b - cg              b
                                    2 ) - (1 - q )c2 -     q  max(0, cg                          b
                                                                      2 - b) + (1 - q )  max(0, c2 )
                        1+r                            1+r
                                                                                          (2)
       In this function c1 are any costs the government pays in the first period, cg
                                                                                   2 are costs

the government pays in the second period if the good state of the world occurs, cb
                                                                                 2 are costs

                                                                                                1
the government pays in the second period if the bad state of the world occurs,                 1+r
                                                                                                     is the
government's discount factor, and q is the government's belief regarding the probability that
the good state of the world will occur. As with the investor, this probability q may not
necessarily equal the true probability p . Finally, note that when the government chooses
not to finance the project, its utility equals zero.
       To grasp this utility function, note that the first term captures government costs in the
first period. The cost, c1 , is multiplied by 1 +  because there are no benefits in the first
period to offset any costs and therefore, given the government's aversion to unfunded costs,
government utility falls by an additional factor . The second term represents the expected
present discounted value of net benefits from the project. The third term represents the
expected present discounted value of unfunded benefits. The use of the max function ensures
that when benefits b exceed costs in the good state of the world, cg
                                                                   2 , the unfunded cost is

exactly zero.
  13
    For example, Rogoff and Sibert (1988) consider a model where politicians have unobserved competency.
Spending money with little benefit reveals the politician's incompetency and results in her being voted out
of office.




                                                    15
4.4    Financial Instruments

Two instruments are available to finance the project: traditional debt finance and a social
impact bond.

Definition 1. Debt finance is a contract that requires the government to pay the investor
c(1 + i) in each state of the world. i is the interest rate on the debt contract.

Definition 2. A social impact bond (SIB) is a contract that requires the government to pay
the investor prespecified values cg                                        b
                                  2  0 in the good state of the world and c2  0 in the bad

state of the world. Additionally, consistent with the SIBs we observe in the data, we require
that cg   b
      2  c2 .




4.5    Incentive Compatibility

A project is government incentive compatible if the government would choose to implement
the project with an available financing instrument. The project is investor incentive compat-
ible if the investor is willing to provide financing for the project. For the investor, incentive
compatibility requires that her expected return be greater than the required return given by
equation (1). For the government, incentive compatibility requires that the expected utility
of implementing the project is greater than the utility of not implementing the project, 0.

Definition 3. A project is implementable if it is incentive compatible for both the investor
and the government.



5     Results

This section examines the conditions under which the government can implement potential
projects with debt finance and the conditions under which a social impact bond can expand
the set of projects that can be financed.



                                               16
5.1     Debt Finance

Theorem 1. A debt contract with interest rate i can implement the project if and only if
    qb
c[1+(1-q )]
              - 1  r - .

Proof. See appendix.

   To understand this result, note that the condition requires that the government's expected
return on the project be greater than the required return of the investor. However, note that
the expected cost of the project to the government is not just c but c[1+ (1 - q )]. This is the
government's real cost because, based on its beliefs, with probability 1 - q the government
will have to make debt payments in excess of received benefits, which has an additional cost
of  per dollar of unfunded costs. However, when the expected benefit of the project is high
enough to cover the government's interest costs while accounting for its aversion to unfunded
costs, the government is willing to finance the project with debt.

Remark 1. When the government has no preference for avoiding states of the world with
                                                             qb
unfunded costs, i.e.,  = 0, then any project where           c
                                                                  - 1  r -  can be implemented. This
result is the conventional result that the government will finance any project for which the
expected return is greater than the rate at which it can borrow.
                            qb
Remark 2. When          c[1+(1-q )]
                                      - 1 > r -  , the project is implementable with any interest rate
              qb
i where   c[1+(1-q )]
                        - 1 > i > r -  . The higher the interest rate, the larger is the share of
the expected benefit from the project that is paid out to the investor.


5.2     Social Impact Bond

Now we consider the set of projects that can be implemented under a social impact bond,
and specifically the capacity of a SIB to expand the set of implementable projects.

                                                                                                  pcg        b
                                                                                                    2 +(1-p)c2
Theorem 2. A social impact bond is investor incentive compatible if and only if                         c
                                                                                                                 -
                                                                            qb       qcg             b
                                                                                       2 +(1-q )(1+)c2
1 > r -  and is government incentive compatible if and only if              c
                                                                                 >           c
                                                                                                       .


                                                      17
Proof. See appendix.

                                                                            b
Theorem 3. A project is implementable using a social impact bond whenever p c > (r - +1).
Moreover if p  q , this condition will hold for any project that is implementable with a social
impact bond.

Proof. See appendix

   To develop some intuition for this last result, note that if the investor believes the good
state of the world will occur with probability p, the left-hand side of this condition is the
expected return on the contract that pays all the project benefits to the investor in the good
state and pays zero in the bad state. The government would accept that contract because
it would set government utility to exactly zero. Therefore, whenever this condition holds we
can implement the project.
   To understand why when p  q this condition must hold for any implementable project,
                             c(r- +1)
consider the contract cg
                       2 =       p
                                        and cb
                                             2 = 0. This contract has the benefit of completely

eliminating unfunded costs and exactly compensating the investor by giving her exactly the
required return. Moreover, when p  q the investor values payments in the good state
relatively more than the government because the investor views these states as more likely.
As such it is best for the government to transfer all its payments to the good state. Therefore,
from the government's point of view this is the best contract, and if it cannot implement the
social impact bond no other contract will. Now note that the government would accept this
contract if it gives a positive expected return to the government. The government will get a
                                     c(r- +1)
positive expected return if q (b -       p
                                              )   > 0, which leads to the condition of theorem 3.
   An important implication of theorem 3 is that when at least one investor is as optimistic
as the government, then any project with positive expected value from the point of view of
the government can be implemented.
   With only debt finance, theorem 1 demonstrates that only projects where the expected
         qb
return   c
               (1 + r -  )  [1 + (1 - q )] will be implementable. We can think about the


                                                    18
government's aversion to unfunded costs as creating a wedge between the expected return
on a project and the cost of debt finance. The size of the wedge is proportional to , the
magnitude of the government's aversion to unfunded costs, and to 1 - q , the probability that
the government experiences unfunded costs.
   Because a social impact bond can eliminate these unfunded costs, if the government can
find an investor that is at least as optimistic as it is, it can fund any project with an expected
                                                                qb
value greater than the interest cost of debt, i.e.,             c
                                                                      (1 + r -  ) because the investor has a
                          pb
success belief p where    c
                                (1+ r -  ). As such, the SIB provides a solution to the inefficiency
caused by the government's aversion to unfunded costs. In fact, if the inefficiency is large
enough (for example if  is large) a SIB could implement a project that debt finance cannot,
even if the private sector is more pessimistic than the government.

Remark 3. When  = 0 and p  q any project that is implementable with a SIB is also
implementable with debt finance.

Proof. Setting  = 0 in theorem 2 we obtain that a social impact bond is government
                               b          qcg         b
                                            2 +(1-q )c2
incentive compatible only if q c >              c
                                                        .   Recall, also from theorem 2, that the SIB
                                                 pcg        b
                                                   2 +(1-p)c2
is only investor incentive compatible if                c
                                                                     - 1 > r -  . When q  p these two
                   qb
conditions imply   c
                        - 1  r -  , which is the implementability condition from theorem 1 for
debt finance.

   Remark 3 implies that for social impact bonds to add value by increasing the set of
implementable projects, we must either have investors who are more optimistic than the
government or have a government that is averse to unfunded costs.


5.3    Examples

Figure 4 presents a specific example to illustrate the role that government and investor beliefs
play in the implementability of the project. We parameterize this example using an aversion
                                                            b
to unfunded costs  = 0, a benefit-cost ratio                c
                                                                 = 1.4, and the investor's required return


                                                      19
r -  = 0.08. The y-axis gives the investor's belief for the probability that the project will
succeed. The x-axis gives the government's probability belief that the project will succeed.
The upper-right square, labeled BOTH, indicates that for projects where the government
and investors are very optimistic about project success both debt and a SIB can implement
the project. Now moving to the rectangle in the upper left of the diagram, we have the region
where only the SIB can implement the project. In this region the government is unwilling
to finance the project with debt because the government believes that the project is likely
enough to fail that it is not worth financing at the 8% interest rate. However, as long as
the investor is sufficiently optimistic, a SIB can implement the project. Because the investor
thinks the project is likely to succeed, the SIB meets her required return. On the other
hand, because the government is more pessimistic about the project, its expected cost is less
than the investor's required return. Finally, note that debt implementability is insensitive
to the investor's belief about project success. This results occurs because debt guarantees
the investor the same payment no matter the state of the world.




                                             20
                  Figure 4: Disagreement about the Probability of Success




Note: This figure indicates the range of investor and government subjective probabilities of project
success where the project can be implemented with debt, a social impact bond (SIB) or both. The
                             b
parameters used are  = 0, c    = 1.4, r -  = 0.08.


   Next, figure 5 uses a similar example to illustrate the role that aversion to unfunded
                                                                                      b
costs has on the implementability of the project. Again, the benefit-cost ratio       c
                                                                                          = 1.4, and
an investor's required return r -  = 0.08. In this figure, we set the investor's probability
of success (p) equal to the government's probability of success (q ) and consider a range of
values for the aversion to unfunded costs () from zero to three. Any project for which
the investor and the government are sufficiently optimistic can be implemented by a social
impact bond. For SIBs, the aversion to unfunded costs is irrelevant because the SIB does
not require the government to make payments in the bad state (when unfunded costs could
occur). However, as the aversion to unfunded costs rise, fewer and fewer projects can be
implemented with debt finance. Because the government risks unfunded costs, it will only
be willing to debt finance projects for which it is highly optimistic.




                                                21
                           Figure 5: The Effect of Unfunded Costs




Note: This figure indicates the range of  (aversion to unfunded costs) where the project can be
implemented with debt, a social impact bond (SIB) or both, given the government and the investor's
belief that the project succeeds. Here we assume that the government and investor share the same
                                  b
belief. The parameters used are c   = 1.4, r -  = 0.08.




6    Conclusion

In this paper we formulate a novel theory of social impact bonds. Social impact bonds allow
the government to finance positive net present value projects that cannot be financed with
traditional debt finance. SIBs solve two inefficiencies. The first inefficiency arises when
the government is unduly pessimistic about the possible success of the project. The second
inefficiency arises when political realities lead politicians to be overly concerned about paying
for underperforming projects. By allowing the payouts to depend on the project's success
and the beliefs of the investor, the SIB can enable the financing of positive net present value
projects when one or both of these inefficiencies prevent the project from being financed
through traditional debt finance. As both these features are common in public investment,
SIBs represent a useful innovation in public finance and should be considered when traditional

                                               22
debt financing has been rejected.
   Looking forward, additional features of SIBs are worthy of exploration. One such feature
is the role an investor can play in affecting the probability a project succeeds. Another
important issue to explore is the SIB transaction cost relative to traditional debt finance
and the resulting appropriate scale of social impact bonds. Finally, the implementation of
a SIB financed project may alter beliefs about the probable success of the project, enabling
the project to be financed by debt finance in the future. A dynamic model would be needed
to explore this avenue.




                                            23
References
Matt Aitken, Amy Bogie, Christi Electris, Farzana Hoque, Kristin Lang, and Jaime Silver-
  stein. Report on U.S. sustainable, responsible and impact investing trends. Technical
  report, US SIF Foundation, 2018.
David P Baron. Managerial contracting and corporate social responsibility. Journal of Public
  Economics, 92(1-2):268­288, 2008.
Jedrzej Bialkowski and Laura T. Starks. SRI Funds: Investor Demand, Exogenous Shocks
  and ESG Profiles. Working papers in economics, University of Canterbury, Department
  of Economics and Finance, 2016.
L Callanan, J Law, and L Mendonca. From Potential to Action: Bringing Social Impact
  Bonds to the U.S. Technical report, McKinsey & Company, 2012.
Emma Disley, Chris Giacomantonio, Kristy Kruithof, and Megan Sim. The payment by
  results social impact bond pilot at HMP Peterborough. 2015.
Andrew Filardo, Madhusudan Mohanty, and Ramon Moreno. Central bank and government
  debt management: Issues for monetary policy. In Bank for International Settlements,
  editor, Fiscal policy, public debt and monetary policy in emerging market economies, vol-
  ume 67 of BIS Papers chapters, pages 51­71. Bank for International Settlements, July
  2012.
Edwin O Fischer, Robert Heinkel, and Josef Zechner. Dynamic capital structure choice:
  Theory and tests. The Journal of Finance, 44(1):19­40, 1989.
Emily Gustafsson-Wright, Sophie Gardiner, and Vidya Putcha. The potential and limitations
  of impact bonds: Lessons from the first five years of experience worldwide. Technical
  report, The Brookings Institution, 2015.
Oliver Hart. Incomplete contracts and public ownership: Remarks, and an application to
  public-private partnerships. The Economic Journal, 113(486):C69­C76, 2003.
Christopher A Hennessy and Toni M Whited. Debt dynamics. The Journal of Finance, 60
  (3):1129­1165, 2005.
IMF and the World Bank Staff. Guidelines for public debt management. Technical report,
  The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, Washington, D.C., 2001.
IMF and the World Bank Staff. State-contingent debt instruments for soverigns. Technical
  report, The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, Washington, D.C., 2017.
Elisabetta Iossa and David Martimort. The simple microeconomics of public-private part-
  nerships. Journal of Public Economic Theory, 17(1):4­48, 2015.
Elizabeth Lower-Basch. Social impact bonds: Overview and considerations. Center for Law
  and Social Policy, 7, March 2014.
Paul Marsh. The choice between equity and debt: An empirical study. The Journal of
  Finance, 37(1):121­144, 1982.
Eric Maskin and Jean Tirole. Public­private partnerships and government spending limits.
  International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(2):412­420, 2008.
MDRC.       MDRC Statement on the Vera Institute's Study of the Adolescent Be-
  havioral Learning Experience (ABLE) Program at Rikers Island, 2015.                  URL
  www.mdrc.org/news/announcement/mdrc-statement-vera-institute-s-study-
  adolescent-behavioral-learning-experience.
Merton H Miller. Debt and taxes. The Journal of Finance, 32(2):261­275, 1977.

                                            24
Alessandro Missale. Managing the public debt: the optimal taxation approach. Journal of
  Economic Surveys, 11(3):235­265, September 1997.
John Olson, Andrea Phillips, et al. Rikers Island: the first social impact bond in the United
  States. Community Development Investment Review, (01):097­101, 2013.
Roxanne Oroxom, Amanda Glassman, and Lachlan McDonald. Structuring and Funding
  Development Impact Bonds for Health: Nine Lessons from Cameroon and Beyond. 2018.
Tracy Palandjian and Paul Brest. After the pandemic: Addressing the permanent crisis with
  pay for success programs. Stanford Social Innovation Review, March 2020.
Mark V. Pauly and Ashley Swanson. Social impact bonds: New product or new package?
  The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 33(4):718­760, Nov. 2017.
V. Kasturi Rangan and Lisa A. Chase. Massachusetts pay-for-success contracts: Reducing
  juvenile and young adult recidivism. Harvard Business School Publishing, 2015. HBS Case
  No. 9514061.
Michael R Reich. Public­private partnerships for public health. Nature Medicine, 6(6):617,
  2000.
Luc Renneboog, Jenke ter Horst, and Chendi Zhang. Socially responsible investments: In-
  stitutional aspects, performance, and investor behavior. Journal of Banking and Finance,
  32(9):1723­1742, 2008.
Kenneth Rogoff and Anne Sibert. Elections and Macroeconomic Policy Cycles. The Review
  of Economic Studies, 55(1):1­16, 01 1988.
James H Scott Jr. A theory of optimal capital structure. The Bell Journal of Economics, 7
  (1):33­54, 1976.
Arthur A Small and Joshua Graff Zivin. A Modigliani-Miller theory of altruistic corporate
  social responsibility. Topics in Economic Analysis & Policy, 5(1), 2005.
Social Finance.             Impact bond global data base,                  2019.        URL
  https://sibdatabase.socialfinance.org.uk.
Jeremy C Stein. Convertible bonds as backdoor equity financing. Journal of Financial
  Economics, 32(1):3­21, 1992.
UBS Optimus Foundation. Knowledge is power: The world's first development impact bond
  in education. Technical report, UBS, Zurich, Switzerland, 2018.
Stephen Vajs. Government debt issuance: issues for central banks. In Bank for International
  Settlements, editor, The role of central banks in macroeconomic and financial stability,
  volume 76, pages 29­46. Basel, Switzerland, 2014.




                                             25
Appendix: Proofs of Theorems

Theorem 1. A debt contract with interest rate i can implement the project if and only if
    qb
c[1+(1-q )]
              - 1  r - .

Proof. If a project is incentive compatible for the government it must be true that b > cg
                                                                                         2,

otherwise every term in the government's utility would be negative. Given that b > cg
                                                                                    2,

the government's expected utility is given by                 1
                                                             1+r
                                                                   q (b - cg              b
                                                                           2 ) - (1 - q )c2 -
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                1+r
                                                                                                       (1 - q )cb
                                                                                                                2 .

Substituting in c(1 + i) = cg    b
                            2 = c2 , we have that the government's expected utility equals

 1                                                                                                        b
1+r
      [b - c(1 + i)] - 1+ r
                            [(1 - q )c(1 + i)], which is greater than zero if and only if             c[1+(1-q )]
                                                                                                                     -
1  i. Because the project is incentive compatible for the investor if and only if i  r -  ,
                                                          b
the project is implementable if and only if           c[1+(1-q )]
                                                                    - 1  r - .
                                                                                                      pcg        b
                                                                                                        2 +(1-p)c2
Theorem 2. A social impact bond is investor incentive compatible if and only if                             c
                                                                                                                     -
                                                                 b                     qcg             b
                                                                                         2 +(1-q )(1+)c2
1 > r -  and is government incentive compatible if and only if q c >                            c
                                                                                                           .

Proof. Because the social impact bond pays the investor cg                        b
                                                         2 in the good state and c2 in the

bad state of the world, and the investor believes the good state will occur with probability p,
                                              pcg        b
                                                2 +(1-p)c2
then her expected return is equal to                c
                                                             for the initial investment of c. This is greater
                                                 pcg        b
                                                   2 +(1-p)c2
than the required return if and only if                c
                                                                > 1 + r - .
      If a project is incentive compatible for the government it must be true that b > cg
                                                                                        2,

otherwise every term in the governments utility would be negative. Given that b > cg
                                                                                   2,

the government's expected utility is given by                 1
                                                             1+r
                                                                   q (b - cg              b
                                                                           2 ) - (1 - q )c2 -
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                1+r
                                                                                                       (1 - q )cb
                                                                                                                2 .

Utility is nonnegative when qb - qcg            b            b
                                   2 - (1 - q )c2 - (1 - q )c2 > 0. Rearranging we get

 b      qcg             b
          2 +(1-q )(1+)c2
qc >            c
                          .

                                                                            b
Theorem 3. A project is implementable using a social impact bond whenever p c > (r - +1).
Moreover if p  q , this condition will hold for any project that is implementable with a social
impact bond.

Proof. Based on the previous theorem, a project is government incentive compatible if and
          b     qcg             b
                  2 +(1-q )(1+)c2
only if q c >           c
                                  .   To find the maximum set of projects that will satisfy this condi-

                                                        26
tion we consider the social impact bond contract that makes the investor indifferent between
investing and not investing in the SIB, i.e., her incentive compatibility constraint holds as an
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                   c(r- +1)-pcg
equality. Therefore, pcg           b                               b
                       2 + (1 - p)c2 = c(r -  + 1), which implies c2 =                                 1-p
                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                     . From
the previous theorem, this contract is incentive compatible for the government if and only if
                                                                                      
 b      cg        (1-q )(1+)   c(r- +1)-pcg              b             p(1-q )(1+)   cg       (1-q )(1+)
qc >q    2
         c
              +         c          1-p
                                          2
                                                    or q c > q-            1-p
                                                                                      2
                                                                                      c
                                                                                          +      1-p
                                                                                                         (r   -  + 1).
                                          c(r- +1)                
   Consider the contract cg
                          2 =                 p
                                                         and cb
                                                              2 = 0. For this contract the government's

                                            b
implementability constraint simplifies to q c > q c(r-p
                                                       +1)      b
                                                           or p c > (r -  + 1). Therefore, when
this condition holds there is a social impact bond that is able to implement the project.
   Additionally when p  q , the first term on the right-hand side of the government's in-
                                                                     
                                                    p(1-q )(1+)   cg
centive compatibility condition q -                     1-p
                                                                   2
                                                                   c
                                                                         is negative. Because we will maximize
the set of implementable projects by making the right-hand side of the government's com-
patibility constraint as small as possible, we can maximize the set of implementable projects
                  c(r- +1)         
with cg
      2 =             p
                             and cb
                                  2 = 0. In this case the implementability constraint simplifies to

 b
qc > q c(r-p
            +1)      b
                or p c > (r -  + 1). Moreover, our contract that implements the social im-
pact bond maximizes the set of implementable projects. Therefore this condition describes
all implementable projects.




                                                            27
