                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 FISCAL AND MONETARY STABILIZATION POLICY AT THE ZERO LOWER BOUND:
                CONSEQUENCES OF LIMITED FORESIGHT

                                     Michael Woodford
                                        Yinxi Xie

                                     Working Paper 27521
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27521


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




Prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference on Public Policy, "Central Banking in the
2020s and Beyond." The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael Woodford and Yinxi Xie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal and Monetary Stabilization Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Consequences of Limited
Foresight
Michael Woodford and Yinxi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 27521
July 2020
JEL No. E52,E63,E7

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper reconsiders the degree to which macroeconomic stabilization is possible when the zero
lower bound is a relevant constraint on the effectiveness of conventional monetary policy, under
an assumption of bounded rationality. In particular, we reconsider the potential role of
countercyclical fiscal transfers as a tool of stabilization policy. Because Ricardian Equivalence no
longer holds when planning horizons are finite (even when relatively long), we find that fiscal
transfers can be a powerful tool to reduce the contractionary impact of an increased financial
wedge during a crisis, and can even make possible complete stabilization of both aggregate
output and inflation under certain circumstances, despite the binding lower bound on interest
rates. However, the power of such policies depends on the degree of monetary policy
accommodation. We also show that a higher level of welfare is generally possible if both
monetary and fiscal authorities commit themselves to history-dependent policies in the period
after the financial disturbance that causes the lower bound to bind has dissipated. Hence forward
guidance continues to play an important role in increasing the effectiveness of stabilization
policy.


Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mw2230@columbia.edu

Yinxi Xie
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
yinxi.xie@columbia.edu
1       Introduction
The events of the period since the financial crisis of 2008 have required a significant
reappraisal of the previous conventional wisdom, according to which interest-rate
policy alone -- and more specifically, a policy of adjusting the central bank's oper-
ating target for a short-term interest rate in response to contemporaneous economic
conditions (as proposed, for example, by Taylor, 1993) -- should suffice to maintain
macroeconomic stability. It has become evident that conventional interest-rate policy
will often be constrained by the zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates.1
One consequence has been a greater willingness on the part of central banks to make
statements about likely future interest-rate policy, even years in advance, as a sub-
stitute for further immediate interest-rate reduction. But another has been a revival
of interest in the use of counter-cyclical fiscal policy for macroeconomic stabilization.
    An important research literature since the crisis has supported the view that fiscal
stabilization policy can be especially valuable when interest-rate policy is constrained
by the ZLB. This literature has mainly addressed the effects of countercyclical gov-
ernment purchases,2 rather than government transfers, on the ground that in simple
representative-agent New Keynesian models, Ricardian equivalence holds in the case
of lump-sum taxes and transfers; lump-sum transfers during a crisis, if expected to
be financed by future lump-sum taxes, should have no effect at all on economic ac-
tivity or inflation.3 On the other hand, the actual fiscal stimulus packages enacted
in response to the crisis consisted to an important extent of increases in government
transfers (Taylor, 2018). This makes it important to further consider the potential
role of countercyclical government transfers as a tool of stabilization policy.
    The Ricardian Equivalence result in standard treatments depends crucially on
an assumption of rational expectations on the part of all decision makers. Yet the
grounds for assuming rational expectations in such a case are especially weak. To the
    1
      The effective lower bound need not be exactly zero, and among the policy innovations of the
past decade have been a number of experiments with slightly negative interest rates. For purposes
of our argument here, it is only important that there be some lower bound, and that in certain
situations even reducing the policy rate to that lower bound will provide an insufficient stimulus to
aggregate demand.
    2
      See, for example, Eggertsson (2010), Christiano et al. (2011), or Woodford (2011).
    3
      An exception is the paper of Ascari and Rankin (2013), who instead analyze the question under
an assumption of rational expectations, but using an overlapping generations model. We show that
the effectiveness of fiscal stimulus need not depend critically on the demographic structure (or the
absence of bequest motives), once one allows for finite planning horizons.


                                                1
extent that a fiscal stimulus package is an ad hoc response to a single crisis, rather
than an implication of a systematic policy of adjusting the government's budget in
response to the business cycle, one cannot expect that people should have rational
expectations as a result of learning from experience; instead, one needs to ask what
people should be able to deduce from reasoning about the predictable effects of a
novel policy. Moreover, in order for it to make sense to suppose that people should
anticipate the future tax increases that must result from the increased public debt
occasioned by the stimulus policy, one must assume not merely that people are capable
of forward planning (taking into account the policy change), but that their forward
planning extends over quite a long horizon -- as long as is required for the increased
public debt to be fully paid off. In practice, even if one thinks that it should be
predictable that the debt will be financed by future tax increases (and when and
from whom those taxes should be collected), it is typically not the case that there is
any reason to expect the new public debt to be paid off within a few years -- decades
might well be required. This means that in order for full (or nearly full) Ricardian
Equivalence to obtain, one needs to assume that most people's planning horizons
extend far into the future.
    In this paper, we reconsider the usefulness of government transfers as a tool of sta-
bilization policy, and the issue of coordination between monetary and fiscal policies,
under a more modest assumption about the degree to which people should be able to
correctly foresee the future consequences of a novel policy. The approach that we take
is the one proposed in Woodford (2019),4 based on the architecture of state-of-the-art
programs to play games of strategy such as chess or go. Our analysis assumes that
in any period, both households and firms look forward from their current situations
some finite distance into the future, to the possible situations that they can reach in
the end period of foresight through some finite-horizon action plan; they use struc-
tural knowledge (including any announcements about novel government policies) to
deduce the consequences of their intended actions over this horizon. (For simplicity,
in this paper planning horizons are taken to be exogenously fixed.)
    Interim situations that someone imagines reaching in the end period of foresight
are evaluated using a value function that has been learned from past experience.
Crucially, we suppose that the value functions cannot be adjusted to take account of
  4
    A version of the model proposed in Woodford (2019) is empirically estimated in Gust et al.
(2019).


                                            2
an unusual shock or a change in policy, if neither the shock nor the new policy is the
one with which people have had much prior experience, though their value functions
may be well-adapted to the prior environment. Under some circumstances, this kind
of analysis leads to conclusions very similar to conventional rational-expectations
analysis (at least, under a suitable equilibrium selection criterion), as discussed in
Woodford (2019). However, a situation in which monetary policy is constrained by
the ZLB for a period that may last longer than the length of many people's planning
horizons is one in which the finiteness of planning horizons can make a significant
difference for the predicted macroeconomic dynamics.
    This suggests that in a model with finite planning horizons, countercyclical fiscal
stimulus might be a powerful tool, and indeed one that might make it possible to
stabilize the economy despite the lower bound on interest rates, without any need to
resort to commitments about future monetary policy.5 Here we consider what can
be achieved by state-contingent transfer policies when people's planning horizons are
finite (and perhaps extend only a few quarters into the future).6 We show that fiscal
transfers can indeed reduce the contractionary impact of an increase in the financial
wedge, and that, at least under some circumstances, a willingness to use fiscal policy
with sufficient aggressiveness makes it possible to achieve complete stabilization of
both aggregate economic activity and the overall rate of inflation, despite the zero
lower bound, and regardless of the size of the increase in the financial wedge. Thus
the existence of state-contingent transfer policies expands the degree to which stabi-
lization would be possible using interest-rate policy alone; and we obtain this result
under conditions that would guarantee Ricardian Equivalence under an assumption
of rational expectations.
    At the same time, we show that it would be a mistake to conclude that counter-
cyclical transfers are so effective a tool that there is no need for a central bank to
ever indicate that it would allow inflation to overshoot the bank's long-run inflation
target, nor any need for a commitment to conduct future interest-rate policy in any
way different from what will best serve the bank's goals at that future date. We find
   5
      Gabaix (2019) obtains a result of this kind, in the context of a "behavioral New Keynesian"
model that downweights the effects of predictable future conditions on current behavior, albeit for
slightly different reasons than those considered here.
    6
      Woodford and Xie (2019) similarly show how the effects of government purchases depend on
the length of decision makers' planning horizons.



                                               3
that state-contingent transfers make possible equilibria that could not be achieved
using interest-rate policy alone, but that there is a limit to the stimulus that can be
achieved even by massive fiscal transfers, in the absence of monetary accommodation
-- that is, a commitment not to raise interest rates, even if inflation overshoots its
long-run target.7
    We also find that there is a limit to what can be achieved, even by coordinated
fiscal and monetary policy, if the increase in the public debt and the monetary ac-
commodation are both contemplated only for the period in which the financial wedge
remains large, with an immediate return to both the normal level of public debt and
the usual inflation target as soon as the wedge returns to a normal level; a higher
level of welfare is possible, in general, if the monetary and fiscal authorities commit
themselves to history-dependent policies in the period after the real disturbance has
dissipated. Thus while transfer policy can in principle be a useful addition to the
arsenal of policymakers in dealing with a situation of the kind reached in late 2008,
even under ideal assumptions about the precision with which fiscal policy can be ad-
justed to varying conditions, it should not eliminate the need for any commitment to
conduct monetary policy differently in the future than would be the case in normal
times.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the New Keynesian DSGE
model with finite planning horizon and the financial shocks considered in this paper.
As a baseline to which more active stabilization policies can be compared, it analyzes
the effects of such shocks, under alternative assumptions about the length of planning
horizons, when monetary policy is specified by a purely forward-looking inflation tar-
get and strict budget balance is maintained. Section 3 then introduces fiscal transfer
policies, while section 4 considers what can be achieved through coordinated fiscal
and monetary stabilization policies. Section 5 concludes.
   7
     Our conclusions about the importance of monetary accommodation of fiscal stimulus are in
line with those of Ascari and Rankin (2013), though the reason for Ricardian Equivalence to fail is
different in our analysis.




                                               4
2       Output and Inflation Determination with Finite
        Planning Horizons
2.1     Forward Planning with a Finite Horizon
We study the consequences of limited foresight in a New Keynesian DSGE model with
finite-horizon forward planning, building upon the approach developed in Woodford
(2019). Households and firms make contingent plans for a finite distance into the
future, and use a value function learned from past experiences to evaluate all possible
terminal states in the last period of the planning horizon. Over this horizon, they
use structural knowledge (including any announcements about novel central bank
or government policies) to deduce the consequences of their intended actions. For
simplicity, we assume that the planning horizon is taken to be exogenously fixed.
    We illustrate the approach by briefly discussing here the problem of households
in our model.8 As in standard New Keynesian models, we assume an economy made
up of infinite-lived households, here assumed to be identical apart from possible dif-
ferences in their planning horizons. But rather than assuming that each household
formulates an infinite-horizon state-contingent expenditure plan, we suppose that in
any date t, a state-contingent expenditure plan is selected only for dates between t
and some date t + h, a finite distance in the future. (We call h the household's plan-
ning horizon, and in the present paper we treat this as exogenously given, though
endogenizing the decision about how far into the future to plan would clearly be a
desirable extension of the theory.)
              i
    Letting C    be household i's planned consumption in period  of a composite good
(a CES aggregate of the many differentiated goods produced in the economy), we
                                                                           i
suppose that at time t the household chooses state-contingent values {C      } for each
of the dates t    t + h (specifying real expenditure in each of the exogenous
states that may arise at any of those dates,9 given the state of the world at the time
of the planning) so as to maximize the expected value (according to the household's
    8
    The decision problem of price-setting firms is treated using similar methods in Woodford (2019).
    9                                                 i
    Given the value of aggregate real expenditure C     , we suppose that the household's purchases of
each of the individual differentiated goods in period  is chosen so as to acquire the desired quantity
of the composite good at minimum cost. This sub-problem of optimal allocation of expenditure
across individual goods within a given period is a static optimization problem, the form of which is
unaffected by our assumption of a finite planning horizon.


                                                5
calculations at time t) of an objective of the form
                             t+h
                                     -t u(Ci
                                             ) +  h+1 v (Bt
                                                          i
                                                            +h+1 ; st+h ).
                              =t

Here the first terms represent the discounted sum of flow utilities from consumption
in periods t through t + h, while the final term represents the household's estimate
of the value of the discounted sum of flow utilities that it can expect to receive in
                                                                                    i
later periods, if the wealth that it holds at the end of the planning horizon is Bt  +h+1 .
We allow in general for the possibility that the value assigned to the household's
continuation problem after period t + h may depend on the state of the world st+h
that has been reached in period t + h.10
    In the household's planning exercise, it takes into account its budget constraint,
                                                i
and thus the way in which the value of Bt        +h+1 will depend on its planned level
of expenditure. As in many simple New Keynesian models, we assume that there
exists only a single financial asset each period, a one-period riskless nominal debt
instrument, the interest rate it on which is also the central bank's policy instrument.
Because wealth can take this single form, the implications of the household's choices
over the planning horizon for the value of its continuation problem can be summarized
                        i
by a single quantity, Bt +h+1 , indicating the wealth carried into period t + h + 1 in the
form of this riskless nominal asset.
    The evolution of this quantity is determined by a flow budget constraint of the
form

        i                    i             i
       B  +1 = (1 + i +  ) [B / + Y + T - C ] -  [B / + T ]                                        (2.1)

                                     i
for each period t    t + h. Here B     is the value of the nominal debt held by the
household that matures at date  , deflated by the period  - 1 price index P -1 ,11
so that it is a predetermined real variable.12 This quantity must be deflated by
  10
     The state st+h refers to variables whose evolution is not under the control of the household, unlike
                i
the variable Bt  +h+1 that depends on its own actions (as discussed further in the next paragraph).
But the value function may depend on endogenous economic conditions, such as the general level of
prices in period t + h, and not only on exogenous states.
  11
     As usual, this price index is the minimum cost at which a unit of the composite good can be
purchased in period  - 1.
  12                  i
     In particular, Bt +h+1 is a quantity that is determined in period t + h, and thus within the
planning horizon, like the other terms in the objective function.

                                                  6
  P /P -1 , the gross inflation rate between  - 1 and  , to obtain the real value
of the maturing debt in units of the period  composite good. The term Y indicates
production of the composite good in period  , the value of which is received as income
by the households (and treated as independent of any household decision, in the
household's forward planning exercise); and T is the value of lump-sum government
transfers (the same to each household), also in units of the composite good. Hence
  i                    i
B   / + Y + T - C        is the value of the household's end-of-period asset balances, in
units of the composite good.
     Because one-period riskless nominal debt is assumed to be the only traded asset,
all of the household's saving must be held in this form. These assets earn a nominal
financial yield of i between periods  and  + 1. In addition, we assume that there
is an additional benefit of holding riskless claims, which we represent in (2.1) as an
additional dividend equal to  per unit of savings held in this form. This additional
dividend is intended to represent the existence of a (time-varying) safety premium as
in the models of Del Negro et al. (2017) and Caballero and Farhi (2017); increases in
the size of such a premium are an important reason for the lower bound on the safe
nominal interest rate to become a tighter constraint during financial crises.13
     The final term in (2.1) is a lump-sum effective tax on households, equal in size to
the safety dividend received by households in aggregate (using the notation B for
the aggregate supply of public debt carried into period  ). This indicates that the
advantages to an individual household of holding more safe assets are at the expense
of other households (as the "safety dividend" does not correspond to any additional
resources created by the safe assets). We model the safety premium {t } as an
exogenous process, satisfying t  0 at all times; we do not consider in this paper
the possibility of government policies that can directly affect the size of this wedge.14
  13
      The only consequence of a non-zero value of  in our model is the introduction of a time-
varying factor in the household Euler equations (2.4)­(2.5) below. The same kind of exogenous shift
factor in the Euler equation could alternatively arise from exogenous variation in households' rate
of time preference, as assumed in Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). While the latter assumption
would allow for a simpler and more conventional model, we believe that variation in the size of the
financial wedge represented by  provides a more realistic picture of the kind of disturbance that
is likely to give rise to the policy challenges that we address in this paper.
   14
      For example, one might well suppose that the size of the safety premium can be reduced by
increasing the government supply of safe assets, either through increased government borrowing or
by central-bank purchases of non-safe assets; we abstract from such questions here. This means



                                               7
    The decision problem of a household at time t depends on the financial wealth
 i
Bt  that it brings into the period (a predetermined variable, and therefore known at
the time of the decision about how much to spend in period t). It also depends on
the household's expectations about the state-contingent evolution of the variables
{ , Y , T , i ,  } over periods t    t + h, that is, the household's planning
horizon. We assume that in their forward planning exercises, households make use of
correct structural information about how the economy works (including a correct un-
derstanding of monetary and fiscal policy, taking into account any new policies that
may have been announced in response to an unexpected exogenous disturbance).
First, we assume a correct understanding of the state-contingent evolution of all ex-
ogenous state variables; this means that households correctly understand the current
value of t (since they know the economy's exogenous state, before undertaking for-
ward planning), and the conditional probability of different possible future paths
{ }.
    Second, households are assumed to correctly understand the rules that will de-
termine the policy variables {T , i } over the planning horizon. For simplicity, we
restrict attention in this paper to fiscal rules under which the path of the real public
debt {B } is exogenously specified;15 this allows us to consider both the case of no
public debt (often assumed in analyses of alternative monetary policies), and vari-
ous ways in which the level of public debt might depend on the path of the financial
wedge { }. Aggregating over households, and assuming no government purchases,16
it follows from (2.1) that the evolution of the real public debt must satisfy

                                B +1 = (1 + i ) [B / + T ]                                     (2.2)

for each of the periods t    t + h. This, like other structural equations of our
model, is assumed to be correctly understood by households. Then the assumption
that the effects of fiscal transfers on aggregate demand analyzed in section 3 do not depend on any
effects of increased government debt issuance on the supply of safe assets. Taking into account such
effects in addition would provide a further reason to expect fiscal transfers to be welfare-improving
during a crisis caused by a large increase in the safety premium.
   15
      See Xie (2020) for analysis of regimes in which there is instead feedback from endogenous
variables to the path of real public debt, including "active" fiscal policy regimes according to the
classification of Leeper (1991).
   16
      The framework can easily be extended to allow for government purchases as well. See Woodford
and Xie (2019) for analysis of how the government purchases multiplier is affected by finite planning
horizons.

                                                8
that fiscal policy is specified by an exogenous process {B } implies that T must
endogenously adjust, to ensure that (2.2) is satisfied, in response to any changes in
i by the central bank, or changes in  as a result of firms' pricing decisions.
    We similarly assume that households correctly understand the way in which i
will be determined under any contingency by the central bank's policy. For example,
if the central bank follows a Taylor rule which requires some relation linking i , 
and Y to be satisfied, then the state-contingent evolutions of those variables assumed
in a household's forward planning will necessarily satisfy that relation. We further
specify the monetary policies to be considered below, but note here that any feasible
policy is assumed to be subject to a ZLB constraint

                                           it  0                                          (2.3)

at all times.17
    Finally, households are also assumed to correctly understand how the variables
Y and  are determined by the decisions of households and price-setting firms
respectively. However, in order not to have to model how the economy should evolve
(or anyone else should be modeling it to evolve) beyond the horizon t + h, a household
with horizon h at time t must model Y and  as being determined by households
and firms who do not look beyond the horizon t + h while making their decisions at
time  . Just as the household, in its planning at time t, models its own behavior at
some later date  as the behavior that will appear optimal to someone with a planning
horizon at that time of only t + h -  periods, it similarly models the behavior of
other households and firms at date  under the assumption that they will all have
planning horizons of t + h -  periods. This means that the household will model all
other households as spending the same amount at time  as it plans itself to spend
at that time. Hence the amount of income Y that it expects to receive in any future
                                          i
state will be the same as the amount C      that it expects to spend in that state.
          j   j j
    Let Yt , t , it be the (counterfactual) output, inflation, and nominal interest rate
in the case that all economic units (households and firms) have a planning horizon
of j  0 periods at time t. Then the Euler equation for optimal forward planning
  17
    As noted in the introduction, whether the effective lower bound on the short-term nominal
interest rate is exactly zero is not crucial to our conclusions, though we assume that the lower
bound is zero (as stated here) in the numerical calibration discussed below.



                                             9
requires that for any j  1,
                                                           j -1 j -1
                        u (Ytj ) =  (1 + ij
                                          t + t ) Et [u (Yt+1 )/t+1 ]                         (2.4)

while for j = 0,
                             u (Yt0 ) =  (1 + i0
                                               t + t ) v (Bt+1 ).                             (2.5)
In (2.5) we use the fact that in equilibrium, a household with planning horizon zero
must anticipate an interest rate i0 t that leads it to choose to hold wealth Bt+1 equal
                                                                                           0

to the exogenously specified supply of public debt Bt+1 (given that it expects other
households to optimize over the same planning horizon as it does, and it expects the
debt market to clear).
    Thus we obtain a system of equations that can be recursively solved for the state-
contingent evolution of the variables {Ytj } for each possible horizon j  0, given the
state-contingent evolution of the endogenous variables {j             j
                                                                 t , it } for all j , and the state-
contingent evolution of the exogenous variables {t , Bt+1 }, along with any exogenous
disturbances to the monetary policy rule.18 (Equation (2.5) can be solved for the value
of Yt0 in any state of the world, given the values of the other variables; then given a
solution for the state-contingent evolution of {Y0 }, the j = 1 case of equation (2.4)
can be solved for the value of Yt1 in any state of the world; and so on for progressively
higher values of j .)
    Modeling the optimizing decision of price-setting firms with finite planning hori-
zons, we similarly obtain a system of equations that can be recursively solved for
the state-contingent evolution of the variables {j      t } for each possible horizon j  0,
given the state-contingent evolution of the endogenous variables {Ytj , ij              t } and the
state-contingent evolution of the exogenous variables. These equations, together with
the monetary policy rule with which the endogenous variables must be consistent for
each value of j , provide a system that can be jointly solved for the state-contingent
evolution of the endogenous variables {Ytj , j        j
                                                 t , it } for each possible horizon j  0,
given the state-contingent evolution of the exogenous variables.
    In writing the above equations, we take as given the value function v (B ) that
households will use in their forward planning, and similarly the value function that
firms will use. In Woodford (2019), the endogenous evolution of these value functions
  18
    The model can easily be extended to allow for exogenous disturbances to productivity, pref-
erences, and government consumption, as treated in Woodford (2019); but in this paper, we are
concerned only with possible policy responses to disturbances to the financial wedge t .

                                               10
in response to additional experience is also modeled; here, however, we abstract from
this additional source of dynamics, and assume fixed value functions, that will be the
same for the different policies that we consider. Our assumption is that the value
functions are determined in a backward-looking way (as an inference from outcomes
observed in the past), and not through a forward-looking deductive process; the whole
point of the use of a value function to evaluate conditions that might be reached at
the planning horizon t + h is to avoid having to reason deductively about what should
happen under various contingencies beyond that date.
    Thus when an unusual shock hits, and unusual policies are announced in response,
the value functions that households and firms use, at least initially, will continue to be
ones that they learned from macroeconomic conditions prior to either the disturbance
or the new policies. Because our concern in this paper is solely with the effects
of temporary policy changes in response to a transitory disturbance, we simplify
the discussion by abstracting from the changes in the value functions that would
eventually occur if the new conditions were to persist sufficiently long.19 Instead
we assume that the value functions remain fixed over the scenarios that we consider
below, and are ones that represent an optimal adaptation to the stationary conditions
assumed to have existed prior to the disturbance.
    In the analyses below, the situation prior to the disturbance is assumed to have
been the one in which the government debt has been zero (Bt = 0 at all times); the
central bank has pursued a forward-looking inflation targeting policy, setting it each
period at the level required to ensure that t =  , the long-run inflation target;20
and the financial wedge t has at all times been small enough to make it possible for
the central bank to achieve that target without violating the zero lower bound (2.3).
  19
     Allowing the value functions to adapt is instead critical for certain other kinds of discussions.
These include consideration of the eventual effects of commitment to an interest-rate peg for a long
period of time, as in Woodford (2019); empirical modeling of US economic data over a period of
decades, that included significant shifts in both output and inflation trends, as in Gust et al. (2019);
analysis of the conditions under which joint monetary-fiscal policy regimes imply sustainable long-
run dynamics, as in Xie (2020); and consideration of the difference between commitment to a
systematic price-level targeting rule and adoption of an ad hoc "temporary price-level target" when
the ZLB binds, as in Woodford and Xie (2019).
  20
     This target is assumed to satisfy  > , so that a stationary equilibrium is possible in which
this inflation rate is maintained at all times, and in this equilibrium, the ZLB constraint (2.3) is a
strict inequality. Note that this will be satisfied in the case of any non-negative inflation target.



                                                11
In a stationary equilibrium in which these conditions always hold, the maximum
attainable discounted utility for a household that enters period t with wealth B is
given by
                                    1      ¯ + (1 -  )B/) ¯ ,
                         v (B ) =       u(Y                                    (2.6)
                                  1-
where Y¯ and   ¯ are the stationary values of Yt and t .21 This is the optimal value
function for households in this stationary environment; its use in a finite-horizon
planning exercise in the stationary environment would result in optimal behavior,
regardless of the length of the planning horizon. It is also the value function to
which the adaptive process described in Woodford (2019) would converge, if such an
environment were maintained for a sufficiently long time. Thus we assume the value
function (2.6) for households in our analyses below; we similarly assume for firms a
value function that is optimally adapted to that same stationary environment.


2.2     Log-Linear Approximate Dynamics
As in many rational-expectations analyses, it will be convenient to approximate the
solution to the model structural equations using a log-linear approximation. We
linearize the model's equations around a stationary equilibrium in which t = 0
at all times, and the policy regime is the one discussed above for which the value
functions of households and firms are adapted. We express the linearized equilibrium
relations in terms of deviations from the stationary equilibrium values of the various
state variables, using the following notation:
               j
              yt           ¯ ),
                  log(Ytj /Y                         ¯ ,
                                           t  log(t /)               bt  Bt /(¯Y
                                                                               ¯ ),

                                          1 + it           ^t        t
                            it  log
                            ^                        ,                   .
                                          1 +¯i                     1 +¯
                                                                       i
Here ¯i   -1 ¯ - 1 > 0 is the stationary equilibrium value of the nominal interest
rate.
  21
     Under the inflation-targeting policy, the real return on assets that do not earn the safety premium
will be constant and equal to the rate of time preference of households. A household's optimal policy
will then be the one given by the permanent income hypothesis: it should plan to consume a constant
amount C = Y  ¯ + (1 -  )B/  ¯ each period, allowing it to maintain a constant wealth B indefinitely.
This results in the discounted utility indicated by (2.6).




                                                12
    In terms of this notation, equilibrium conditions (2.4) and (2.5) can be log-
linearized to yield
                        j             ^       j -1        j -1
                      yt  = - (^ ij
                                  t + t - Et  t+1 ) + Et yt+1               (2.7)
for each j  1, and
                               0
                              yt      i0
                                 = - (^    ^
                                       t + t ) + (1 -  )bt+1 .                                 (2.8)
Note that except for the superscripts, (2.7) has the same form as the "New Keynesian
IS equation" obtained in the rational-expectations version of the model (see, e.g.,
Woodford, 2003, chap. 4).
    Similarly, the structural relations describing optimal price-setting behavior by
firms can be log-linearized to yield
                                                   j -1
                                     j    j
                                     t = yt +  Et  t+1                                         (2.9)

for each j  1, and
                                            0    0
                                            t = yt .                                         (2.10)
(See Woodford, 2019, for the derivation.) Here again, it will be observed that except
for the superscripts, (2.9) has the same form as the "New Keynesian Phillips curve"
obtained in the rational-expectations version of the model (Woodford, 2003, chap.
3).
    Finally, in terms of the deviations variables, the zero lower bound constraint can
be written as
                                         it  ^
                                         ^     i                                (2.11)
where ^i < 0, meaning that the constraint does not bind when it is near its stationary
                  i.22
equilibrium value ¯


2.3     A Crisis Scenario
We consider the effects of alternative monetary and fiscal policies under the following
scenario: prior to date t = 0, we suppose that the economy has for a long time
been in the stationary equilibrium discussed above, in which the financial wedge
has always been small, the government's budget has been balanced each period (so
  22
     If the lower bound is exactly zero, then we will have ^ i = -(r +   ) < 0, where r   -1 - 1
is the stationary equilibrium real rate of return inclusive of the safety premium. This is assumed in
our numerical calibration, but our qualitative results depend only on our assumption that ^   i < 0.

                                               13
that government debt has remained equal to zero), and the inflation target   has
been consistently achieved. As a result, households and firms have learned the value
functions that are appropriate to a stationary environment of that kind. At time
t = 0, however, an unexpected financial disturbance occurs, and the economy enters
a "crisis" state, in which there is a substantial financial wedge   ^ t > 0 between the
return on safe assets (balances held at the central bank) and other assets.
     We further assume that the crisis state persists to the following period, whenever
the economy is currently in that state, with probability 0 < µ < 1, while with
probability 1 - µ the economy reverts back to its "normal" state, in which we suppose
that the financial wedge  ^ t will subsequently equal zero forever after. For simplicity,
we assume that the probability of exit from the crisis state is independent of the
length of time already spent in that state. We further assume that the size of the
financial wedge while in the crisis state is constant; thus the exogenous fundamental
{t } evolves according to a two-state Markov chain, as in Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003). We write the constant financial wedge in the crisis state as      ^ t = -^
                                                                                 i + ,
where  > 0; the latter quantity measures the degree to which the financial wedge is
too large to be offset through a contemporaneous interest-rate reduction.23 It is the
fact that  > 0 that means that the inflation target can no longer be maintained at
all times, using only conventional interest-rate policy and with a balanced government
budget.

2.3.1    Numerical calibration

We illustrate a number of our conclusions about the effects of alternative policies
under such a scenario for economic fundamentals using numerical computations. In
these calculations, we calibrate the model -- including our assumption about the
size and persistence of the disturbance to fundamentals -- largely in accordance
with the parameter values proposed by Eggertsson (2011), who shows that under
the assumption of rational expectations and a zero inflation target, these parameter
values would imply a contraction of the size experienced by the US economy during
the Great Depression, as shown by Eggertsson (2011). However, in this paper, we
specify "normal" monetary policy as involving an inflation target   of two percent
  23
    In the notation of Eggertsson (2011), this quantity corresponds to  = -r -   , where r < 0 is
the natural rate of interest in the crisis state.



                                             14
                           Table 1: Calibrated Parameter Values
                                                                           Value
          Subject discount factor                                           = 0.997
          Response of inflation to output gap in Phillips curve             = 0.00859
          Intertemporal elasticity of substitution                          = 0.862
          Financial wedge in "crisis" state                                ^ = 0.013
                                                                           
          Probability of staying in "crisis" state                         µ = 0.903
          Inflation target                                                   = 0.005


per year, rather than a target of zero inflation, as in Eggertsson's model of the Great
Depression. This makes the zero lower bound a less severe constraint in our scenario
than in the one considered by Eggertsson, since we continue to assume the same size
of increase in the financial wedge as in his Depression scenario.
    In our numerical calculations, the periods of our discrete-time model are identified
with quarters. We set the subjective discount factor  = 0.997, the slope of the
Phillips curve  = 0.00859, and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution  =
0.862. The shock required to account for the size of the contraction during the Great
Depression is one in which    ^ = 0.013,24 and the probability of staying in the crisis
state is µ = 0.903, so that the expected length of a crisis is about 10 quarters.
In addition, we assume a long-run inflation target of 2 percent per year; that is,
  = 0.005 in quarterly terms, which implies that the part of financial wedge that
cannot be offset by monetary policy owing to the ZLB is      ~ = 0.005, or two percent
per year.25 The calibrated parameter values are summarized in Table 1.

2.3.2    Contraction in the absence of a policy response

We first consider the consequences of a temporary large increase in the size of the
financial wedge (the "crisis scenario" explained above), in the case that monetary and
fiscal policy continue to be conducted as under normal conditions, which is to say as
  24
     This is a quarterly rate; thus the assumed increase in the size of the financial wedge is a bit
greater than 5 percent per annum. The natural rate of interest in the normal state is r =  -1 - 1,
or slightly above 1 percent per annum; thus we assume that in the crisis state, the natural rate of
interest falls to -4 percent per annum, as in Eggertsson (2011).
  25
     Note that this is only half the size of ~ in the crisis state considered by Eggertsson (2011).



                                               15
assumed above in our discussion of the stationary equilibrium prior to the occurrence
of the shock. We assume that the government budget continues to be balanced each
period, so that Bt+1 = 0 at all times, and that the central bank continues to conduct
monetary policy in accordance with a strict inflation target. The latter stipulation
implies that in each period, ^ it will be set as necessary to ensure that inflation is equal
to the target rate ( t = 0, in our deviations notation), if this is consistent with the
ZLB; if inflation undershoots the target in any period t even when the interest rate is
at its lower bound, then ^                i in that period (the policy as close as possible
                            it will equal ^
to achieving the inflation target in that period, taking as given the expected conduct
of monetary policy in all future periods).
    Let us first recall the analysis of such a situation under the assumption of rational
expectations (RE) by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Eggertsson (2011). The
linearized equations of the RE model can be written in vector form as

                                    zt = A Et zt+1 - a (^
                                                        it + ^ t ),                            (2.12)

where we define

                          yt                     1                               1
               zt               ,       A                       ,      a              .
                          t                        +                             

(Note that the path of public debt is irrelevant, owing to Ricardian Equivalence.)
Under the assumption that     ^ t evolves according to the two-state Markov process and
that ^
     it is chosen according to the inflation targeting policy, there exists a rational-
expectations solution that is also Markovian, in the sense that the vector zt takes
only two possible values: a vector z in any period t in which the crisis state persists,
and the zero vector in each period after the reversion to the normal state (in which
case the inflation target is achievable each period from then on).26
   In the case that
                                 µ < (1 - µ)(1 - µ),
  26
    Mertens and Williams (2018) call this the "target equilibrium"; it is not the only possible RE
solution, even if one restricts attention to Markovian solutions. It is however the solution emphasized
in the RE literature, following Eggertsson and Woodford (2003); we show below that restriction of
attention to this RE solution can be justified as the limit of the unique solution associated with a
model with finite planning horizons, when the length of the planning horizons is made arbitrarily
long.


                                                16
the matrix A has two positive real eigenvalues, both less than µ-1 , and the Marko-
vian solution is also the unique bounded solution to the linear system (2.12). This
condition holds if and only if
                                      µ < µ¯,                                 (2.13)
where µ ¯ is a bound between zero and 1 that depends on the values of  and of  ;
this is the case considered by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003).27 In this case, the
Markovian RE solution under which the crisis state persists is given by

                          zt = z RE  - (I - µA)-1 a  << 0.                                   (2.14)

    In this equilibrium, both output and inflation remain persistently below their
target values as long as the crisis state continues, but return immediately to their
target values as soon as the financial wedge returns to its normal (negligible) value.
As Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) show in a calibrated example, this equilibrium
can involve quite a severe contraction as well as substantial deflation, in response to
even a few percentage points' increase in the financial wedge. We now examine the
robustness of these conclusions to allowing for finite planning horizons.
    Assume again that the central bank adheres to a strict inflation targeting policy,
and suppose also that there is no government debt (so that the fiscal authority main-
tains a balanced budget).28 Equations (2.7) and (2.9) can then be written in vector
form as
                             j          j -1            ^
                            zt = A Et zt +1 - a (^ ij
                                                    t + t )                      (2.15)
                                   j                   j j
for each j  1, using the notation zt  for the vector [yt  t ] , while (2.8) and (2.10) can
be written as
                         0
                        zt = -a (^   i0    ^
                                      t + t ) + (1 -  )a bt+1 .                     (2.16)
Under the assumption of zero public debt, equation (2.16) implies that an expectation
of strict inflation targeting requires that horizon-zero agents expect an interest rate

                                      i0        ^ i}.
                                      ^t = max{-t , ^
  27
      A Markovian rational-expectations solution can also be defined when µ exceeds the bound (2.13),
but in this case it does not correspond to the limit of an equilibrium with finite-horizon planning,
as planning horizons are made arbitrarily long.
   28
      This is a common assumption in New Keynesian models used for monetary policy analysis,
though in models where Ricardian Equivalence would hold, it is without loss of generality. With
finite planning horizons, the assumption is not innocuous, as we show in section 3.

                                               17
Under the assumption that the financial wedge evolves as a two-state Markov chain,
                   0
this implies that zt = 0 if t is any date after the reversion to the normal state, while

                                    0
                                   zt = z 0  -a  << 0                                       (2.17)

if t is any date at which the crisis state continues.
     We can then use this result to solve recursively for the behavior of households and
firms with progressively longer planning horizons. First we observe that if t is any
                                                 h
date after the reversion to the normal state, zt   = 0 for all h. This can be established
                                     h
recursively; we first show that if zt = 0 for all dates after the reversion to normal for
some horizon h  0, (2.15) implies that inflation targeting will require ^     ih
                                                                               t
                                                                                 +1
                                                                                     = 0 at
                                                               h+1
any date after the reversion to normal, and hence that zt          = 0 as well. Then the
                                           0
fact that we have already shown that zt = 0 after the reversion to normal implies
        h
that zt   = 0 for all h.
     Next, consider instead dates t at which the crisis state continues, and suppose that
                                                                                    h
it has already been established for some horizon h that in any crisis state, zt       = zh,
where z h is a vector that is negative in both elements. Then it follows from (2.15)
that even if ^ ih
                t
                  +1
                     =^i (the most expansionary possible monetary policy that can be
                                             h+1
expected), in any crisis state the vector zt     will equal

                                h+1
                               zt   = µA z h - a  << 0.

                                                       h+1
Hence the ZLB will necessarily bind, and we will have zt   = z h+1 in any such state,
where
                         z h+1 = µA z h - a  << 0.                            (2.18)
It follows that the equilibrium will be Markovian,29 and that the sequence of vectors
{z h } characterizing the Markovian equilibrium can be computed recursively, using
(2.18) together with the initial condition (2.17).
     This system of equations can be recursively solved to yield
                                              h
                                   h
                               z       = -          (µA)j a  << 0                           (2.19)
                                             j =0

  29
    Note that this is not an assumption (equilibrium selection criterion), as in the case of the
rational-expectations analysis; we have shown that in the case of finite-horizon planning, there is
necessarily a unique solution, and that it has this property.


                                                  18
                    10 -2                                       10 -2
           0                                           0



           -1

                                                     -0.5
           -2



           -3
                                                      -1


           -4


                                                     -1.5
           -5



           -6
                                                      -2

           -7



           -8                                        -2.5
                0           10   20   30   40               0           10   20   30   40




Figure 1: Expenditure and rates of price increase during the crisis period, under
different assumptions about the planning horizon h (in quarters) of households and
firms, when the central bank follows a strict inflation targeting policy and there is no
response of fiscal policy.

for any planning horizon h  0. Note that the solution is well-defined for any fi-
nite h; if in addition to our more general assumptions, µ satisfies the bound (2.13),
the solution has a well-defined limit as h is made unboundedly large. In this lat-
ter case, we find that as h  , z h  z RE , so that the unique equilibrium with
finite-horizon planning approaches the Markovian rational-expectations equilibrium
discussed above. It follows that any long enough finite planning horizon will lead to
outcomes similar to those in the RE analysis.
    If planning horizons are only of modest length, however, the quantitative predic-
tions of the model with finite-horizon planning are different from those of the RE
analysis. Since each of the terms in the sum (2.19) is a vector with both elements
negative, it is evident that both y h and  h are more negative the longer the planning
horizon. This is illustrated in Figure 1, for the numerical parameter values listed in
Table 1.


                                                19
    This solution tells us the value of y h and  h for each possible planning horizon h.
These calculations are the same regardless of the distribution of planning horizons
in the economy. For a given distribution of planning horizons { h }, we can then
compute the predicted state-contingent evolution of aggregate output and inflation
by aggregating the individual decisions of the agents with different horizons. In the
case of an exponential distribution of planning horizons with  h = (1 - )h for some
0 <  < 1, the condition required for the infinite sum               h
                                                            h=0  h z to converge -- and
hence for there to be a well-defined equilibrium under the assumed policies -- is

                                             µ < µ
                                                 ¯,                                          (2.20)

where µ ¯ is defined as in (2.13). This is thus a weaker condition than (2.13), that
requires only that the product µ not be too large; it will be satisfied if either most
planning horizons are not too long ( is well below 1) or the financial disturbance
is not expected to last too long (µ is well below 1), or both. In the case that it is
satisfied, aggregate outcomes in the crisis state will be given by

                               z = - [I - µA]-1 a  << 0                                      (2.21)

Note that if (2.20) is satisfied, (2.21) is the unique solution to our model, not simply
one among multiple possible solutions, as in the rational-expectations analysis. In the
case that (2.13) is satisfied, the solution (2.21) approaches the RE solution specified
in (2.14) as  approaches 1; this provides a possible justification for selecting that
solution in a rational-expectations analysis.
    We see from Figure 1 that when households and firms have finite planning hori-
zons, the contractionary and disinflationary effects of an increase in the financial
wedge are less severe than in a rational-expectations analysis; the more short-sighted
people are assumed to be, the milder the effects. Even if we assume a 10-year planning
horizon for all households and firms (the case h = 40), the contraction is only slightly
more than half as severe as under the RE analysis.30 Nevertheless, assuming some
degree of foresight, the ZLB can pose a serious problem, under these assumptions
  30
    Even under rational expectations, the contraction is only half as large in our calculations as in
those of Eggertsson (2011), because the higher inflation target assumed in our calculations mean
that the value of  is only half as large for us. Thus the contractions shown in Figure 1 are much
smaller than a Great Depression, even when planning horizons are long.



                                               20
about policy. (A larger increase in the financial wedge would produce a correspond-
ingly larger contraction than those shown in the figure.) Thus it is still desirable to
explore whether alternative policies can mitigate this problem.
    One possibility would be to consider what can be achieved by committing to
a more expansionary monetary policy following the return of the financial wedge
to its normal level, as proposed by Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). In their RE
analysis, such a policy can greatly improve upon the outcomes associated with a
purely forward-looking inflation targeting regime; however, the effects of such "for-
ward guidance" depend entirely upon its being taken into account in the expectations
of households and firms during the crisis period, which depends upon planning hori-
zons being sufficiently long.31 An alternative approach is to consider what can be
achieved by increasing fiscal transfers in response to the financial disturbance. As we
shall see, when planning horizons are finite, the use of this additional tool can achieve
greater stabilization than even the best-designed forward guidance policy can on its
own. However, the ideal policy response will involve both increased fiscal transfers
and forward guidance regarding future interest-rate policy.


3      Fiscal Transfers and Aggregate Demand
As explained in section 2, in this paper we consider only fiscal policies in which the
real public debt Bt+1 is a function of the exogenous state in period t (including the
history of exogenous evolution of the financial wedge, through period t, and any
information available at time t about future financial wedges); but in this section we
no longer require that Bt+1 = 0 at all times. The implied state-contingent level of net
lump-sum transfers Tt is then given by equation (2.2). While we now allow the path
of the debt to respond to shocks, we consider only policies under which the process
{Bt+1 } remains within finite bounds with certainty for all time; this means that
we consider only policies under which any increase in the public debt is eventually
paid off, with certainty.32 Given this -- together with the facts that all taxes and
  31
     See Woodford and Xie (2019) for quantitative analysis of the degree to which shortening the
assumed length of planning horizons reduces the predicted effects of such policies, even when clearly
explained and fully credible.
  32
     This is true regardless of how prices, interest rates, and economic activity may evolve; thus we
do not consider the effects of "non-Ricardian" fiscal policy rules of the kind discussed, for example,



                                               21
transfers are lump-sum and distributed equally to all households, and that there are
no financial constraints (other than the "financial wedge" that allows riskless claims
on the government to trade at a lower equilibrium rate of return than private debt)
-- our model is one in which Ricardian Equivalence would hold under an assumption
of rational expectations.
    Instead, if households have finite planning horizons -- or even, if a sufficient
number of them do -- a bounded increase in the path of the real public debt (resulting
from an initial increase in lump-sum transfers, followed eventually -- though possibly
much later -- by the tax increases required to keep the debt from exploding) will
increase aggregate demand. Note that the household FOCs (2.4)­(2.5) imply that
real expenditure Yth by households with a planning horizon of h periods must satisfy
                                            h
                                                   h+1-j  ~t
                         u (Yth ) = Et [          Dt +j  ·D 0
                                                             +h v (Bt+h+1 )],                     (3.1)
                                           j =1


where the stochastic discount factors are defined by

            j            1 + ij
                              t + t                              ~t0
           Dt +1                -1       for any j  1,           D     (1 + i0
                                                                             t + t ).
                            j t+1

Now consider the effect of a fiscal policy change, that increases the planned level of
Bt+1 for at least some future dates (in at least some possible states of the world), while
decreasing it at no dates. If the paths of neither goods prices nor asset prices change
(as would be the case under Ricardian Equivalence), then (3.1) implies that Yth must
increase in any period t with the property that Bt+h+1 is increased in at least some
states that remain possible, conditional on the state at date t.33 Aggregating across
households with different planning horizons, one concludes that aggregate output Yt
must increase, in at least some periods; thus Ricardian Equivalence does not obtain.
    The key to this result, of course, is our assumption that announcement of the
policy change does not change the value function v (B ) used to evaluate terminal
states. A household with rational expectations should instead understand that if a
policy change results in a higher real public debt Bt+h+1 , it must imply higher tax
obligations in periods subsequent to t + h (that is, beyond the planning horizon);
in Woodford (2001).
  33
     This follows from the fact that both u (Y ) and v (B ) are decreasing functions of their respective
arguments.


                                                   22
                                                        i
and this should change the level of private wealth Bt    +h+1 needed in order to ensure
                                                                           i
a given level of continuation utility. Thus the correct value function v (Bt +h+1 ) would
have as another argument the aggregate supply of debt Bt+h+1 . Because the value
function takes account only of a coarse description of the household's situation --
and because the situation that gives rise to an unusually large public debt following
a financial crisis may not be similar to situations that the household has frequently
encountered in the past -- we suppose that households have not already learned how
to take this additional state variable into account in the way that they value terminal
states. Neglect of this state variable is what breaks Ricardian Equivalence. The
degree to which this is quantitatively important will depend on the extent to which
the time that it takes for the real public debt to return to its normal level following
a shock exceeds the planning horizons of many households.
    The failure of Ricardian Equivalence adds another dimension along which govern-
ment policy can shift the equilibrium allocation of resources, possibly in ways that
can improve stabilization outcomes. This is particularly easy to see in the case of an
exponential distribution of planning horizons,  h = (1 - )h for all h  0, where the
parameter 0 <  < 1 determines the mean planning horizon h        ¯  /(1 - ). In this
case, the log-linearized aggregate demand relations (2.7)­(2.8) can be aggregated to
yield
            yt = - (^  ie   ^
                        t + t - Et  t+1 ) + Et yt+1 + (1 - )(1 -  )bt+1 ,            (3.2)
where                                                        
                                          ie
                                          ^t    (1 - )               ij
                                                                   j ^t
                                                            j =0

is an average of the interest rates expected by households with different planning
horizons.34 The linearized aggregate supply relations (2.9)­(2.10) can similarly be
aggregated to yield
                                t = yt +  Et  t+1 .                            (3.3)
  34
    In Woodford (2019), this equation involves ^        it , the actual interest-rate target of the central bank,
                              e
rather than the variable ^  it defined here. The form (3.2) is more generally valid. In the earlier paper,
monetary policy is assumed to be characterized by a linear relationship among ^           it and other aggregate
variables, such as a Taylor rule ^     it = ( t , yt ; st ), where st is an exogenous state and  is linear in
the first two arguments. In such a case, the fact that the policy rule is understood by all households
implies that ^ij        j   j
               t = ( t , yt ; st ) for each horizon j ; aggregating over the different horizons then implies
that ^ie
       t = ( t , yt ; st ) = ^ it , owing to the linearity of . When the zero lower bound sometimes
constrains policy, as in the cases considered in this policy, ^       ie
                                                                       t will in general no longer equal ^it .

                                                     23
Note that equations (3.2) and (3.3) relating the evolution of aggregate output and
inflation reduce to the structural equations of the standard New Keynesian model
under rational expectations in the limit as   1.
    Equation (3.2) shows that variation in the level of real public debt bt+1 (the debt
issued in period t) shifts the aggregate-demand relation in exactly the same way as
does variation in ^ it , the central bank's interest-rate target. It follows that, if one is
concerned solely with stabilization of the aggregate variables yt and  t , there is no
need to consider varying the path of the real public debt, as long as it is possible for
the central bank to vary ^    it to the desired degree instead. However, when the zero
lower bound is a binding constraint on interest-rate policy, the fact that the public
debt can still be increased through transfer policy can effectively relax this constraint.
    This allows stabilization of the aggregate economy in cases where this would not
be possible under a policy that maintained bt+1 = 0 at all times. Note that the paths
in which yt =  t = 0 at all times are consistent with both equations (3.2) and (3.3)
holding at all times, if and only if

                              ie
                           - (^    ^
                               t + t ) + (1 - )(1 -  )bt+1 = 0                                    (3.4)

at all times. Since everyone is assumed to understand that the central bank's policy
must conform to the lower bound ^     it  ^i, the interest rates expected by households
               e
must satisfy ^it  ^
                  i at all times. Hence if t > -^   i at some time, it will not be possible
to satisfy (3.4) with bt+1 = 0.
    Instead the condition can always be satisfied if we allow fiscal transfers. Let us
suppose that the central bank's interest-rate target tracks variations in the financial
wedge to the extent that this is consistent with the ZLB, i.e., that monetary policy
ensures that
                                   it = max{-
                                   ^              ^ t, ^
                                                       i}                             (3.5)
each period.35 Then (since the interest rate is specified as a function of the exogenous
  35
     More precisely, we assume that this policy is followed during a relatively brief period in which
there is a non-trivial financial wedge, but that after that period the central bank reverts to a policy
rule that ensures achievement of its inflation target. The latter stipulation is required in order to
ensure that there should not be any long-run drift in the value functions of households and firms,
allowing us to abstract from modeling the endogenous adjustment of value functions, as discussed
in section 2. If the rule (3.5) were followed forever, then the learning process for the value functions
specified in Woodford (2019) would lead to unstable dynamics, as shown in that paper for the case
of a permanent zero financial wedge.

                                                24
       ie
state) ^t will equal ^
                     it , and condition (3.4) will be satisfied if and only if fiscal policy
is given by
                                                         ~t
                                bt+1 =                                                 (3.6)
                                         (1 - )(1 -  )
where
                                     ~ t  max{
                                              ^t + ^
                                                   i, 0}                                        (3.7)
measures the part of the financial wedge that is not offset by interest-rate policy. If
monetary policy is given by (3.5) and fiscal policy by (3.6), equilibrium will involve
yt =  t = 0 at all times, regardless of the path of the financial wedge.36


4      Coordinated Monetary and Fiscal Stabilization
       Policy
The striking result of the previous section might make it seem that there is no need
for a central bank to depart from its commitment to a strict inflation-targeting policy,
given that fiscal transfers can be varied to offset any effects on aggregate demand of
variations in the financial wedge. Can one simplify the tasks of both policy authori-
ties, and communication with the public as well, by stating that the sole concern of
the central bank should be to ensure that inflation remains equal to the target rate,
while it is the responsibility of the fiscal authority to offset any excessive financial
wedge (any positive value of   ~ t ) with fiscal transfers, so as to maintain a zero output
gap? We shall argue that this would be a mistake. Successful use of fiscal policy as a
tool of stabilization policy requires that it be supported by an appropriate monetary
policy; moreover, the ideal joint policy will involve a commitment that monetary
policy will continue to depart from the central bank's usual inflation targeting policy,
even after the financial wedge has returned to its normal size.
  36
     It is immediately obvious from inspection of equations (3.2) and (3.3) that the asserted solution
is consistent with both of these equations at all times. We show in Appendix A that this is indeed
the unique equilibrium outcome, assuming a bound on the asymptotic growth rate of the excess
financial wedge. The required condition holds, for example, in the case of the two-state Markov
process for the financial wedge introduced in section 2.3 as long as (2.20) is satisfied.




                                               25
4.1    The Dependence of Fiscal Stimulus on Monetary Accom-
       modation
It might seem from the analysis above that the central bank can commit itself to the
inflation targeting policy considered in section 2.3.2 (setting ^it as needed to achieve
the inflation target, or as low as possible if the target cannot be achieved), and that
as long as fiscal policy is given by (3.6), the outcome will be complete stabilization of
both inflation and the output gap. This would however be incorrect. It is true that
the equilibrium described at the end of the previous subsection is one in which the
paths of ^it and  t conform to the proposed monetary policy rule; but it is not true
that that equilibrium is consistent with everyone expecting that monetary policy will
be conducted in accordance with that rule. In our model, because of people's finite
planning horizons, it matters not only what happens in equilibrium, but what the
central bank would be expected to do out of equilibrium; and the complete stabiliza-
tion of macroeconomic aggregates actually depends on people's understanding that
the central bank is not determined to prevent over-shooting of the long-run inflation
target under any circumstances.
    In order to see this, we need to consider the forward plans of agents with differing
planning horizons in the equilibrium in which yt =  t = 0 at all times. Substituting
the monetary policy rule (3.5) into (2.15)­(2.16) yields
                                   j         j -1     ~
                                  zt = A Et zt +1 - a t                             (4.1)

for each j  1, and
                             0
                            zt = - a ~ t + (1 -  )a bt+1 .

In the case of an arbitrary process for the financial wedge and an arbitrary fiscal
policy, this system of equations can be solved recursively to yield
                              h
                 h
                zt   = - ·          [Aj a] Et ~ t+j + (1 -  )[Ah a] Et bt+h+1       (4.2)
                             j =0


for any planning horizon h  0. The implied solutions for the aggregates yt and  t
are then obtained by averaging over the various planning horizons h. If fiscal policy
is given by (3.6), these equations imply yt =  t = 0; however, they do not generally
        h
imply yt  = h t = 0 for each individual planning horizon.



                                             26
    Consider, for example, the case in which the financial wedge evolves according
to a two-state Markov chain of the kind proposed in section 2.3. In this case, the
right-hand side of (4.2) depends only on whether the economy is still in the crisis
state at date t, or has already returned to normal. In any period t such that the
economy remains in the crisis state, the solution is given by
                                                       h
                   h         h          µh
                  zt   = z         ·       [Ah a] -          µj [Aj a]   · ,
                                       1-             j =0

where  > 0 is the excess financial wedge in this state. Instead, in any period after
                                   h
the return to the normal state, zt   = 0. Note that the solution for z h is well-defined
for any finite horizon h, regardless of parameter values.
    One observes that in the crisis state, the elements of z h are different for different
horizons h. For example, when h = 0,

                                 y0             1
                                      =                >> 0.
                                 0         1-   

Moreover, one can show that the largest of the two positive real eigenvalues of A is
         ¯ -1 > 1, where µ
equal to µ               ¯ is the quantity introduced in (2.13). Then if µ < µ¯ , one
finds that
                                 z h  z RE << 0
as h  , where z RE is the Markovian rational-expectations solution defined in
(2.14). Thus both y h and  h are positive in the case of short enough planning horizons,
while both are negative in the case of long enough horizons.
    This is illustrated numerically in Figure 2. Here we plot y h and  h for each of
the different planning horizons, for each of several different assumptions about the
value of  (or alternatively, the mean planning horizon h     ¯ ); the values of the other
parameters are as in the calibration introduced in section 2.3.1. While in each case
the mean value of both y h and  h is equal to zero, this averages positive values for
short horizons and negative values for longer horizons. (Increasing h    ¯ increases both
y h and  h for all horizons, but this is consistent with the mean values continuing to
be the zero, because the distribution of weights shifts toward greater weight on the
                              ¯ .)
longer horizons the larger is h
    The figure underlines the fact that an equilibrium with yt =  t = 0 depends on
an understanding of the central bank's policy that allows households and firms to

                                           27
                     10 -2                                       10 -2
           20                                         2.5


                                                        2

           15
                                                      1.5


                                                        1
           10

                                                      0.5


            5                                           0


                                                      -0.5

            0
                                                       -1


                                                      -1.5
            -5

                                                       -2


           -10                                        -2.5
                 0           10   20   30   40               0           10   20   30   40




Figure 2: Expenditure and rates of price increase during the crisis period, for house-
holds and firms with different planning horizons h, under a policy that fully stabilizes
aggregate output and inflation. Each line is for a distinct value of the mean planning
        ¯ Both h and h
horizon h.             ¯ are in quarters.


anticipate that inflation would be allowed to overshoot the long-run inflation target,
under some circumstances. Even though this does not occur in the equilibrium shown
in the figures, it is anticipated in the forward plans of both households and firms,
as shown in the figure. It is important to note that in this solution, it is not just
the households and firms with short planning horizons that must believe that such
overshooting would be allowed. A household or firm with some long planning horizon
h in period t (assumed to be a crisis period) anticipates that if the crisis persists until
period t + h - j , inflation will at that time equal  j -- a positive quantity, for all
small enough j . Since this is expected to occur with positive probability (probability
µh-j ), the equilibrium with full stabilization of yt and  t depends on all households
and firms believing that with positive probability a situation will be reached in which
the central bank will allow inflation to overshoot its long-run target, because of the
central bank's commitment to accommodate the continuing fiscal stimulus.


                                                 28
   The situation would be quite different if, instead, the central bank were understood
to be committed to setting the interest rate required to achieve its inflation target,
unless constrained by the ZLB. In that case, there would be a maximum degree of
aggregate demand stimulus that could be achieved through fiscal transfers, no matter
how large the transfers might be. Under strict inflation targeting, (2.8) and (2.10)
imply

                      0
                      t = - (^i0   ^
                               t + t ) + (1 -  )bt+1

                        = min{- (^ i+  ^ t ) + (1 -  )bt+1 , 0}.

In the case of the assumed two-state Markov chain for the financial wedge, this implies
that as long as the crisis state persists, one will have

                        0   0
                        t =  =  min{(1 -  )bt+1 -  , 0}.


(The corresponding value of y 0 is simply this quantity without the prefactor .) Thus
increases in the public debt are stimulative only up to the level
                                                    
                                        bmax          .
                                                   1-

(In our numerical calibration, this amounts to 0.36 of annual GDP.37 ) For any level
bt+1  bmax , the model predicts that y 0 =  0 = 0.
                                                      h
    For any longer horizon h, we similarly will have zt = z h as long as the crisis state
persists, where crisis values {z h } can be computed recursively as follows. For any
j  1, (4.1) implies that in any crisis period,

                              j
                              t = [  +  ] µz
                                             j -1
                                                  -  

   ij
if ^t is expected to be at the lower bound. If both elements of z
                                                                  j -1
                                                                       are non-positive,
this implies inflation below target, even with the interest rate at the lower bound.
Hence the ZLB will bind, and we must have

                               z j = µA z j -1 - a  << 0.                                    (4.3)
  37
    Note that this does not mean that there would be no effect of increasing the public debt beyond
36 percent of GDP -- a level that the US is already well past. It means that, under the assumptions
of our calibration, there would be no effect of an increase by more than 36 percent of GDP relative
to the normal steady-state level of public debt.

                                              29
                    10 -2                                          10 -2
           0                                              0



           -1

                                                        -0.5
           -2



           -3
                                                         -1


           -4


                                                        -1.5
           -5



           -6
                                                         -2

           -7



           -8                                           -2.5
                0           10   20   30     40                0           10   20   30   40




Figure 3: Expenditure and rates of price increase during the crisis period, for house-
holds and firms with different planning horizons h (in quarters) when the central bank
follows a strict inflation targeting policy. The two lines correspond to the minimal
and maximal sizes of fiscal stimulus.

Under the assumption that bt+1  bmax for as long as the crisis state persists (the
most favorable assumption for a stimulative effect of fiscal policy), we have shown in
the previous paragraph that z 0 = 0; we can then show recursively using (4.3) that
both elements of z j are non-positive for all j  0. It follows that the assumption used
to derive (4.3) is valid for all j  1.
                                                                              h
    Thus under the most expansive possible fiscal policy, we will have zt        = z h as
long as the crisis state persists, where the sequence {z h } can be computed recursively
using (4.3), starting from the initial condition z 0 = 0. This yields the solution
                                             h
                                  z h = -          (µA)j -1 a  << 0
                                            j =1

                     h
for each h  1. Both yt and  h
                            t remain below their target values for all horizons h > 0,
and more so the longer the horizon. (This is illustrated for our numerical example in


                                                   30
Figure 3, which shows the values of z h both in the case of zero fiscal stimulus38 and
in the case of the maximum fiscal stimulus.) We see that fiscal stimulus can mitigate
the contractionary and disinflationary effects of the financial disturbance, but both
spending and the rate of price increase continue to fall, even with the maximum fiscal
stimulus, for all horizons h > 0; if planning horizons extend years into the future,
the fraction of the contractionary effect that can be offset using fiscal policy alone is
quite modest.
    Summing over the different planning horizons (again assuming an exponential dis-
tribution of horizons), the net effect on both aggregate output and aggregate inflation
is necessarily contractionary. As long as (2.20) is satisfied,39 the weighted average of
the {z h } is a convergent sum, and equal to
                                  
                  z = (1 - )           h z h = - [I - µA]-1 a << 0.
                                 h=0

It is not possible to fully stabilize either aggregate output or inflation; both necessarily
fall in the crisis state. Indeed, the effects on aggregate output and inflation are similar
to those obtained in the case of no fiscal response (see equation (2.21) above): they
are simply both reduced by a factor of . This means that the contractionary effects
are reduced by less than half, in the case of any mean planning horizon h         ¯ greater
than one quarter.
     Instead, it is possible to completely eliminate the contractionary effects of the
increased financial wedge on both output and inflation, if an expansionary fiscal pol-
icy (an increase in the real public debt through lump-sum transfers, in an amount
proportional to the excess financial wedge ) is combined with monetary accommo-
dation -- a commitment to keep the nominal interest rate at its lower bound during
the period in which the financial wedge is large, even if this causes inflation to over-
shoot its long-run target. A coordinated change in both monetary and fiscal policy in
response to the financial disturbance can achieve more than either policy can on its
own. Thus while fiscal transfers have an important contribution to make, in the case
that planning horizons are finite, the availability of this additional instrument does
not make monetary stabilization policy irrelevant. Moreover, the important aspect of
  38
    Note that the results for b = 0 repeat those shown in Figure 1 above.
  39
    This is the condition required for both eigenvalues of µA to be less than 1, the same condition
required for convergence as in the case of zero fiscal stimulus considered in section 2.3.2.


                                              31
monetary policy is not what the central bank actually does during the period when
the financial wedge is large (since the ZLB binds during this period); rather, it is what
it leads people to believe that it would do, in the event that the ZLB were to cease
to bind. In this sense, commitments about the determinants of future interest-rate
policy remain a crucial dimension of policy, even when aggressive use of government
transfers is possible.


4.2     The Continuing Relevance of Forward Guidance
The example considered above not only shows that the use of fiscal transfers can im-
prove stabilization outcomes, relative to what monetary policy alone can accomplish;
the results obtained might seem to make the details of monetary policy unimportant,
given sufficient latitude in the way that fiscal policy can be used. If we assume a
conventional objective for stabilization policy, in which the aim is to minimize the
expected value of a discounted sum of squared target misses
                                         
                                    E0          t [ 2    2
                                                    t + yt ],                             (4.4)
                                         t=0

then it is easy to characterize an optimal joint monetary-fiscal policy in the case of
an exponential distribution of planning horizons.
    We have shown in this case that if (3.4) is satisfied at all times, we will have
yt =  t = 0 at all times, which obviously achieves the minimum possible value of
criterion (4.4). Moreover, it is possible to choose a state-contingent evolution {bt+1 }
that satisfies (3.4) at all times, in the case of any assumed state-contingent evolution
for {^
     it }, as long as ^
                      it is a function only of the exogenous state, so that ^ie
                                                                              t =^it .40 For
example, it is not necessary for interest-rate policy to respond at all to increases in
the financial wedge in order for complete aggregate stabilization to be possible; we
could assume that ^  it = 0 at all times, and make the fiscal authority solely responsible
for responding to variations in financial conditions.
    The example suggests another strong conclusion as well: it would seem that there
is no need to contemplate any deviation from our baseline policy regime (strict in-
  40
    It is necessary, however, that we assume that interest rates do not adjust endogenously in
response to changes in bt+1 in such a way as to keep (1 - )(1 -  )bt+1 - ^  ie
                                                                             t constant; this is
the problem with an expectation that the central bank is committed to whatever interest-rate
adjustments are needed to achieve a fixed inflation target.

                                               32
flation targeting and zero public debt) in periods when financial wedges are small
(small enough so that   ~ t = 0), simply because there are transitory periods in which
the wedges are large. In the example discussed above, it is possible to achieve full sta-
bilization of aggregate variables even during a "crisis," while conducting (and being
expected to conduct) policy in a completely orthodox way as soon as the economy
reverts to the "normal" state. Thus there is no need for forward guidance, in the
sense of a commitment to more stimulative than ordinary policy for a time even after
the financial wedge is again small, for the sake of improved stabilization during the
period when the wedge is large.
    It would be wrong, however, to draw such conclusions. We should first note that,
even if minimizing the expected value of (4.4) is the sole objective of policy, the results
obtained above depend on the special assumption of an exponential distribution of
planning horizons. As a simple (but instructive) alternative case, suppose instead
that all households and firms have a common planning horizon. In this case, the level
of the nominal interest rate is not generally irrelevant; we can determine an optimal
state-contingent evolution for {^ it } even under the assumption that the path of the
public debt will be optimized for whatever monetary policy is chosen.
    Moreover, it is not generally true that it will be optimal for either the public
debt or the nominal interest to return immediately to the values associated with the
long-run steady state as soon as the financial wedge becomes small again; instead,
stabilization during the crisis period (which is necessarily imperfect) can be improved
by a commitment to continue the anomalous policies of the crisis period for a time
even after it would be possible to achieve full stabilization of both inflation and the
output gap by immediately returning to policy "orthodoxy." Thus forward guidance
(both with regard to interest-rate policy and the path of the public debt) has an
important role to play in improving outcomes during a crisis; indeed, we find that
the optimal use of forward guidance regarding interest-rate policy in a coordinated
monetary-fiscal response to the crisis is not too different than it would be if we ignored
the possibility of countercyclical government transfers.
    Let the common planning horizon be h > 0, and let us restrict attention to
policies specified by exogenous state-contingent paths for both {^    it , bt+1 }. While not
completely general, this family of possible specifications includes the kind of policy
that can achieve complete stabilization in the case considered above. It also allows
us to consider the possibility of returning immediately to complete stabilization of


                                           33
both inflation and output as soon as this is feasible, since a specification that ^       it =
   ^
-t , bt+1 = 0 at all times as soon as the economy returns to the normal state (a state
in which it is expected that financial wedges will be small from then on) will suffice
to ensure this. Within this family of policies, our goal is to choose state-contingent
                                                                                    h
paths {^ it , bt+1 } so as to minimize the expected value of (4.4), where yt = yt     , t = ht
at all times (because of the common planning horizon).
     Let us begin by considering the optimal evolution of {bt+1 }, taking as given the
state-contingent path of {^      it }. In the case of an arbitrary interest-rate policy, we
                                                             h
can use the same methods as above to show that zt              will be given by (4.2), except
that in the more general case the variable          ~ t defined in (3.7) must be replaced by
 t       ^t +^  it . Since only the evolution of the variables {zt  h
                                                                      } for horizon h matters
for the stabilization objective, it follows from this solution that the choice of bt+h+1
for any exogenous state st+h in period t + h affects no variables relevant to the
                                           h
stabilization objective other than zt        in the state at period t in which it is possible
to reach the particular state st+h at date t + h. We can then reduce the problem of
choosing an optimal state-contingent evolution for {bt+1 } to a sequence of independent
static problems: for any state st in period t, choose the level of bt+h+1 in the states
at date t + h that are possible conditional on being in state st so as to minimize
     h
L(zt   )  ( h       2       h 2          h
                 t ) + (yt ) , where zt is given by the generalized version of (4.2).
     This is a convex minimization problem, with a unique interior solution character-
ized by a first-order condition. If we introduce the notation

                                                    j
                                      Aj a =
                                                    j

for each j  0, then the first-order condition is given by

                                    hh      h
                                     t + h yt = 0.


   Substituting the generalization of (4.2) into this yields a linear equation (with a
unique solution) for the expected public debt at the end of the planning horizon:
                                            h
                                                  h j +  h  j
                     Et bt+h+1   =                            Et  t+j .                 (4.5)
                                   1-      j =0
                                                  2 h +  2
                                                         h


Substituting this solution into the generalization of (4.2) then yields an equation for


                                            34
 h
zt in the case of an optimal transfer policy, but arbitary interest-rate policy,
                                                             h-1
                           - h                                      j  h - h  j
               h
              zt   = t             ,      where t                               Et  t+j .      (4.6)
                           h                                 j =0
                                                                    2   h +  2
                                                                             h

                                                   h
It follows that the minimum achievable value of L(zt ), given interest-rate policy, will
be given by
                                                   2
                              Lt = (2           2
                                          h +  h ) t ,

where t is the function of financial wedges and interest rates defined in (4.6).
    Given that these results obtain regardless of the assumed interest-rate policy, the
choice of an optimal interest-rate policy reduces to the choice of a state-contingent
evolution {^ it } subject to the lower bound (2.11) holding at all times, so as to minimize
the expected value of             t 2
                             t=0   t , where  t is given by (4.6). If the ZLB never binds,
this problem will be solved by choosing ^      it = - ^ t each period, so that   t = 0 at all
times, implying that t = 0 at all times. However, this will be possible if and only if
financial wedges are never large, i.e.,    ~ t = 0 at all times -- the same condition as is
required for complete stabilization to be possible under the constraint that bt+1 = 0
at all times. While the availability of countercyclical fiscal transfers as an additional
policy instrument reduces the losses associated with a given process {            t } for the
financial wedges not offset by contemporaneous interest-rate adjustments, it does not
change the fact that complete stabilization requires (except in the case where h = 0)
that one be able to ensure that        t = 0 at all times. As discussed in section 2.3, this
is sometimes precluded by the ZLB.
    We can also see that in general, when complete stabilization is not possible, the
optimal second-best policy will involve committing to maintain bt+1 > 0 and/or ^        it < 0
(that is, deviation from the policies associated with the long-run steady state) even in
some periods t after the financial wedge has again become small, so that an immediate
return to the long-run steady state would be possible. Suppose instead that one were
to have ^ it = 0 (and hence      t = 0) for all t  T, where T is the (possibly random)
date at which reversion to the "normal" state occurs, while          t is instead necessarily
positive (because of the ZLB) at all dates 0  t < T. It would then follow that at any
date t (and in any state of the world at that date) at which the financial wedge remains
large,   t > 0 and     t+j is also anticipated to be non-negative in all possible successor
states with j > 0; hence the right-hand side of (4.5) will necessarily be positive.41
  41
       Here we use the fact that all elements of the vector a and the matrix A are positive, implying

                                                 35
We can thus conclude that optimal policy would require that Et bt+h+1 > 0.
    If we further suppose that t is a date such that the financial wedge remains large
at date t, but it is foreseen that it will necessarily be small at date t + h, then this
requires that bt+h+1 > 0 with positive probability even after reversion to the normal
state. Furthermore, on the assumption that the economy is already in the normal
state at date t + h, and hence that ^   it+h = 0 in all possible states at that date, a
policy under which bt+h+1 > 0 in some state st+h will also have to involve  0    t+h > 0
               42
in that state. Thus the optimal joint fiscal-monetary policy must also involve an
understanding that inflation would be allowed to overshoot its long-run target, even
in some periods t  T. Stabilization outcomes during the period when the financial
wedge remains large (and the ZLB consequently binds) are improved by committing
to continue expansionary policies for a time beyond the date T at which it would be
possible to again achieve complete stabilization using orthodox (and purely forward-
looking) policies.
    In fact, it will not generally be optimal for the central bank to set ^it = 0 for all
t  T ; it can easily be optimal to set a lower level of interest rates, and even to
keep the nominal interest rate at its lower bound, in the early periods following the
reversion to the normal state. This is illustrated by a numerical example in Figure
4.43 In this example, all households and firms are assumed to have planning horizons
extending eight quarters into the future (h = 8), and the financial disturbance at date
t = 0 increases the financial wedge (to the extent assumed in the numerical calibration
proposed in section 2.3) for ten quarters. We furthermore assume for simplicity that
it is known from t = 0 onward that the financial wedge will be elevated for exactly
ten quarters (rather than assuming stochastic exit from the crisis state, as in the
two-state Markov case), so that T = 10 with certainty.
    The several panels of the figure show the (deterministic) evolution of the finan-
cial wedge, output, inflation, the nominal interest rate, and the real public debt in
response to such a disturbance,44 under three possible assumptions about monetary
that j ,  j > 0 for all j  0.
  42
     This follows from (4.2), given that  h > 0.
  43
     We discuss further the calculations involved, and show how the results depend on the assumed
planning horizon, in Appendix B.
  44
     Here the financial wedge, inflation and the nominal interest rate are reported in annualized
terms:  ^ t = 0.05 means a safety premium of 5 percentage points per year (and is equivalent to the
value ^ = 0.013 given in Table 1, where the value is for a quarterly model). Output is reported as



                                              36
                      10 -2
             5



             0


                      10 -2
             0
            -2
            -4



                      10 -2
             0

           -0.5

            -1


                      10 -2

             0

            -2

            -4



             2
             1
             0

                  0           2   4   6    8        10   12      14     16     18      20




Figure 4: Equilibrium trajectories in the case of an elevated financial wedge for 10
quarters (panel (a)), under three alternative assumptions about policy: (i) bt+1 = 0
at all times, and ^it = max{-     ^ t, ^
                                       i}; (ii) bt+1 = 0 at all times, but the path {^ it }
is chosen optimally; or (iii) the paths of both {bt+1 } and {^  it } are chosen optimally.
Planning horizons extend 8 quarters into the future, and t measures quarters since
the onset of the elevated financial wedge.

and fiscal policy, which is to say about the paths of {^  it } and {bt+1 }. (Both of these
evolve deterministically under all of the policies considered, since no further uncer-
tainty is resolved after date t = 0.) In case (i), we assume that ^ it tracks the variation
in the "natural rate of interest" (the interest rate required for stabilization of the
output gap, as specified in (3.5)), and that bt+1 = 0 (no response of fiscal policy to
the disturbance). These assumptions lead to the same outcomes as under the "ortho-
dox" policy discussed in section 2.3, though here we define the policies in a way that
a percentage deviation from the long-run steady state level of output, and real public debt in units
of years of long-run steady state real GDP.



                                               37
makes them a particular case of the class of policies studied in this section. As in
section 2.3, the consequence is output contraction and inflation below target during
the crisis period, but immediate stabilization of both output and inflation as soon as
the economy reverts to the normal state; the only difference from the results shown
in section 2.3 is that here, because the expected time to the reversion to the normal
state falls as time passes during the crisis state, the effects on output and inflation
are both largest at the onset of the financial disturbance.
     In case (ii), we again assume that bt+1 = 0 at all times, but consider optimal
forward guidance with respect to the future evolution of the central bank's nominal
interest-rate target {^it }. In case (iii), we instead allow the paths of both {^   it } and
{bt+1 } to be optimized. In the latter case, we see that the optimal joint fiscal-monetary
commitment involves promising to maintain both bt+1 > 0 and ^       it < 0 for a time after
the reversion to the normal state in quarter 10. The figure (panel (e)) shows that
optimal policy requires an increase in the public debt (by an amount equal to nearly
two years' GDP) by at least quarter 8,45 which must then be maintained in quarter
9. In quarter 10, when the financial wedge has returned to zero (see panel (a)), it
continues to be optimal to maintain a larger public debt than in the long-run steady
state (though not as large as the debt in quarters 8 and 9); and the optimal level of
the debt continues to be somewhat positive in quarters 11 and later, though much
smaller than the earlier levels of debt.
     The optimal joint fiscal-monetary commitment also involves keeping the nominal
interest rate lower than its long-run steady-state level, for two quarters following the
reversion of the financial wedge to zero. Panel (d) of the figure shows that under policy
(iii), the nominal interest rate remains at the zero lower bound in quarter 10, even
though it would be possible at this time to return immediately to the long-run steady
state (and policy (i) would require ^ it = 0 from t = 10 onward). The nominal interest
rate also remains well below its long-run steady-state level in quarter 11, though no
  45
     Because all households and firms are assumed to have horizon h = 8 in these calculations, the
response of the public debt in quarters 0 through 7 in response to the shock has no consequences
for behavior. Thus the value of bt+1 under the optimal policy is indeterminate in these periods;
this is the meaning of the dotted line shown in the figure for those periods. (The figure shows the
public debt being immediately increased at the time that the financial wedge increases, since in the
periods for which there is a unique solution, the public debt should be maintained at a constant
level proportional to the increase in the financial wedge. But a more gradual increase in the public
debt between quarters 0 and 8 would have the same effect on equilibrium output and inflation.)


                                               38
longer at the lower bound. As in rational-expectations analyses of optimal forward
guidance, a commitment to keep the interest rate "low for longer" following the
reversion of the financial wedge to zero improves stabilization during earlier periods
when the financial wedge is large (and the ZLB precludes complete stabilization as a
result). (Even though planning horizons extend only eight quarters into the future,
in this example, it remains true that expectations regarding ^ i10 affect the values of t
in quarters t = 3 through 9.)
    Indeed, the degree to which it is optimal to commit to keep interest rates low
beyond date T = 10 is similar in the case when fiscal transfers are used optimally
(case (iii)) as in the case where fiscal transfers cannot be used (case (ii)). The most
important difference in the nature of optimal policy (and in stabilization outcomes)
when fiscal policy can respond to the financial disturbance is that increasing public
debt outstanding at the ends of quarters 8 and 9 can increase aggregate demand in
quarters 0 and 1 -- points in time at which a commitment to lower interest rates in
quarter 10 or later can have no effect, because planning horizons extend only eight
quarters into the future. A somewhat greater degree of stabilization in quarter 2 is
also possible when fiscal transfers are used, because even though the commitment
to lower interest rates in quarter 10 affects aggregate demand, the extent to which
interest-rate policy can be used is limited, as the ZLB continues to bind in quarter
10. Instead, the equilibrium paths of both inflation and output are similar from t = 3
onward under cases (ii) and (iii). Stabilization is also superior in quarters 3 through
8 under these policies (relative to case (i)); but most of the improvement is already
achieved by the use of interest-rate forward guidance alone (case (ii)).
    It is also important to recognize that the superior stabilization outcomes shown
in case (iii) of Figure 4 depend on people's understanding that under this policy, the
central bank is committed to maintaining low interest rates even if inflation and/or
output overshoot their long-run target values, and even if such overshooting occurs at
date T = 10 or later (which is to say, after complete stabilization has again become
feasible). We first note that panel (c) of Figure 4 shows that under the optimal fiscal-
monetary commitment, inflation is allowed to overshoot its long-run target value in
quarters 0 through 8; this is because over this period, this degree of demand stimulus
remains insufficient to raise output to its target level -- some degree of over-shooting
of inflation is tolerated in order not to have even greater under-shooting of output.
But we further observe that this degree of stabilization depends on allowing people to


                                         39
                          -2
                     10
            6

            4

            2

            0



                     10 -2
            2



            0



            -2



                     10 -2
           0.2

           0.1

            0

          -0.1
                 0             2   4   6   8        10   12   14    16     18    20




                                                                   h                     h
Figure 5: Dashed lines show the expected paths of output (y         |t ) and inflation (  |t )
for dates t    t + h, under the plans calculated by households and firms with
horizon h = 8 at successive dates t, in the case that both monetary and fiscal policy
commitments are optimal (case (iii) from Figure 4). The solid lines show the predicted
                         h                      h
actual paths of output (yt |t ) and inflation ( t|t ). Both t and  indicate quarters since
the onset of the disturbance (again shown in panel (a)).

believe that (under circumstances that are actually counter-factual) monetary policy
would allow both output and inflation to over-shoot their targets simultaneously.
    Figure 5 shows the paths of output and inflation that are anticipated in the
forward plans of households and firms, in the case (iii) equilibrium of Figure 4. Here
the assumed path of the financial wedge is shown again in panel (a) -- because this is
an exogenous variable, actual and anticipated paths coincide. In the other two panels,
the paths of output and inflation that are anticipated looking forward from each date
are shown. If we let y |t (respectively,   |t ) denote the level of output (inflation) in
period  that is anticipated during forward planning in period t, then the figure shows
the paths {y |t } and {  |t } for dates t    t + 8, looking forward from each of a
succession of dates t. The solid line in each panel shows the actually realized path of
the variable (the paths of yt = yt|t and  t =  t|t as functions of t); the dashed lines
instead show the paths of y |t and   |t as functions of  , with a separate dashed line


                                               40
for each value of t.
     Note that these anticipated paths involve greater over-shooting of long-run targets
than the actually realized paths do. Furthermore, the over-shooting is anticipated
to extend into the period t  10 in which complete stabilization would be possible.
For example, both inflation and output are anticipated to over-shoot their long-run
targets simultaneously in quarter 10, in the forward plans of people looking forward
from quarters t = 2 through 7; both are anticipated to over-shoot simultaneously
in quarter 11, by people looking forward from quarters t = 3 through 6. Thus not
only does the optimal forward guidance express an intention to keep interest rates
below their long-run level in these quarters, but it requires people to believe that the
central bank will do so even though (in the calculations of people considering this
period several quarters earlier) this is expected to lead to over-shooting of the long-
run targets for both inflation and output. Despite the optimal use of counter-cyclical
transfer policy, it remains valuable for the central bank to communicate that it will
not quickly return to pursuit of its normal targets following a period in which the
financial wedge has been so elevated as to cause the ZLB to bind.
     It might be thought that these conclusions depend on our having assumed that all
households and firms have planning horizons of exactly the same length, while forward
guidance about policy after the financial wedge reverts to a normal level would be
unnecessary in the case of a heterogeneous distribution of planning horizons of the
kind assumed in section 3. But the results in section 3 show only that in the case of an
exponential distribution of planning horizons, a relatively simple policy commitment
suffices to completely stabilize both an overall price index (or inflation rate) and
aggregate output. This implies that the loss function (4.4) can be minimized by
such a policy; yet the proposed policy does not really eliminate all distortions in the
allocation of resources.
     In a representative-household model, a loss function of the form (4.4) can be justi-
fied as a quadratic approximation to the level of expected utility of the representative
household, under conditions discussed by Woodford (2003) and Benigno and Wood-
ford (2005). However, those derivations apply to a model in which the aggregate
output measure Yt (or rather, Yt - Gt , where Gt is the quantity of the composite
good consumed by the government) represents the quantity of the composite good
consumed by each household, and in which all firms that reconsider their price in pe-
riod t choose the same (optimal) new price, so that the only reason for the prices of


                                         41
different goods to be mis-aligned is that different firms adjust their prices at different
dates.
    In the model considered here, instead, if the planning horizons of different house-
holds and firms are heterogeneous, then households with different planning horizons
will generally consume different amounts at a given point in time (as illustrated by
panel (a) of Figure 2), and firms with different planning horizons will generally set
different prices even when they adjust their prices at the same point in time (as
illustrated by panel (b) of that same figure). This creates additional sources of ineffi-
ciency in the allocation of resources: non-uniform allocation of the goods produced at
a given date to the different households reduces average utility (and hence reduces the
representative household's ex ante expected utility, since households do not know ex
ante which planning horizon they will have), and dispersion in the prices of the goods
supplied by different firms (even though the aggregate inflation rate never varies)
means that the composite good will be obtained in a way that uses more resources
than necessary (because the quantities supplied of the different differentiated goods
will not be uniform).
    We leave a full analysis of welfare-optimal policy in the case of a heterogeneous
distribution of planning horizons for future work, but one general point can be noted
here. Once one recognizes that there are many different distortions each period (as-
sociated with the separate pricing and expenditure decisions of agents with different
planning horizons) that must all be set to zero in order to achieve the first-best al-
location of resources, it is evident that a first-best outcome will not generally be
achievable, even when both fiscal transfer policy and interest-rate policy are available
as instruments (assuming that neither can be separately targeted to households or
firms depending on their planning horizon).
    And the fact that the first-best allocation is not achievable makes it implausible
that it will be optimal to fully stabilize both inflation and output as soon as the
financial wedge reverts to its normal level (at some random date T ), even though this
would be optimal if one only cared about outcomes from date T onward. The reason is
that changing anticipated outcomes after date T can change the allocation of resources
prior to date T (when stabilization is incomplete, even under the second-best optimal
policy), and it will be optimal to choose at least some degree of distortion after date
T for the sake of reducing the much larger distortions before date T , just as in the
RE analysis of Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). Hence we should expect in general


                                          42
that forward guidance regarding policy after date T will be useful in mitigating the
distortions created by the large financial wedge of the crisis period.


5    Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we reconsider the nature of effective stabilization policy when the zero
lower bound is a relevant constraint on the effectiveness of conventional monetary pol-
icy, by relaxing the unrealistic assumption that people should be able to deductively
reason about the economy's future evolution under a novel policy regime arbitrarily
far into the future. We examine the robustness of conclusions about the consequences
of particular combined monetary-fiscal regimes to changes in the assumed degree of
decision makers' foresight in the economy. We find that when planning horizons are
finite, the contractionary effects of a financial disturbance are less dramatic than
in the rational-expectations analysis. But, as long as there is some degree of fore-
sight, even a relatively modest financial wedge can substantially impact stabilization
goals, if additional tools of stabilization policy beyond those needed under normal
circumstances are not available.
    Given that Ricardian equivalence does not hold when people have finite horizons,
we consider in particular the extent to which pure variation in the government's
budget balance, i.e., changes in the size of lump-sum transfers, can serve as a tool of
stabilization policy. We show that fiscal transfers can be a powerful tool to reduce
the contractionary impact of a financial disturbance, and can even make possible a
complete stabilization of both aggregate output and inflation, despite the binding
ZLB constraint. But the power of fiscal transfers relies on the degree of monetary
accommodation of such transfers.
    Moreover, neither the availability of transfer policy nor the fact that the length of
planning horizons is bounded makes commitments about interest-rate policy beyond
the date at which the financial disturbance has dissipated, of the kind argued for
in the rational-expectations analysis of Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), no longer
relevant. We show that the use of such forward guidance along with fiscal policy
achieves better stabilization outcomes than fiscal policy alone would achieve under
an understanding that the central bank will return to pursuit of its usual inflation
target once the financial wedge is again modest in size. In a numerical example that
we present, the degree to which it is optimal to commit to a continuation of looser

                                         43
monetary policy beyond the time at which fundamentals have reverted to normal is
roughly the same in the case of an optimal state-contingent transfer policy as in the
case of no response of fiscal transfers to the disturbance at all. Thus while the rational-
expectations analysis exaggerates the quantitative effects of forward guidance policies
as a response to the kind of financial disturbance considered here,46 a commitment
to keeping interest rates "lower for longer" following a crisis that causes the ZLB to
become a binding constraint continues to be desirable in the framework for policy
analysis proposed here.
  46
    This has been noted by a number of authors, including Andrade et al. (2019), Angeletos and
Lian (2018), Del Negro et al. (2015), Farhi and Werning (2019), Gabaix (2019), Garc´
                                                                                   ia-Schmidt
and Woodford (2019), Gust et al., (2018), and Woodford (2019).




                                            44
References
 [1] Andrade, Philippe, Gaetano Gaballo, Eric Mengus, and Benoit Mojon, "Forward
     Guidance and Heterogeneous Beliefs," American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
     nomics 11: 1-29 (2019).

 [2] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Chen Lian, "Forward Guidance Without Com-
     mon Knowledge," American Economic Review 108: 2477-2512 (2018).

 [3] Ascari, Guido, and Neil Rankin, "Effectiveness of Government Debt for Demand
     Management: Sensitivity to Monetary Policy Rules," Journal of Economic Dy-
     namics and Control 37: 1544-1566 (2013).

 [4] Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford, "Inflation Stabilization and Wel-
     fare: The Case of a Distorted Steady State," Journal of the European Economic
     Association 3: 1185-1236 (2005).

 [5] Caballero, Ricardo J., and Emmanuel Farhi, "The Safety Trap," Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies 85: 223-274 (2017).

 [6] Calvo, Guillermo A., "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics 12: 383-398 (1983).

 [7] Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, "When Is the
     Government Spending Multiplier Large?" Journal of Political Economy 119:
     78-121 (2011).

 [8] Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tam-
     balotti, "Safety, Liquidity and the Natural Rate of Interest," Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, Spring 2017, pp. 235-294.

 [9] Del Negro, Marco, Marc P. Giannoni, and Christina Patterson, "The Forward
     Guidance Puzzle," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 574,
     revised December 2015.

[10] Eggertsson, Gauti B., "What Fiscal Policy Is Effective at Zero Interest Rates?"
     NBER Macroeconomics Annual 25: 59-122 (2011).



                                       45
[11] Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, "The Zero Bound on Interest
     Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     Spring 2003, pp. 139-211.

[12] Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning, "Monetary Policy, Bounded Rationality,
     and Incomplete Markets," American Economic Review 109: 38887-3928 (2019).

[13] Gabaix, Xavier, "A Behavioral New Keynesian Model," NBER Working Paper
     no. 22954, revised June 2019.

[14] Garc´ ia-Schmidt, Mariana, and Michael Woodford, "Are Low Interest Rates De-
     flationary? A Paradox of Perfect-Foresight Analysis," American Economic Re-
     view 109: 86-120 (2019).

[15] Gust, Christopher, Edward Herbst, and David L´ opez-Salido, "Forward Guidance
     with Bayesian Learning and Estimation," Finance and Economics Discussion
     Series no. 2018-072, Federal Reserve Board, September 2018.

[16] Gust, Christopher, Edward Herbst, and David L´  opez-Salido, "Short-Term Plan-
     ning, Monetary Policy, and Macroeconomic Persistence," Finance and Economics
     Discussion Series no. 2020-003, Federal Reserve Board, December 2019.

[17] Leeper, Eric, "Equilibria under `Active' and `Passive' Monetary and Fiscal Poli-
     cies," Journal of Monetary Economics 27: 129-147 (1991).

[18] Mertens, Thomas, and John C. Williams, "What to Expect from the Lower
     Bound on Interest Rates: Evidence from Derivatives Prices," Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York Staff Report no. 865, August 2018.

[19] Taylor, John B., "Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39: 195-214 (1993).

[20] Taylor, John B., "Fiscal Stimulus Programs During the Great Recession," Eco-
     nomics Working Paper no. 18117, Hoover Institution, December 2018.

[21] Woodford, Michael, "Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability," Journal of Money,
     Credit and Banking 33: 669-728 (2001).



                                       46
[22] Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary
     Policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003.

[23] Woodford, Michael, "Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multi-
     plier," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3: 1-35 (2011).

[24] Woodford, Michael, "Monetary Policy Analysis when Planning Horizons are Fi-
     nite." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 33: 1-50 (2019).

[25] Woodford, Michael, and Yinxi Xie, "Policy Options at the Zero Lower Bound
     when Foresight is Limited," AEA Papers and Proceedings 109: 433-437 (2019).

[26] Xie, Yinxi, "Fiscal and Monetary Policy Interaction under Limited Fore-
     sight," working paper, Columbia University, January 2020. [Available at:
     econ.columbia.edu/e/yinxi-xie/]




                                     47
A         Output and Inflation Stabilization with an
          Exponential Distribution of Planning Horizons
Here we demonstrate that the combination of a monetary policy specified by (3.5) and
a fiscal policy specified by (3.6) each period imply complete stabilization of aggregate
output and inflation at all times, in the case of an exponential distribution of planning
horizons,  h = (1 - )h for all h  0. In the text, we have already shown that this
monetary rule implies that the spending and price-increase decisions of households
and firms with an arbitrary planning horizon h are given by equation (4.2). This is a
well-defined, unique solution, independent of any assumption about the distribution
of planning horizons in the economy. There will therefore exist a well-defined, unique
solution in the case of an exponential distribution of planning horizons if and only if
the infinite sums                                 
                                              zt = (1 - )               h zt
                                                                           h
                                                                                                         (A.1)
                                                                 h=0
                    h
converge, where zt    is given by (4.2). This is the issue that remains to be addressed.
    Let us first consider the partial sum that aggregates the decisions of only the part
of the population with horizons less than or equal to k periods,
                                                                    k
                                              (k)
                                          zt        = (1 - )            h zt
                                                                           h

                                                                  h=0

for some finite k. This finite sum is obviously well-defined; it remains to be determined
                           (k)
whether the sequence {zt } converges as k is made large.
    Substituting (4.2) into this definition yields
                            k         h                                               k
    (k)                                                 ~ t+j + (1 -  )(1 - )
  zt      = - (1 - )             h            [Aj a] Et                                    h [Ah a] Et bt+h+1
                           h=0       j =0                                            h=0
                            k    k                                                    k
          = - (1 - )                      j
                                       [A a] Et ~ t+h + (1 -  )(1 - )
                                                h
                                                                                           h [Ah a] Et bt+h+1
                           h=0 j =h                                                  h=0
               k
          =         [Ah a]Et [(1 -  )(1 - )h bt+h+1 -  (h - k+1 )~ t+h ].
              h=0

If we further substitute the fiscal rule (3.6) into this, we obtain
                                                            k
                                  (k)                k+1                   ~ t+h .
                                 zt           =                  [Ah a] Et                               (A.2)
                                                           h=0


                                                       48
Thus the condition required for a well-defined solution is convergence of the sequence
defined by the right-hand side of (A.2) as k becomes large.
    The existence of a well-defined limit depends on the asymptotic rate of growth
of the expected future excess financial wedge Et       ~ t+h . A sufficient condition for the
existence of a well-defined solution is that   ~ t = 0 with probability one beyond some
                                                             (k)
finite future date T . In this case, for all k  T - t, zt is a constant multiple of k ,
and hence converges to zero as k is made large (regardless of the value of  < 1).
    But this is not necessary: a weaker sufficient condition is that there exists a finite
constant C > 0 such that Et     ~ t+h  C · µh for all h, where µ  0 is a growth factor
satisfying (2.20). As discussed in the text, this bound implies that both eigenvalues
of A are less than -1 µ-1 . The partial sum k             h
                                                   h=0 [A a] is therefore positive, increases
in k , and grows asymptotically with a growth factor less than -1 µ-1 . Hence the
right-hand side of (A.2) is necessarily non-negative (since (3.7) implies that         ~ 0
at all times), and bounded above by a positive sequence that converges to zero at an
exponential rate as k is made large.
    Hence under this condition, the infinite sum in (A.1) is well-defined, and equal to
                                                (k)
                                   zt = lim zt        = 0.
                                          k

Thus the specified joint fiscal-monetary regime implies the existence of a well-defined
unique equilibrium, in which yt =  t = 0 at all times, as stated in the text. Among
the cases in which a well-defined equilibrium exists is the two-state Markov process
for the financial wedge introduced in section 2.3, under the assumption that the
probability µ of continuation of the crisis state satisfies (2.20), the condition already
discussed in section 2.3.2 for the existence of a well-defined equilibrium in the case of
a balanced-budget policy and strict inflation targeting.


B      Optimal Fiscal-Monetary Policy Coordination:
       Numerical Methods
In this section, we propose a numerical method to compute the solutions for optimal
exogenous state-contingent fiscal transfer policy and interest rate policy. Assume
all the agents have the same planning horizon, and the path of financial wedge is
perfectly predictable, i.e., ^ t = -^
                                    i +  for 0  t < T - 1, where  > 0 is the excess

                                           49
financial wedge that cannot be offset by a reduction in nominal interest rate, and
 ^ = 0 for all t  T . We consider the following class of policies: the fiscal policy is
specified by an exogenous path of the real public debt bt+1 , and the monetary policy
is specified by an exogenous path of the nominal interest rate ^ it consistent with the
ZLB constraint (2.11).
    The structural equations (2.7) and (2.9) can be written as
                                 j
                                zt     j
                                   = Azt +1 - a(^
                                                it + ^ t)

for all j  1, while (2.8) and (2.10) can be written as
                            0
                           zt = -a(^
                                   it + ^ t ) + (1 -  )abt+1 ,

         j     j j
where zt   = [yt  t ] and the matrices A and a are defined as in (2.12).
     Since the path of  ^ t is exogenously given, the policy variables {^
                                                                        it , bt+1 } can be
equivalently described by the sequences of {      t , bt+1 }, where t = ^ it +    ^ t . The
problem of solving optimal monetary and fiscal policy is then to choose {      t , bt+1 } for
all t  0, subject to the constraints that     t   > 0 for all 0  t < T and            t  ^  i
for all t  T , so as to minimize the welfare loss (4.4).
     Now we characterize the solution to such an optimal fiscal and monetary policy
problem. Let us first take the sequence of {      t } as given, and derive the optimal
choice of the sequence {bt+1 }, which is a sequence of independent static optimization
problems. More specifically, for any period t  0, we choose bt+h+1 to minimize
( h   2      h 2            h   h
   t ) + (yt ) , where {yt ,  t } are given by

                      h
                        = - h      j                 h
                     zt     j =0 [A a]t+j + (1 -  )[A a]bt+h+1 .                       (B.3)

   Denote [Aj a] = [j  j ] for each j  0, and then the F.O.C.s of the problem for
optimal fiscal transfer policy are given by
                                           h
                                     h  h zt = 0,

which yields the unique solution of bt+h+1 to be

                                      h                  
                                      j =0 (h j +  h  j )t+j
                          bt+h+1 =                           .                         (B.4)
                                        (1 -  )(2      2
                                                 h +  h)

   By substituting the expression of bt+h+1 into (B.3), the output and inflation under
the optimal fiscal transfer policy conditional on a given state-contingent interest rate

                                           50
policy are thus given by
                                                 (h j +  h  j ) h
                        h
                          = - h -1    j                               t+j
                       zt     j =0 {[A a] -                    [A a]}
                                                  2 h +  2
                                                         h


                                          -1              h
                                   = [- h
                                        j =0  j t+j ]       ,
                                                         -h
                   - 
where j = j    h   h j
                2 + 2  for each 0  j  h - 1. It follows that the minimized value of
                h   h
the objective function Lt  ( h     2    h 2
                                t ) + (yt ) is equal to


                                Lt = [ h -1         2 2    2
                                       j =0  j t+j ] (h +  h ).


   We now consider the optimal monetary policy {   t } so as to minimize   t Lt ,
                                                                            t=0
                                                          
subject to the constraint t   > 0 for all 0  t < T and t  ^     i for all t  T . The
                                 
F.O.C.s of the optimal choice of t for any t  h - 1 are given by
                              -1 -j h-1                     
                            h
                            j =0  [l=0  l t-j +l ] j  0, t  t ,                        (B.5)

where at least one of these inequalities must hold with equality, and  t =  for all
0  t < T and    t = ^i for all t  T . Instead, for any 0  t < h - 1, the F.O.C.s are
given by
                             -j  h-1                        
                      t j =0  [l=0  l t-j +l ] j  0, t  t .                   (B.6)
    We conjecture that the solution of {      t } to (B.5) and (B.6) has the following form:
there exists a T  such that the ZLB binds in every period up to some date T   0,
and then the ZLB never binds for any dates t  T  , i.e., for any 0  t < T  ,        t =    t,
                 -1                                         
while j  -j [h                                       
                l=0  l t-j +l ] j = 0 for all t  T , and t  0 as t  .
    Under this conjecture, for numerical purpose, we assume that there exists a large
enough T max such that      t = 0 for any date t > T max .47 Then (B.5) and (B.6) give
a total number of T max - T  + 1 linear equations for the periods T   t  T max
in which the ZLB is not binding, with the unknown variables {           t }T max
                                                                           t=T  . This linear
system yields a unique solution if there exists one. Thus we can start with T  = 0
and increase the possible values of T  until we find a value of T  satisfying all the
inequality conditions. In other words, for a given guess of T  , we have a system of
linear equations to solve with a unique solution {          t }; then we check whether the
solution satisfies a sequence of inequalities (in which case it is the desired solution).
  47
       In the numerical exercise, we take T max = 200.

                                                 51
    Once we get the solution of T  and the sequence of {  t }, the optimal fiscal transfer
policy is accordingly pinned down by (B.4). With the solution of optimal fiscal and
monetary policy, the realized paths of output and inflation are then given by (B.3),
while the expected path of output and inflation are given by (2.7)-(2.10).
    Figure B.6 and B.7 show the equilibrium dynamics of output, inflation, interest
rate, and public debt with different common planning horizons under the optimal
fiscal transfer policy and monetary policy. In these figures, the economy enters the
crisis state at time t = 0 and reverts to the normal state after 10 quarters (T = 10).
All the variables are reported in annualized terms. Moreover, Figure B.8 illustrates
the expected and realized paths of output and inflation under the optimal combined
fiscal-monetary policy with a common planning horizon h = 20. The dashed lines in
the figure indicate the expected paths of output and inflation in the agents' forward
planning exercise, while the solid lines indicate the realized paths of output and
inflation.
    So far, we have shown the numerical methods for the solution of optimal com-
bined fiscal transfer policy and interest rate policy. In order to highlight the role of
fiscal transfer policy, we now consider the case of optimal exogenous state-contingent
interest rate policy but with bt+1 = 0 at all times (as included in Figure 4). In this
case, the dynamics of output and inflation (B.3) are instead given by

                                 h
                                zt = - h      j  
                                       j =0 [A a]t+j .


Then, the minimized value of the objective function Lt  ( h  2    h 2
                                                          t ) + (yt ) is equal to


                       Lt = [ h            2    h           2
                              j =0  j t+j ] + [ j =0 j t+j ] .


   The F.O.C.s for the optimal monetary policy with bt+1 = 0 for any t are thus
given by

           h    -j h                    h                        
           j =0  [(l=0  l t-j +l ) j + (l=0 l t-j +l )j ]  0, t  t ,


for any t  h, while for any 0  t < h, the F.O.C.s are given by

           t    -j h                    h                        
           j =0  [(l=0  l t-j +l ) j + (l=0 l t-j +l )j ]  0, t  t .


   We similarly conjecture that there exists a T  such that the ZLB binds in every
period up to some date T   0, and then the ZLB never binds for any dates t  T  .

                                          52
                     10 -2
            5



            0


                     10 -2
            1
            0
            -1
            -2


                     10 -2
           0.1
          0.05
            0
         -0.05


                     10 -2

            0

            -2

            -4


            2

            1

            0

                 0           2   4   6   8        10   12   14   16   18   20




Figure B.6: Equilibrium trajectories in the case of an elevated financial wedge for 10
quarters, for households and firms with relatively short common planning horizons,
under the paths of both {bt+1 } and {^
                                     it } being chosen optimally. The planning horizon
h is in quarters, and t measures quarters since the onset of the elevated financial
wedge.

With the same numerical method as in solving the optimal combined fiscal-monetary
policy problem, we can similarly solve for the optimal monetary policy of { t } under
the assumption of bt+1 = 0 at all times.




                                             53
                     10 -2
            5



            0


                     10 -2
            2

            0

            -2


                     10 -2
          0.05
            0
         -0.05



                     10 -2

            0

            -2

            -4




           0.2

            0

          -0.2
                 0           5   10   15   20        25   30   35   40   45   50




Figure B.7: Equilibrium trajectories in the case of an elevated financial wedge for 10
quarters, for households and firms with relatively long common planning horizons,
under the paths of both {bt+1 } and {^
                                     it } being chosen optimally. The planning horizon
h is in quarters, and t measures quarters since the onset of the elevated financial
wedge.




                                                54
                     10 -2
            6

            4

            2

            0



                     10 -2
            2



            0



            -2



                     10 -2
           0.4

           0.2

            0

          -0.2
                 0           2   4   6   8        10   12    14     16     18     20




                                                                    h                     h
Figure B.8: Dashed lines show the expected paths of output (y        |t ) and inflation (  |t )
for dates t    t + h, under the plans calculated by households and firms with
horizon h = 20 at successive dates t, in the case that both monetary and fiscal
policy commitments are optimal. The solid lines show the predicted actual paths of
          h                     h
output (yt |t ) and inflation ( t|t ). Both t and  indicate quarters since the onset of the
disturbance.




                                             55
