                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WHY DOES GLOBALIZATION FUEL POPULISM?
         ECONOMICS, CULTURE, AND THE RISE OF RIGHT-WING POPULISM

                                          Dani Rodrik

                                      Working Paper 27526
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27526


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




This paper has been prepared for the Annual Review of Economics. I am grateful to Phoebe Cai
for research assistance and to Gordon Hanson for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Why Does Globalization Fuel Populism?
Economics, Culture, and the Rise of Right-wing Populism
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 27526
July 2020
JEL No. F1,F3,F6

                                          ABSTRACT

There is compelling evidence that globalization shocks, often working through culture and
identity, have played an important role in driving up support for populist movements, particularly
of the right-wing kind. I start with an empirical analysis of the 2016 presidential election in the
U.S. to show globalization-related attitudinal variables were important correlates of the switch to
Trump. I then provide a conceptual framework that identifies four distinct channels through
which globalization can stimulate populism, two each on the demand and supply sides of politics,
respectively. I evaluate the empirical literature with the help of this framework, discussing trade,
financial globalization, and immigration separately. I conclude the paper by discussing some
apparently anomalous cases where populists have been against, rather than in favor of trade
protection.


Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 J.F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
                                   WHY DOES GLOBALIZATION FUEL POPULISM?

                          ECONOMICS, CULTURE, AND THE RISE OF RIGHT-WING POPULISM

                                                  Dani Rodrik 1
                                                   July 2020


1. Introduction

        Globalization figures prominently in discussions of populism. Especially in its post-1990s variant
-- which might be better called "hyperglobalization -- international economic integration seems to have
produced domestic disintegration in many countries, deepening the divide between the winners and
losers of exposure to global competition. There is nothing particularly surprising about this from the
standpoint of economic theory. Standard trade theory is quite clear about the sharp redistributive
effects of free trade and open economy macroeconomics has long grappled with the instability of global
financial markets. Economic history is equally suggestive. The high points of globalization in previous
eras have also been marked by a populist backlash. 2

        But there are still many open questions. First, what are the mechanisms through which
globalization fuels populism? Answering this question requires a more fully fleshed out model of
political economy. Second, globalization is not just one thing: we can distinguish among international
trade, international finance, and international labor flows specifically. How do each one of these facets
of globalization work their way through the political system? Third, globalization is clearly not the only
economic shock that creates redistributive effects or economic anxiety ­ and it may not even be the
most important economic force to do so. Why does globalization appear to have an outsized effect on
politics compared to, say, technological change or regular business cycles?

        Fourth, the populist response so far seems to have taken a mostly right-wing form. On the face
of it, this is surprising since left-wing populist movements with their redistributive economic agendas
could have been the more obvious beneficiary of economic dislocations. Why have nativist, ethno-
nationalist populists been instead the ones to take advantage? Fifth, and related to the previous



1
 This paper has been prepared for the Annual Review of Economics. I am grateful to Phoebe Cai for research
assistance and to Gordon Hanson for helpful comments.

2
 See Rodrik (1997, 2011) on the economic and social rifts created by advanced stages of globalization, and Rodrik
(2018) for an earlier overview of the relationship between globalization and populism.

                                                       -1-
question, what about the roles of culture, values, and identities? Could it be that populism is rooted not
in economics but in a cultural divide -- social conservatives versus social liberals, traditionalists versus
modernists, nationalists versus cosmopolitans, ethnically homogenous dominant communities versus
"outsider" minorities of various kinds?

         The economics versus culture question has been a source of controversy in discussions of
populism. The literature on the economic determinants of populism ­ globalization in particular ­ is
quite rich, as the studies I will discuss in this paper attest to. On the other side, Sides, Tesler, and
Vavreck (2018), Norris and Inglehart (2019), and Margalit (2019), among others, have made strong cases
for the culture thesis. In the U.S., the culture argument revolves around the strong undercurrent of
racism in American society. In Europe, the argument centers on aversion to Muslim and African
immigrants, which has long been the basis of support for far-right parties such as the French National
Front.

         Some of the disagreement revolves around empirical methods. For example, observational
studies tend to favor the economics argument, while survey experiments give greater credence to
culture (Naoi 2019). But there is a key conceptual difference at the heart of the matter as well. The
relative importance one ascribes to economics versus culture depends crucially on whether we are
interested in a question about levels or about changes ­ whether we ask "why do so many people vote
for populist candidate?" or we ask "why did the populist vote share increase so much?" (Margalit
2020). 3 My focus in this paper, as in much of the economics-centered literature, is on the latter
question. Since culture transforms slowly, and a constant cannot explain a change, culture is unlikely to
do a good job answering the question in changes form. Economic shocks, such as those related to
globalization, are a more likely candidate for the answer.

         In any case, I do not aim to resolve the economics versus culture debate here. My goal is more
limited. By unpacking globalization and specifying the channels through which its different components
work their way into politics, I try to bring greater clarity to the discussion on the contribution
globalization has made to the rise of populist politics. There is compelling evidence, from diverse
settings, that globalization shocks, often working through culture and identity, have played an important
role in driving up support for populist, particularly right-wing populist movements. The argument does


3
 Margalit (2019) calls these "outcome" versus "explanatory" significance, but I am not sure if this nomenclature is
quite appropriate. The difference has to do more with the kind of outcome we are trying to explain. The level and
change in support for populists are both outcomes, and we could be interested in explaining either.

                                                        -2-
not dismiss the possibility that purely cultural factors too may have been at play as well, and I will briefly
discuss some of the historical evidence on immigration in the U.S. that leans that way. While I draw on
an extensive literature, this is by no means a survey paper. For a recent survey on the political economy
of populism, see Guriev and Papaioannou (2020). The political science literature on the relationship
between globalization and the rise of the far right is surveyed by Bornschier (2018).

        I start the paper in the next section with an empirical look at the 2016 presidential election in
the U.S. I focus on the characteristics of both Trump voters in general and "switchers" ­ voters who
supported Obama in 2012 but voted for Trump in 2016. This relatively unstructured data analysis shows
that globalization-related attitudinal variables were important correlates of the switch to Trump, even in
survey data. Section 3 then presents a conceptual framework to clarify the various channels through
which globalization can stimulate populism. I distinguish here between the demand and supply sides of
politics, and the different causal pathways that link globalization shocks to political outcomes. I identify
four mechanisms in particular, two each on the demand and supply sides: (a) a direct effect from
economic dislocation to demands for anti-elite, redistributive policies; (b) an indirect demand-side
effect, through the amplification of cultural and identity divisions; (c) a supply-side effect through
political candidates adopting more populist platforms in response to ecoomic shocks; and (d) another
supply-side effect through political candidates adopting platforms that deliberately inflame cultural and
identity tensions in order to shift voters' attention away from economic issues.

        Section 4 reviews the empirical literature with the help of this framework, discussing trade,
financial globalization, and immigration separately. The existing literature has focused mostly on the
first two channels, with the second two (and especially the last) receiving considerably less attention.
Section 5 focuses specifically on the outsized political response to globalization shocks and the reasons
why right-wing populists have benefited disproportionately. The answers to these two questions may be
related, having to so with the way in which globalization shocks interact with latent cultural divisions.
Section 6 concludes the paper with a discussion that reversed the direction of causation and examining
some apparent exceptions where populists have been against, rather than in favor of trade protection.

2. Evidence on the empirical correleates of voting patterns in 2016 U.S. presidential election

        In this section I provide the results of some explaratory data analysis of the 2016 presidential
election in the U.S. I focus on two types of voters: Trump voters in general and "switchers," i.e., those
who voted for Obama in 2012 and switched to Trump in 2016. I try to answer three questions. First,


                                                     -3-
what were the distinguishing characteristics of Trump voters? Second, what were the distinguishing
characteristics of switchers? Third, how did the switchers differ from other Obama voters from 2012?
The answers to the first two questions are provided in Table 1. The answers to the third question are
shown in Table 2, where the sample is restricted to Obama voters in 2012. I make no claim to causal or
structural interpretation, to which I will turn in the next section. My objective is to understand the broad
correlates of these distinct voting patterns.

        I use data from American National Election Studies (2019), which is a representative survey of
Americans before and after the 2016 presidential elections. Of the 4,270 individuals in the survey, 1,245
report having voted for Trump in 2016 and 1,728 recall having voted for Obama in 2012. There are 154
respondents in the intersection of these two groups, who constitute the switchers. The survey includes a
broad range of demographic and attitudinal questions. Note that the regressions reported below have
fewer than 4,270 observations because not all respondents answered all the questions.

        As my primary indicator of economic insecurity I use the question "how worried are you about
your current financial situation?" The five possible valid responses for this question range from "not at
all worried" to "extremely worried." I supplement this measure with views on trade, immigration, and
banks to gauge the strength of economic correlates. To measure social identity I use respondents' self-
assessment of the social class to which they belong. This is a 4-point measure taking the values 1="lower
class," 2="working class," 3="middle class," and 4="upper class."

        To measure racial attitudes I use the same index as Sides et al. (2018, appendix to Chap. 8).
Sides et al. (2018) combine answers to four questions, gauging agreement/disagreement with the
following statements:

            ·    "Over the past few years, Blacks have gotten less than they deserve."
            ·    "Irish, Italian, Jewish, and many other minorities overcame prejudice and worked their
                 way up. Blacks should do the same without any special favors."
            ·    "It's really a matter of some people not trying hard enough; if Blacks would only try
                 harder they could be just as well off as Whites."
            ·    "Generations of slavery and discrimination have created conditions that make it difficult
                 for Blacks to work their way out of the lower class."

The five-fold responses to these questions are averaged to obtain a single indicator of attitude to racial
inequality, with a higher value indicating greater hostility to racial equality.

                                                      -4-
        My benchmark specification is a logit regression with attitudes to racial inequality, social class,
and economic insecurity (financial worries) as the main regressors in addition to basic demographic
variables (age, gender, race, and education). For each dependent variable, I start with this specification
and then add specific regressors related to globalization individually. The latter are binary (0-1) variables
meant to capture attitudes towards different aspects of economic globalization. They gauge the
respondents' support for (i) trade agreements, (ii) immigration, and (iii) regulation of banks. Note that
there are no questions in ANES that gauge views on financial globalization specifically; I use the "bank
regulation" variable as a proxy for support for financial globalization. A final, kitchen-sink regression
shows the results when all regressors are included.

        The first six columns of Table 1 probe characteristics of Trump voters in general. Trump voters
were more likely to be white, older, and college-educated (these results are not shown). More germane
to our analysis, they were significantly more hostile to racial equality and perceived themselves to be of
higher social class. The estimated coefficient on racial attitudes is particularly large: a one-point increase
in the index of racial hostility ­ which theoretically ranges from 1 to 5 ­ is associated with a 0.28
percentage point increase in the probability of voting for Trump (col. 1). By contrast, economic
insecurity does not seem to be associated with a propensity to vote for Trump.

        The finding that Trump voters thought of themselves as belonging to upper social classes may
seem surprising. But this largely reflects the role played by party identification in shaping voting
preferences. When we control for Republican party identification (cols. 2 and 6), the estimated
coefficient for social class drops sharply and ceases to be statistically significant. In other words,
Republican party identification is a strong correlate of support for Trump, and Republicans tend to be
wealthier than Democrats. Note, however, that racial hostility remains significant, although its
estimated coefficient becomes smaller (cols. 2 and 6).

        The remaining columns examine attitudes towards globalization (cols. 2-5). All three of our
measures enter statistically significantly: Trump voters disliked trade agreements and immigration; they
were also against bank regulation (presumably in line with the general anti-regulation views of (cols. 2-
5) the Republican party). These indictors remain significant in the kitchen-sink version where they are all
entered together (col. 6).

        In none of these regressions does economic insecurity (financial worries) enter significantly. This
changes when we move from Trump voters in general to switchers from Obama to Trump (cols. 7-12).


                                                      -5-
There are two essential differences from the baseline specification: financial worries now becomes
statistically significant, and switchers do not identify with the upper social classes. Switchers, in other
words, view their economic and social status very differently from, and as much more precarious than
run-of-the-mill Republican voters for Trump.

        With respect to attitudes towards globalization, there are interesting parallels and differences as
well. Switchers are similar to Trump voters insofar as they too dislike trade agreements and immigration
(cols. 9-11). 4 But they are dissimilar in that they view regulation of banks favorably. Hence switchers
appear to be against all aspects of globalization ­ trade, immigration, finance. Economic insecurity
remains statistically significant when these globalization indicators are added to the regression. But in
the kitchen-sink regression -- with all the regressors included simultaneously -- economic insecurity is no
longer significant while the globalization attitudes all retain their statistical significance (col. 12).

        Finally, in Table 2 I focus on how switchers differ from other Obama voters. For this purpose, I
restrict the sample to those respondents who report having voted for Obama in 2012. I repeat the
second set of regressions from Table 1 (cols. 7-12) for this restricted sample.

        The baseline regression shows that switchers are both generally more hostile to racial equality
and feel greater economic insecurity; they don't seem to differ from other Obama voters in their self-
assessed social class (col. 1). They are also significantly more anti-trade and anti-immigration (cols. 3-4).
Their views on bank regulation are not distinctive (col. 5). When all indicators are included, trade and
immigration attitudes enter significantly while economic insecurity loses statistical significance (col. 6).

        These results suggest switchers to Trump are different both from Trump voters and from other
Obama voters in identifiable respects related to social identity and views on the economy in particular.
They differ from regular Trump voters in that they exhibit greater economic insecurity, do not associate
themselves with an upper social class, and look favorably on financial regulation. They differ from others
who voted for Obama in 2012 in that they exhibit greater racial hostility, more economic insecurity, and
more negative attitudes towards trade agreements and immigration.

3. A conceptual framework




4
 Note that the magnitude of coefficients in cols. 7-12 cannot be directly compared with those for cols. 1-6, since
switchers are a much smaller percentage of the sample than Trump voters.

                                                        -6-
        These empirical results suggest, as a first pass, that the vote for Trump was influenced by
perceptions on economic conditions as well as by social and racial attitudes. Anti-globalization views
appear to be strongly associated with the decision to vote for Trump instead of Hillary Clinton. But these
are merely suggestive empirical associations. Parsing the specific causal relationships between economic
and attitudinal variables, on the one hand, and political outcomes, on the other, requires a more fully
fleshed-out structural model. In particular, social identities, cultural sensitivities, and racial attitudes
may well be endogenous, determined in part by objective economic conditions. Economic conditions, in
turn, are shaped by a number of different forces, including globalization shocks. In addition, voters'
political preferences may be formed also by narratives and messages ("propaganda") emanating from
political parties and leaders. And political leaders may choose to formulate their campaign messages in
response to economic conditions as well.

        Figure 1 sketches a causal framework that highlights the key causal relationships, emphasizing
the mechanisms through which globalization may drive support for populism. I distinguish between the
demand and supply sides of politics, allowign a role for political leaders' programs and strategies as well
individual voters' preferences. Different types of globalization shocks ­ trade, immigration, finance ­
enter the system through their impact on economic conditions ­ economic dislocation, in particular.
Economic dislocation, in turn, can influence political outcomes ­ here, electoral success of populist
politicians -- through four different causal pathways. These four cusal explanations are identified as (A),
(B), (C), and (D) in Figure 1.

        First, and most directly, it can determine voters' preferences for policies and leaders (A). A voter
in a region where employment prospects have been adversely affected by a rise in imports may choose
to cast his vote for a politician who advocates protectionism and a tougher line against foreign
exporters. Second, it may shape voters' preferences indirectly through the effect it has on identity or the
salience of certain cultural values (B). Concretely, economic shocks can heighten feelings of insecurity,
inducing voters to make sharper distinctions between insiders ("us") and ethnic, religious, or racial
outsiders ("them"). They can lead voters to yearn for an earlier era of prosperity and stability, increasing
the political salience of traditional cultural values and hierarchies. And to the extent that they generate
wider economic and social gaps within a nation, economic shocks may reinforce more local, less
encompassing identities. To the extent that such effects operate, political preferences that appear to be
driven by cultural values will in fact have deeper, economic roots.




                                                       -7-
        These two causal pathways operate on the demand side of the political equilibrium. The other
two channels work through the supply side. Hence a third possibility is that economic shocks affect the
ideology of political candidates or the platforms of competing political parties (C). Even if voters'
preferences remain unchanged, they may find themselves confronted with parties or candidates that
are more polarized on issues of such as trade protection or immigration. The fourth and final channel is
that economic shocks may induce some parties ­ typically those on the right -- to try to render culture
and identity more salient in voters' decisions at the polling booth (D). For example, suppose greater
economic inequality results in the loss of median-voter support for a right-wing party. The party may
counter by attempting to shift the electoral competition away from economics to issues of identity and
culture. If such a strategy is successful, it will appear as if electoral outcomes are driven voters' cultural
preferences. But the ultimate determinant will be economics ­ via party strategies ­ rather than voters'
cultural values per se.

         Hence globalization shocks can can feed into support for populism directly (A) as well as
indirectly (B, C, D); it can activate supply-side (C) as well as demand-side (A, B, D) causal pathways. A full
causal explanation of the rise of populism ­ and its links to globalization -- would not only have to
spearately identify each of one of these channels, but also gauge their importance vis-à-vis all the other
causal pathways in Figure 1, including, most crucially, those that originate from cultural or identity
determinants that are orthogonal to economic dislocation. This is a tall order. Perhaps not surprisingly,
no single piece of empirical work has attempted to provide such a comprehensive analysis. What we
have instead are empirical papers that focus on some of the individual pieces of the larger puzzle.
Collectively, they paint a consistent picture on the importance of globalization shocks on the demand
side, both directly (A) and indirectly (B). Supply-side causal pathways have received less attention than
others. In particular, there has been virtually no systematic empirical work on channel (D), even though
the informal evidence (discussed in section 5 below) is quite suggestive. And convincing tests of the
economics versus culture hypotheses have proved elusive.

4. Empirical studies

        The empirical literature on determinants of populism is summarized in four separate tables
(Tables 3-7). I have organized the literature by the main explanatory category that is the focus of the
studies: trade (Table 3), immigration (Table 4), financial globalization (Table 5), economic insecurity
(Table 6), and culture and identity (Table 7). Since the present paper hones in on globalization and
economic insecurity, I have tried to be comprehensive in those areas, but less so with respect to culture

                                                      -8-
and identity. Table 7 on culture and identity should be be viewed as illustrative of the empirical work in
this area. For each paper covered, the tables include information on the key explanatory variables,
dependent variables, main results, geographical setting and time period for which the study was
conducted, and estimation method. Note that some papers focus on more than a single determinant
(for example, trade and immigration); in those cases I have listed the papers in one table rather than
repeating the reference. Below, I will focus on selected papers to discuss the more salient findings;
readers are referred to the tables for a fuller sense of the empirical literature.

    (a) Trade

        Autor et al.'s (2013) original paper analyzing the local labor market effects of the China trade
shock has spawned a small cottage industry of papers using a similar approach to document the political
consequences of trade shocks. This paper developed a plausibly exogenous instrument for the increase
in imports from China by combining (a) the contemporaneous change in imports from China in eight
other developed countries, and (b) the industrial composition of production within commuting zones.
Since some commuting zones have more industries exposed to Chinese competition than others, this
approach allows an examination of the effects of Chinese imports across different localities. In
subequent work, Autor, Dorn, Hanson, and Majlesi (ADHM, 2019) have mapped commuting zone data to
congressional districts and established several interesting findings.

        First, they document that Chinese import penetration had an impact on political preferences.
Localities where the China trade shocks was greater experienced an increase in the market share of Fox
News (at the expense of viewership for CNN and MSNBC), stronger conservative beliefs (as measured by
Pew Surveys), and greater campaign contributions by both left- and right-leaning donors (relative to
moderate donors at the center of the ideaologial spectrum). In the authors' words, "localized economic
shocks stemming from rising trade pressure in the 2000s increased the relative demand for conservative
media content, support for conservative viewpoints, and campaign contributions by more ideologically
extreme donors" (ADHM, 2019). Next, they show that the China trade shock increased the likelihood
that GOP legislators would get elected in Congressional elections, especially after 2008. This is so even
though the shock appears to have reduced the GOP vote share somewhat overall; the increase in
Republican support in competitive districts more than compensated. When candidates are classified
according to political ideology, the biggest winners were those on the farthest right (conservative
Republicans). The paper also uncovers an interesting interaction with race. GOP candidates were
especially helped by trade shocks in majority White districts, where many Democratic voters switched to

                                                     -9-
the Republican candidates. In majority non-white districts, the switch was from moderate to liberal
Democrats -- not a net gain for the Democratic party.

        ADHM (2019) also show that the China import shock produced a boost for the GOP in the
Presidential elections of 2008 and 2016 (relative to 2000). In a particularly interesting side note which
builds on the results of this paper, the authors estimate that a reduction of the China trade shock by half
between 2000 and 2014 would have produced a majority for the Democrats in 2016 in the key
battleground states of Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Michigan (instead of a defeat) and would have
swept Hillary Clinton to the Oval Office in lieu of Donald Trump (Autor et al., 2017). This is a particularly
stark illustration of the electoral consequences of trade, and of trade shocks driving populists into office.

        The ADHM China trade shock instrument has been used in a number of other papers looking at
the effect of trade on polical preferences. Ballard-Rosa et al. (2017) find that individuals living in
relatively diverse regions where the China trade shock was more powerful have more authoritarian
values. They interpret this as evidence that economic dislocation shapes political identity by producing
"social-norm conformity" among historically dominant groups. This paper is an illustration of causal
pathway B in Figure 1. By contrast, the original ADHM paper is largely agnostic on whether trade shocks
work directly (A) or through their effects on culture and identity (B).

        Another paper that sheds light on the mechanisms through which economic insecurity may
drive support for right-wing populists is Cerrato et al. (2018). These authors focus explicitly on the
cultural backlash produced by the China trade shock. Interestingly, they argue that the political impact
of the ADHM trade shock works primarily through (negative) attitudes towards immigrants and
racial/ethnic minorities. Attitudes towards international trade per se do not seem to be affected by
Chinese import penetration. One specific finding is indicative of what the authors call the "pure" cultural
backlash effect: greater import penetration produces negative sentiment towards Muslims. 5 Since
Muslims are a tiny share of the labor market, it is difficult to provide this finding an alternative,
economic interpretation. In terms of Figure 1, channel (B) trumps channel (A). Using text analysis of
campaign speeches, Cerrato et al. (2018) also provide evidence of the anti-immigrant and anti-trade
shift in Republican party Presidential candidates over 2008-2016, which would be consistent with
mechanism (C) being at play as well. The import of these findings is that they suggest the cultural
determinants of support for populists highlighted in some studies (e.g., Inglehart and Norris 2016, 2019)

5
 In a similar vein, Steiner and Harms (2020) find Chinese import shocks lead respondents in Britain to develop
more nationalistic attitudes, but not greater affinity to redistributive economic policies.

                                                       -10-
may themselves have economic underpinnings. They again illustrate the need for a fully fleshed out
structural causal model a la Figure 1.

         The ADHM approach has been used in a growing number of studies on Europe as well,
demonstrating an apparently causal impact of trade shocks on the rise of the populist right. Chinese
import penetration has been linked to increased support for nationalist, far-right parties in empirical
analyses covering regions within 15 European countries (Colontane and Stanig, 2018c), Italian
municipalities (Barone and Kreuter, 2019), German counties (Dippel et al., 2018), and Franch cantons
(Malgouyres, 2017). It is significantly associated with the strength of the pro-Brexit vote in Britain's 2016
referendum (Colontane and Stanig, 2018a). It is also found to lead to lower support for democracy and
liberal values in a study of regions covering 15 European nations and to cultural, but not economic
concerns, on immigration (Colontane and Stanig, 2018b). This last finding parallels the Cerrato et al.
(2018) results for the U.S. 6

        It is somewhat surprising that so many studies covering different European nations have found
such strong causal effects from Chinese import penetration to political preferences. Safety nets and
labor market protections are much stronger in Europe than in the U.S. Imports from China and other
low-cost nations have not figured prominently in political campaigns, as they have in the U.S. While
public opposition to trade agreements has been on the rise in Europe, this opposition generally revolves
around trade with the U.S. and Canada, specifically the proposed Transatlantic Trade and Investment
Partnership (TTIP) and the Canada-Europe Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement CETA)
(Young, 2019). The apparent fact that the local labor markets effects of Chinese imports have left a
measurable political imprint even in Europe is suggestive of an oversized sensitivity to trade shocks, a
question I will return to later in the paper.

        In view of the appeal of the Autor et al. (2013) instrument, causal studies on the political impact
of trade have focused largely on the Chinese trade shock. A notable recent exception is a study by Choi,
Kuziemko, Washington, and Wright which applies a similar method to the passage of NAFTA in the U.S.
(Choi et al., 2020). These authors develop a measure of localities' ex ante vulnerability to NAFTA based
on industrial composition and pre-existing tariff levels. Using an event-study method, they find that



6
  As in the U.S., trade shocks seem to have boosted the electoral fortunes of mostly right-wing populist movements
in Europe and not the left. One exception is the study by Rommel and Walter (2017), which finds that a measure of
offshorability of occupation of European respondents is associated with support for leftist and center-right parties
but not right-wing populists.

                                                       -11-
areas with greater exposure to Mexican exports experienced large employment reductions subsequent
to the 1993 completion of the Agreement. These areas also shifted sharply towards the Republican
party. Interestingly, prior to NAFTA the counties most exposed to Mexico, mainly in the upper South,
tended to vote for the Democratic party. By 2000, these same counties had turned heavily Republican.
Choi et al. (2020) use a wide variety of regressors to control for possibly confounding secular trends.
They also include Autor et al.'s (2013) China trade shock variable. They note that the NAFTA trade shock
preceded the China shock, which came in the 2000s. While many of the same localities were hit by the
two shocks, the correlation with NAFTA exposure across commuting zones is low for the raw Chinese
import penetration measure (0.17) and higher, but considerably less than one for the instrumented
version (0.42).

      (b) Immigration and refugees

           The relationship between presence of immigrants and support for populism is clearly a
contingent one. Large metropolitan areas and highly diverse cities such as NYC and London with a large
immigrant footprint are not where populists get their votes. In Germany, electoral support for the anti-
immigrant AfD is concentrated in the eastern part of the country where there are few immigrants. The
identity of source countries, recent changes in the volume of immigration, and spatial patterns of
immigrant presence can be more important than the numbers of immigrants per se. In particular, a
political backlash on account of either economics or culture seems more likely when there is a rapid
increase in foreign presence, when immigrants are low-skilled and come from countries with different
racial, ethnic or religious characteristics, and when there is a high level of spatial segregation. 7 The
empirical studies summarized in Table 4 are generally consistent with these ideas. While these studies
cover a large number of countries and time periods, the majority are drawn from Europe, which has
experienced a recent wave of increase in low-skilled migrants from Muslim and African countries or
from East European countries that recently acceded to the EU. The general message that comes out of
the table is that this influx has been a boon to right-wing, anti-immigrant parties in Europe. The
evidence on the U.S., by contrast, is decidedly mixed (Mayda et al, 2019; Hill et al., 2019).

           What are the specific mechanisms through which immigration generates political
consequences? Figure 1 suggests a number of possibilities. Consider the following three mechanisms in
particular. First, a sudden influx of foreigners may generate a cultural backlash that has nothing to do


7
    On the importance of geography and spatial segregation, see Enos (2017).

                                                        -12-
with economics. This would be the case of xenophobia or anti-immigrant sentiment that arises purely
out of psychological and identity-related processes: "we dislike and reject foreigners because they are
not like `us'." Analysts who give culture a primary independent role in driving populism have this
mechanism in mind (e.g., Margalit, 2019). Alternatively, the influx may generate a backlash because it
creates economic dislocations. Such dislocations arise from competition in local labor markets or in
public-goods provision. Immigrants, especially of the low-skill type, can drive local wages down. They
can reduce the availability of government services such as public housing or social transfers to native-
born citizens. As Figure 1 shows, these economic factors can in turn play out politically in two different
ways -- either directly, or indirectly through culture and identity. These are variants (A) and (B),
respectively. The direct channel refers to the case where political support for populist, anti-immigrant
parties increases because these parties allay the economic anxieties of voters (A). The indirect channel
refers to the case where economic dislocation activates affirmation of traditional, dominant identities
and triggers hostility towards perceived out-groups on cultural grounds (B). In the latter case, anti-
immigrant preferences appear to be driven by culture, but the roots are in economics. These two cases
provide the other two possible mechanisms, in addition to the purely cultural case. 8

         The empirical literature on the political consequences of immigration has generally not
scrutinized these different channels separately. The vast majority of studies summarized in Table 4 focus
directly on a "reduced form" relationship between immigrant/refugee presence and voting for populist
parties (mostly of the extreme right). For example, Becker et al. (2016) find that the increase in
immigrants from 12 recent EU accession countries is associated positively with a vote in favor of Brexit
across British localities, though the level of migrants is negatively (and insignificantly) correlated with
the Brexit vote. Dustmann et al. (2016) and Dinas et al. (2019) find that an increase in the local
concentration of refugees increases support for far-right, anti-immigrant parties, in Denmark and
Greece respectively. For the U.S., Mayda et al. (2019) find that an increase in low-skilled immigrants
increases the Republican vote share, while an increase in high-skilled immigrants decreases it. Historical
evidence, also for the U.S., suggests the association between immigrant influx and support for populist
politicians is not a recent phenomenon (Eichengreen et al., 2017, and Tabellini, 2019).




8
  Figure 1 contains other possibilities, on the supply side, which I ignore for the moment. An increase in
immigration can also alter party platforms (C) and induce political candidates to "prime" racial/ethnic/religious
identities. I will return to this channel in a later section of the paper.


                                                        -13-
         The study by Tabellini (2019) is notable because it is one of the few that explicitly tries to unpack
the economic versus cultural roots of the anti-immigrant backlash. Tabellini looks at U.S. cities between
1910 and 1930, a period when immigrant levels were very high and anti-immigrant legislation began to
be implemented. He uses a shift-share instrument that predicts each city's number of immigrants by
interacting 1900 numbers with subsequent (total) migration flows from each sending region, net of the
individuals that settled in that city. 9 The regressions include city fixed effects, so that the results are
estimated from changes in immigrant numbers within cities, compared to other cities. Tabellini shows
that greater immigration was associated with the election of more conservative representatives and loss
of support for the Democratic party (the more pro-immigration party). He finds no evidence that
immigration had adverse labor market effects. In fact, more immigration was associated with higher
employment levels, even in occupations where immigrants provided greatest competition, and also with
greater occupational upgrading (a proxy for wages). Tabellini reasons that the positive employment
effects may have been due to this being a period of rapid economic expansion in the U.S., with labor
shortages an important constraint on economic activity. Furthermore, the political reaction seems to
have been directed primarily at Catholics and Jews, even though these groups' economic impact would
have been no different than in the case of immigrants from Protestant countries. Tabellini concludes
that the political backlash was rooted not in economic dislocation ­ i.e., neither in channel (A) nor in (B)
­ but in purely cultural factors.

         Recall that one of the mechanisms through which globalization shocks can influence political
outcomes is the effect on politicians' programs (causal pathway (C)). An interesting paper by Moriconi et
al. (2019) focuses in part on this channel. Using the Manifesto Project Database, the paper quantifies
each European political party's attitude towards redistribution through the welfare state. The authors
find that an increase in less-skilled immigration results in national party platforms to shift towards less
redistribution, while high-skilled immigration has the opposite (but statistically insignificant) effect.
Since this paper does not focus on populist outcomes per se, it is not included in Table 4. But an earlier
paper by the same authors shows that different types of immigration have opposite-signed effects on
nationalist sentiments as well: low-skill immigration strengthens nationalism, while high-skill
immigration weakens it (Moriconi et al., 2018).

    (c) Financial globalization


9
 Tabellini performs a number of checks to control against threats to his instrument's validity -- early immigrant
numbers may predict subsequent political outcomes.

                                                        -14-
        Unlike trade and immigration, financial globalization has not received much attention in popular
discussions as a source of the populist backlash. This is surprising in some ways. The free flow of short-
term finance across national borders and the buildup of significant foreign liabilities have played a
significant role in triggering the financial crisis of 2008-2009, which was the most severe economic shock
experienced by advanced nations since the Great Depression of the 1930s until the more recent COVID-
19 pandemic. The fiscal austerity that deepened and lengthened the employment impact of the crisis,
particularly in Europe, was the result of conducting economic policy according to the perceived
requirements of financial markets. Yet there has not been much apparent political reaction against
financial globalization. Global banks and financial speculators have not become targets in the way
Chinese exports or Mexican and muslim immigrants have. This stands in sharp contrast to the original
wave of populism in late 19th century U.S., during which the Northestern financial establishment drew
much ire as the upholders of the Gold Standard and hard money.

        The scholarly empirical literature on the relationship between financial crises/globalization and
populism is correspondingly thin, and disproportionately historical (Table 5). Funke et al. (2016) look at
the electoral consequences of financial crises in 20 developed countries since 1870. They find that
financial crises increase the vote share of far-right parties (but not far-left parties) by around 4
percentage points on average (a 30% increase) and that the results are statistically stronger for the post-
World War II period. Interestingly, regular business-cycle recessions or macro shocks that do not involve
financial crisis do not produce similar effects. Doerr et al. (2019) focus more narrowly on Germany
during the 1930s and show that exposure to bank failures increased support for the Nazi party, with
localities with a history of anti-Semitism showing larger effects.

        Two other papers cover the interesting recent cases of Hungary and Poland. These Eastern
European countries are intriguing because they were not subject to the kind of trade and immigration
shocks experienced by the U.S. and Western Europe. Yet, they have experienced similar electoral gains
by right-wing ethno-nationalist populist movements. These papers suggest external financial shocks may
have played a more prominent role there. Gyöngyösi and Verner (2020) study the rise of the far-right
Jobbik party in Hungary after the financial crisis of 2008. Many Hungarian households had borrowed in
foreign currencies (primarily the Swiss franc). The sharp depreciation of the Hungarian forint after the
crisis left these borrowers in severe distress. Gyöngyösi and Verner (2020) show that the far-right
populist vote increased especially strongly in localities where foreign currency debt exposure was




                                                     -15-
higher, with this financial channel accounting for as much as 20 percent of the increase in the far-right
vote.

        Ahlquist et al. (2018) carry out an analysis similar in spirit for the Polish parliemantary elections
of 2015, which brought the rightwing populist party PiS to power. These elections followed the Swiss
National Bank's decision to allow the Swiss Franc to appreciate. This meant a large and unexpected
adverse financial shock to Polish borrowers who had taken out low-interest rate mortgages
denominated in Swiss Francs. Using a survey carried out just before the elections, Ahlquist et al. (2018)
study Polish voters' policy preferences. They document that those exposed to the shock were more
likely to demand government action that would make banks pay a larger share of the cost. Among
former government voters, Swiss Franc borrowers were more likely to desert the government and vote
for PiS. As the authors also make clear, the PiS actively courted these voters by broadening its
nationalist, anti-immigrant platform to include policies that would shift the cost of the Zloty
depreciation to the banks and protect the borrowers ­ proposals designed to appeal to the economic
interests of the affected voters. So this case appears to be an example of both channel (A) and channel
(C) in operation.

     (d) Economic insecurity in general

        Whether they take the form of increased import penetration, influx of immigrants, or financial
crises, globalization shocks can cause significant economic distress in various segments of the
population. But they are are certainly not the only source of economic dislocation. As a cause of job loss,
income volatility, and economic insecurity in general, their role is easily dwarfed by other cyclical and
secular economic movements. Automation, deindustrialization, de-unionization, flexibilization of labor
markets, rising economic inequality, the expansion of the gig economy, expansion of part-time work,
spatial concentration of productive economic activities have all loomed large in labor markets in recent
decades. In general, these trends have produced greater economic anxiety and a squeeze of middle-
class livelihoods (see Center for American Progress, 2014, on the U.S., and Eurofound, 2017, on
Europe). 10 Globalization is related of course to many of these trends, but it is far from the only cause.
Table 6 summarizes empirical papers that focus on different sources and aspects of economic insecurity
without emphasizing globalization specifically.



10
  Economic insecurity can be hard to disentangle from anxiety with regard to loss of social status. See however
Gidron and Hall (2017) and Kurer (2020).

                                                       -16-
         Some of the studies in Table 6 take as their independent variable unemployment or declines in
incomes, without scrutinizing what may lie behind. But two types of non-globalization shocks in labor
markets merit particular mention: automation and labor market de-regulation.

         On automation, Anelli, Colantone, and Stanig (2019) study 14 West European nations between
1993 and 2016, looking at individual or regional exposure to automation (instrumented by robot
adoption in other countries) based on ex ante industrial structure or occupation. They find greater
exposure to robots increases support for right-wing populist parties, both among individuals and across
regions. They report that these results are robust to controlling separately for a wide set of cultural
values at the individual level (though, as they point out, these attitudinal variable are arguably "post-
treatment" indicators, influenced by labor market shocks). Interestingly, they also include the Autor et
al. (2017) China trade shock variable, which they find has a small and statistically insignificant effect on
the rightward political shift. They attribute the result on trade to be due to the fact that the present
study covers a later period than the earlier Colantane and Stanig (2018b) paper, which found a large
effect for an almost identical sample of countries. 11

         Dal Bó et al. (2019) focus on the rise of the far-right Sweden Democrats. The authors hone in on
the reforms of labor market and welfare state arrangements in 2006 alongside the economic insecurity
generated by the financial crisis. These reforms produced greater inequality in Sweden and a deeper
divide between labor market insiders who benefited from stable, well-paying jobs and outsiders with
stagnant incomes and unpredictable employment opportunities. The paper finds that support for
Sweden Democrats correlates strongly, across and within municipalities, with the presence of losers
from the reforms and from the financial crisis. Interestingly, and in contrast to many other studies cited
earlier, this paper does not find any direct correlation between patterns of local immigration and
support for the far right. The authors note, however, that labor market reforms made outsider, anti-
immigration voters shift towards Sweden Democrats. As they summarize the results, "our results rhyme
well with the idea that an economic shock which creates insecurity may interact with pre-existing,
latent, traits among some voters, and lead them to switch their political allegiance." In other words,
channel (B) seems to operate alongside channel (A).


11
  The Anelli et al. (2019) study covers a more recent period in which the China shock had dissipated somewhat
and the financial crisis and austerity policies had a much larger footprint. The authors report that when they
restrict their time coverage to the pre-crisis period, they recover a strong China trade shock effect, while
automation retains its significance. Caselli et al. (2020) also find that China trade shock does not have a significant
effect on vote shares for far-right parties in Italy after 2008.

                                                         -17-
        This paper is also one of the few to make an explicit distinction between the demand- and
supply sides of politics (along with Guiso et al., 2018, and Rodrik, 2018) in accounting for the rise of
populists. The authors find that politicians from the Sweden Democrats are more likely to be drawn
from "outsiders and vulnerable insiders" compared to other parties. To recall Figure 1, this is another
instance of economic shocks driving the supply-side of politics (causal pathway (C)). They speculate that
this might be the reason it has been the extreme right rather than the left that has been able to
capitalize on labor market dislocation.

5. Globalization and economics as cultural flash points

        The rich empirical literature I have discussed in the previous section raises two questions. First,
why does globalization elicit such an outsized political backlash, when it is just one of the forces that
have buffeted labor markets the macro economy in recent decades? As I have noted, technological
change, de-industrialization, and the usual churn of firm contraction and closure impart a much stronger
footprint on labor markets than trade or immigration. Yet, empirical evidence leaves no doubt that
globalization has played a significant role in the rise of populism in recent years. Second, why has the
political backlash taken a largely right-wing, nativist form? The studies I have discussed find that the
backlash has overwhelmingly benefited right-wing populists. Left-wing populists who may have been
programmatically better positioned to take advantage of the labor market shocks, with their
redistributionist agendas, do not seem to have been much advantaged.

        The two questions may be related. As many studies note, globalization shocks play on latent
cultural and identity divisions in society, both activating and magnifying them. Trade, immigration and
financial shocks present obvious "outsider" targets: foreign exporters, culturally different workers,
international banks. Economic anxieties and insecurities threats can be recast as threats on the
dominant group's traditional way of life, deepening the divide between "us" and "them." This can be a
particularly potent channel if the regions of the country or segments of the labor market adversely
affected by globalization are less diverse and culturally homogenous, where traditional identities and
cultural values were strong to begin with. In terms of Figure 1, this argument suggests the indirect
channel (B) may be quite powerful, stronger even than the direct channel (A).

        Consider first some direct evidence on the outsized response to globalization shocks. Di Tella
and I carried out an online survey where we provided respondents with what looked like a newspaper
story on a planned factory closure in a fictitious local community (di Tella and Rodrik, 2020). All of our


                                                    -18-
subjects (except those in the control group) were told 900 jobs were at risk. But they were separated
into distinct treatment groups with different explanations for why the factory may close. One group was
told the factory closure was due to automation (technology shock). The second group was told there
had been a shift in consumer preferences away from the products manufactured in the plant (demand
shift). A third was told the problem was due to management failure (bad management). Finally, the
other treatment groups were told the factory may close because of outsourcing to a foreign country. All
respondents were then asked whether they thought the government should do anything in response,
and if yes, whether they favored transfers to those who become unemployed (compensation) or import
protection.

        Figure 2 summarizes the results. First note that both technology and demand shocks elicit a
protectionist response of 5 percentage points or so. The increase in desired compensation is of the same
order of magnitude, if somewhat smaller. Bad management, by contrast, elicits a demand for transders
to workers, but not a statistically significant protectionist response. This stands to reason insofar as
respondents want to assist workers but not managers and owners when the fault lies with the latter.
What really stands out in the chart, however, is the magnitude of the protectionist repsonse when
subjects are told the reason for the prospective plant closure is international trade. The last two
treatments in the chart differ by one word only. In one case subjects are told the outsourcing is to
France; in the other case, they are told it is to Cambodia. The percentage of respondents who ask for
import protection more than doubles in the first case (France), compared to the technology and demand
shocks. It quadruples in the second case (Cambodia). And the demand for transfers falls in both cases.
Not only is the demand for trade protection highly elastic with respect to negative trade shocks,
respondents apparently treat trade with advanced nations very differently than trade with developing
nations.

        Consider why there is such a big difference in the way that our subjects approach trade with
France versus trade with Cambodia. From an en economic-utilitarian perspective, we might have
expected respondents to look more favorably on imports from a developing nation. A poorer nation
stands to lose more from cutoffs in market access to the U.S. Therefore, a utilitarian calculus would have
produced a greater willingness to restrict imports from the richer nation. A cultural-differences
perspective, however, yields a different answer. Our American respondents might have thought of
Cambodians as much less "like us" than the French, and less worthy of sympathy. They would then have
exhibited a greater willingness to penalize them. The results we obtained suggest strongly that the


                                                    -19-
cultural perspective was the dominant one among our respondents. Furthermore, when we divided our
sample (in the pre-treatment phase of the experiment) between subjects who had favored Trump in the
2016 presidential elections and subjects who had favored Hillary Clinton, we found that the additional
protectionist boost in the case of Cambodia was concentrated among those who favored Trump (di Tella
and Rodrik, 2020, Table 5). In other words, what was presumably a cultural aversion to Cambodia was
magnified among those respondents who were already likely to be more intolerant of cultural
differences.

         Labor market shocks that drive a greater wedge between winners and losers can inflame latent
cultural tensions. Grossman and Helpman (2019) develop a model that describes one possible
mechanism. In their model, cultural associations of lower-skill individuals are driven by two conflicting
forces. On the one hand, they benefit from identifying with "the nation as a whole," a category which
includes the high-skilled individuals with higher social status. On the other hand, they pay a cognitive-
dissonance cost to the extent their material circumstances differ from the average member of the
national aggreate. A trade shock such as greater Chinese import penetration increase the latter cost by
geneating a bigger earnings gap between skill groups. That in turn can induce a change in social and
cultural identification patterns whereby lower-skill individuals no longer view themselves as members of
the nation as a whole, but as members of a narrower group. When racial or ethnic chanracteristics are
also associated with group identities, this segmentation of identities can also exhibit itself in cultural
terms.

         Willkinson (2019) provides an interesting account of how spatial sorting may serve to reinforce
the interaction between economics and values to produce a populist backlash. Less educated, socially
conservative whites have had lower propensity to migrate to urban areas. Meanwhile, globalization,
technological change, and other economic trends have disproportionally benefited urban areas, in
particular mega-cities. The China trade shock in particular has hit smaller urban areas and white middle-
class communities particularly hard. In Wilkinson's words, "rural stagnation is widening the already
significant gap in cultural and moral values produced by the increasing spatial separation of urbanizers
and rooted holdouts" (Wilkinson, 2019, 6) This kind of spatial segregation is particularly conducive to
generating distrust and magnifying aversion to cultural outsiders (Enos, 2017). Hence economic
adversity that exacerbates a pre-existing cultural divide can turn into a powerful force for right-wing
populist to leverage in the political sphere. While Wilkinson's story focuses on the U.S., it is clear that
Europe shares similar features as well. Spatial segregation between liberals in urban centers and socially


                                                     -20-
conservative residents of outlying areas has clearly added fuel to the populist backlash (see also Norris
and Inglehart, 2019).

        Such effects can be amplified through dynamic feedback loops. If globalization shocks make
identity more salient and the result is party platforms that reduce transfers to the poor (both whites and
minorities), then the increased economic insecurity of poor whites may increase their aversion to
minorities and intensify their desire to cut transfers to them further. This is akin to the mechanism
described at length in Arlie Hochschild's ethnographic study of "white anger" in Strangers in their Own
Land (Hochschild).

        These stories are all demand-side stories (focusing on causal pathway (B) in Figure 1). Economic
shocks trigger natural psycho-social processes that alter individual preferences and identities. But
economics can inflame culture wars through the supply side as well, by inducing political leaders or
parties to adopt campaign strategies deliberately designed to prime latent ethno-religious sensitivites
and divides. This is the possibility highlighted by causal pathway (D) in Figure 1.

        In Mukand and Rodrik (2018) we provide one possible mechanism. In this model, political
entrepreneurs or parties compete for political support by appealing to either voters' economic interests
or to voters' ideas, with the latter including ideas about cultural identities or "who they are." One of the
results in the paper is that as economic inequality increases in society, a party representing the rich is
more likely to invest in strategies that appeal to identity and culture. Greater inequality means the
median voter grows more distant from the rich in terms of where she stands on economic policy
interests. For the party of the rich, there is now higher return from a political narrative that catalyses
identity around issues such as racial resentment, gay marriage, women's rights, and immigration, all of
which can give low-income voters a reason to vote against their purely material interests.

        Hacker and Pierson (2020) argue that this is exactly the strategy the Republican Party has
pursued as U.S. inequality began to rise after the 1970s. The puzzle they address is how the Party was
able to advance a right-wing policy agenda ­ tax reduction, deregulation, weakening of labor market
protections, cuts in social insurance ­ that benefited the wealty and was increasingly unpopular on its
own terms. The answer is that the Party adopted a racially charged narrative to enhance the appeal of
regressive policies to middle- and lower-middle class white voters. Hacker and Pierson (2020) cite an




                                                    -21-
interview in which Republican political operative Lee Atwater lays out the strategy explicitly. 12
Republicans must use language that is a "lot more" abstract than using the n-word, Atwater told the
interviewer. Policies that benefited the rich had to be packaged in terms that would resonate with
poorer, white voters. For example, "we want to cut this" would convey "blacks get hurt worse than
whites" (Hacker and Pierson, 2020, 112). As Hacker and Pierson put it, "Republicans used white identity
to defend wealth inequality." Their account makes clear that America's version of right-wing populism
predates Trump. 13

6. Concluding remarks: is populism always at odds with globalization?

           This paper has focused on the causal links between globalization and other economic shocks, on
the one hand, and the rise of populism, on the other. Before closing, it is worth spending a moment on
the reverse linkage, from populism to globalization. The present-day literature takes it as almost
axiomatic that populists are against globalization. And to the extent that globalization, in its many
facets, is a driver of globalization, this seems like a sensible presumption. But when we disaggregate the
two concepts, we can see some interesting departures from received wisdom.

           British proponents of Brexit are normally classified with other populists. And in their opposition
to immigration, they shared a common bugaboo with populists in other nations. But they were also, at
least nominally, free traders. One of the arguments put forth by "Economists for Brexit" (2016) was that
the EU was a protectionist bloc, maintaining high barriers to protect its agriculture and manufacturing.
They argued Brexit would enable Britain to reduce those barriers and reap significantly larger gains by
trading at world market prices. What the Brexiteers opposed first and foremost was the European Union
and the supranational rules emanating from it. Restoring national democratic sovereigny over economic
policy would allow Britain to devise its own rules, which in the case of trade, were expected to be more
liberal.

           The Brexit case illustrates the general principle that populists are not always and necessarily
protectionist. What they oppose are the elites ­ domestic or foreign ­ that they claim over-ride the

12
  Atwater was promised lifetime anonymity for his comments, which came into the public domain after his
untimely death in 1991.

13
  As Hopkins (2019) points out, Trump's presidential campaign contained strong undertones of anti-Latino priming
as well. Yet Hopkins (2019) finds anti-Latino prejudice was not strongly predictive of the shift to Trump, while anti-
Black prejudice was a strong predictor. Another indication that party strategies to prime ethnic divisions may not
always be successful comes from Schwartz et al. (2020), who report that anti-immigrant and anti-refugee
sentiments among their sample of UK respondents actually softened after the Brexit referendum.

                                                        -22-
popular will at home. Their views on the globalization are often mediated through the relationship of
those elites to the international economy.

        A second case in point is the U.S. populist movement during the late 19th century. The
movement arose out of the plight of farmers in the Southern and Western parts of the country who
were being squeezed by decline in agriculture prices, on the one hand, and high debt burdens, on the
other. The Gold Standard was seen as responsible, since it kept credit conditions tight and prevented an
increase in the money supply. The People's Party's ire was directed at the supporters of the Gold
Standard, Notheastern bankers and the financial elite. William Jennings Bryan's famous rallying cry of
1896 is a ringing statement of populists' hostility to the financial globalization of their day: "You shall not
crucify mankind upon a cross of gold."

        Late 19th century American populists may have been against bankers and global finance, but
they also opposed tariffs. The U.S. had at the time quite high import tariffs, due to the Civil War tariffs
that were further raised by the McKinley tariff of 1890. Republicans generally favored high tariffs, which
they viewed as important for developing American industry. Democrats and Populists thought import
tariffs were a regresive tax that hurt ordinary people and benefited mainly the Northeastern industrial
classes (Irwin 2017, 244ff). Populists sought to replace the tariff with a progressive income tax instead
(Mehrotra, 2002, 178). As one labor advocate put it at the time, the import tariff was

        devised to draw the money from the working people chiefly, and then to cover up the amount
        so taken, that they might be squeezed without knowing it. It was seen that if a man should be
        taxed ten dollars for the privilege of wearing an overcoat, he would rebel against such an
        outrage, but if, by any hocus-pocus, he could be prevailed on to buy the garment, with the tax
        added to its original cost, he would not suspect the extent of his robbery.... (quoted in Mehrotra,
        2002, 183)

Hence American populists of an earlier era had a much more sound understanding of the workings of
import tariffs than many apparently do today. Populists lost this particular battle, and their crusade
against the Gold Standard did not bear fruit either. But their ideas were long-lived. Income taxation
became a permanent fixture of the U.S. economy after the passage of a constitutional amendment in
1913. Franklin D. Roosevelt took the country out of the Gold Standard eventually in 1933.

        Populists in late 19th century America wanted freer trade because they believed protection
helped the country's elites and hurt ordinary people. Today's populists want protection for the same

                                                     -23-
reason, namely that globalization benefits the rich and wealthy but harms the middle class. There are of
course many differences between the People Party back then and Trumpist Republicans today. But in
terms of attitudes towards globalization, what has changed in the meantime is not the nature of
populism, but the relationship of the American elite to the world economy.




                                                  -24-
REFERENCES

Ahlquist, John, Mark Copelovitch, and Stefanie Walter. "The Political Consequences of External
     Economic Shocks: Evidence from Poland." American Journal of Political Science, 2020.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12503.
Algan, Yann, Sergei Guriev, Elias Papaioannou, and Evgenia Passari. "The European Trust Crisis and the
     Rise of Populism." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2017, 309.
American National Election Studies. User's Guide and Codebook for the ANES 2016 Time Series Study.
    University of Michigan and Stanford University, 2019.
Anelli, Massimo, Italo Colantone, and Piero Stanig. "We Were the Robots: Automation and Voting
      Behavior in Western Europe." SSRN Electronic Journal, 2019.
      https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3419966.
Autor, David, David Dorn, Gordon Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi. "A Note on the Effect of Rising Trade
     Exposure on the 2016 Presidential Election." Appendix to Autor, Dorn, Hanson, and Majlesi,
     "Importing Political Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure," 2017.
------. "Importing Political Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure," 2020.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects
     of Import Competition in the United States." American Economic Review 103, no. 6 (2013): 2121­
     2168. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.6.2121.
Ballard-Rosa, Cameron, Amalie Jensen, and Kenneth Scheve. "Economic Decline, Social Identity, and
      Authoritarian Values in the United States," March 2019.
Barone, Guglielmo, Alessio D'Ignazio, Guido de Blasio, and Paolo Naticchioni. "Mr. Rossi, Mr. Hu and
     Politics: The Role of Immigration in Shaping Natives' Voting Behavior." Journal of Public Economics
     136 (2016): 1­13.
Barone, Guglielmo, and Helena Kreuter. "Low-Wage Import Competition and Populist Backlash: The
     Case of Italy." Working Paper. FiFo Discussion Paper, 2019.
     https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/210375.
Becker, Sascha O, and Thiemo Fetzer. "Did Eastern European Immigration Cause an Increase in Anti-
     European Sentiment in the UK?," August 22, 2017, 77.
Becker, Sascha O., Thiemo Fetzer, and Dennis Novy. "Who Voted for Brexit? A Comprehensive District-
     Level Analysis." Economic Policy 32, no. 92 (2017): 601­650.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/epolic/eix012.
Bergh, Andreas, and Anders Gustafsson. "Globalization and Populism in Europe." SSRN Electronic
     Journal, 2019. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3489924.
Bornschier, Simon, "Globalization, Cleavages and the Radical Right," in Jens Rydgren, ed., The Oxford
     Handbook of the Radical Right, Oxford University Press, 2018.
Bromhead, Alan de, Barry Eichengreen, and Kevin H. O'Rourke. "Political Extremism in the 1920s and
    1930s: Do German Lessons Generalize?" The Journal of Economic History 73, no. 2 (June 2013):
    371­406. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050713000302.




                                                 -25-
Brunner, Beatrice, and Andreas Kuhn. "Immigration, Cultural Distance and Natives' Attitudes Towards
    Immigrants: Evidence from Swiss Voting Results." Kyklos 71, no. 1 (2018): 28­58.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/kykl.12161.
Caselli, Mauro, Andrea Fracasso, and Silvio Traverso, "Globalization, Robotization and Electoral
         Outcomes: Evidence from Spatial Regressions for Italy, Journal of Regional Science, 2020,
         forthcoming.
Center for American Progress, "The Middle-Class Squeeze: A Picture of Stagnant Incomes, Rising Costs,
     and What We Can Do to Strengthen America's Middle Class," September 2014.
     https://cdn.americanprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/MiddeClassSqueeze.pdf.
Cerrato, Andrea, Federico Maria Ferrara, and Francesco Ruggieri. "Why Does Import Competition Favor
     Republicans? Localized Trade Shocks, Voting Behavior, and Scapegoating in the U.S." SSRN
     Electronic Journal, 2018. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3147169.
Che, Yi, Yi Lu, Jusin R. Pierce, Peter K. Schott, and Zhigang Tao. "Did Trade Liberalization with China
     Influence U.S. Elections?," Apirl 2017.
Chen, Shuai. "Unemployment, Immigration, and Populism: Evidence from Two Quasi-Natural
    Experiments in the United States," 2018.
Choi, Jiwon, Ilyana Kuziemko, Ebonya Washington, and Gavin Wright. "Local Employment and Political
     Effects of Trade Deals: Evidence from NAFTA," February 2, 2020.
Colantone, Italo, and Piero Stanig. "Global Competition and Brexit." The American Political Science
     Review 112, no. 2 (2018): 201­218. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055417000685.
------. "The Economic Determinants of the `Cultural Backlash': Globalization and Attitudes in Western
    Europe." SSRN Electronic Journal, 2018. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3267139.
------. "The Trade Origins of Economic Nationalism: Import Competition and Voting Behavior in
    Western Europe." American Journal of Political Science 62, no. 4 (2018): 936­953.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12358.
Dal Bó, Ernesto, Frederico Finan, Olle Folke, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne. "Economic Losers
     and Political Winners: Sweden's Radical Right," February 2019, 64.
Dauth, Wolfgang, Sebastian Findeisen, and Jens Suedekum. "The Rise of the East and the Far East:
    German Labor Markets and Trade Integration." Journal of the European Economic Association 12,
    no. 6 (December 1, 2014): 1643­75. https://doi.org/10.1111/jeea.12092.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Dani Rodrik. "Labour Market Shocks and the Demand for Trade Protection:
      Evidence from Online Surveys." The Economic Journal, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1093/ej/ueaa006.
Dinas, Elias, Konstantinos Matakos, Dimitrios Xefteris, and Dominik Hangartner. "Waking Up the Golden
     Dawn: Does Exposure to the Refugee Crisis Increase Support for Extreme-Right Parties?" Political
     Analysis 27, no. 2 (2019): 244­254. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2018.48.
Dippel, Christian, Robert Gold, Stephan Heblich, and Rodrigo R. Pinto. "Instrumental Variables and
     Causal Mechanisms: Unpacking the Effect of Trade on Workers and Voters." CESifo Working Paper
     Series, no. 6816 (January 17, 2018). https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4kp5c6jj.
Doerr, Sebastian, Stefan Gissler, José-Luis Peydró, and Hans-Joachim Voth. "From Finance to Fascism."
     Barcelona GSE Working Paper No. 1092, April 2020.


                                                   -26-
Dustmann, Christian, Kristine Vasiljeva, and Anna Piil Damm. "Refugee Migration and Electoral
    Outcomes." The Review of Economic Studies 86, no. 5 (2018): 2035­91.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdy047.
Economists for Brexit. The Economy after Brexit, 2016. https://www.economistsforfreetrade.com/wp-
    content/uploads/2017/08/Economists_for_Brexit_The_Economy_after_Brexit.pdf.
Edo, Anthony, Yvonne Giesing, Jonathan Öztunc, and Panu Poutvaara. "Immigration and Electoral
     Support for the Far-Left and the Far-Right." European Economic Review 115 (June 2019): 99­143.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2019.03.001.
Eichengreen, Barry, Michael Haines, Matthew Jaremski, and David Leblang. "Populists at the Polls:
     Economic Factors in the 1896 Presidential Election." NBER Working Paper Series, 2017, 23932.
     https://doi.org/10.3386/w23932.
Enke, Benjamin. "Moral Values and Voting," October 11, 2019.
Enos, Ryan D. The Space Between Us: Social Geography and Politics. Cambridge, United Kingdom; New
     York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Eurofound. Income Inequalities and Employment Patterns in Europe before and after the Great
     Recession. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2017.
     https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/ab252b03-150c-11e7-808e-
     01aa75ed71a1/language-en.
Fetzer, Thiemo. "Did Austerity Cause Brexit?" American Economic Review 109, no. 11 (November 2019):
     3849­86. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20181164.
Funke, Manuel, Moritz Schularick, and Christoph Trebesch. "Going to Extremes: Politics after Financial
    Crises, 1870­2014." European Economic Review 88 (2016): 227­260.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2016.03.006.
Gerdes, Christer, and Eskil Wadensjö. "The Impact of Immigration on Election Outcomes in Danish
    Municipalities." SULCIS Working Papers. SULCIS Working Papers. Stockholm University, Linnaeus
    Center for Integration Studies - SULCIS, March 10, 2010.
    https://ideas.repec.org/p/hhs/sulcis/2010_003.html.
Gibbons, Joseph. "The Space between Us: Social Geography and Politics." Contemporary Sociology: A
     Journal of Reviews 48, no. 2 (2019): 163­165. https://doi.org/10.1177/0094306119828696i.
Gidron, Noam, and Peter A. Hall. "The Politics of Social Status: Economic and Cultural Roots of the
     Populist Right." British Journal of Sociology 68, no. S1 (2017): S57­S84.
     https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-4446.12319.
Raul Gomez, and Luis Ramiro, "Beyond the 2008 Great Recession: Economic Factors and Electoral
     Support for the Radical Left in Europe," Party Politics, 2017, 1-11.
Guiso, Luigi, Helios Herrera, Massimo Morelli, and Tommaso Sonno. "Populism: Demand and Supply,"
     November 25, 2018.
Guriev, Sergei, and Elias Papaioannou, "The Political Economy of Populism," CEPR Discussion Paper
     DP14433, February 2020.
Gyöngyösi, Gyozo, and Emil Verner. "Financial Crisis, Creditor-Debtor Conflict, and Populism," February
    2020.


                                                  -27-
Hacker, Jacob S., and Paul Pierson. Let Them Eat Tweets: How the Right Rules in an Age of Extreme
    Inequality. New York and London: Liveright Publishing, 2020.
Halla, Martin, Alexander F. Wagner, and Josef Zweimüller. "Immigration and Voting for the Far Right."
      Journal of the European Economic Association 15, no. 6 (2017): 1341­1385.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/jeea/jvx003.
Harmon, Nikolaj A. "Immigration, Ethnic Diversity, and Political Outcomes: Evidence from Denmark."
    The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 120, no. 4 (2018): 1043­74.
    https://doi.org/10.1111/sjoe.12239.
Hill, Seth J., Daniel J. Hopkins, and Gregory A. Huber, "Local Demographic Changes and US Presidential
       Voting, 2012 to 2016," PNAS, December 2019. www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1909202116.
Hobolt, Sara B., and James Tilley. "Fleeing the Centre: The Rise of Challenger Parties in the Aftermath of
    the Euro Crisis." West European Politics 39, no. 5 (June 16, 2016): 971­91.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/01402382.2016.1181871.
Hochschild, Arlie Russell, Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right, The
    New Press, New York, 2016.
Hopkins, Daniel J., "The Activation of Prejudice and Presidential Voting: Panel Evidence from the 2016
    U.S. Election," Political Behavior, online publication, September 2019.
Im, Zhen Jie, Nonna Mayer, Bruno Palier, and Jan Rovny. "The `Losers of Automation': A Reservoir of
     Votes for the Radical Right?" Research & Politics 6, no. 1 (2019).
     https://doi.org/10.1177/2053168018822395.
Inglehart, Ronald, and Pippa Norris. "Trump, Brexit, and the Rise of Populism: Economic Have-Nots and
     Cultural Backlash." SSRN Electronic Journal, 2016. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2818659.
Irwin, Douglas A. Clashing over Commerce: A History of US Trade Policy. Markets and Governments in
     Economic History. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2017.
Iversen, Torben, David Soskice, and Alice Xu. "Transition to the Knowledge Economy and the Rise of
     Populism: A Human Capital Perspective," 2017.
Jensen, J. Bradford, Dennis P. Quinn, and Stephen Weymouth. "Winners and Losers in International
     Trade: The Effects on US Presidential Voting" 71, no. 3 (2017): 423­457.
     https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818317000194.
Kurer, Thomas, The Declining Middle, "Occupational Change, Social Status and the Populist Right,"
     Comparative Political Studies, 2020.
Malgouyres, Clement. "Trade Shocks and Far-Right Voting: Evidence from French Presidential
    Elections." SSRN Electronic Journal, 2017. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2942173.
Margalit, Yotam. "Costly Jobs: Trade-Related Layoffs, Government Compensation, and Voting in U.S.
    Elections." American Political Science Review 105, no. 1 (2011): 166­188.
    https://doi.org/10.1017/S000305541000050X.
------. "Economic Insecurity and the Causes of Populism, Reconsidered." Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 33, no. 4 (2019): 152­170. https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.4.152.
Mayda, Anna Maria, Giovanni Peri, and Walter Steingress. "The Political Impact of Immigration:
    Evidence from the United States." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, February 6,
    2019.

                                                  -28-
Mehrotra, Ajay K. "`More Mighty than the Waves of the Sea': Toilers, Tariffs, and the Income Tax
    Movement, 1880-1913." Labor History 45, no. 2 (2004): 165­198.
    https://doi.org/10.1080/0023656042000217246.
Mendez, Ildefonso, and Isabel M. Cutillas. "Has Immigration Affected Spanish Presidential Elections
    Results?" Journal of Population Economics 27, no. 1 (January 2014): 135­71.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s00148-013-0471-y.
Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi. "Resolving Debt Overhang: Political Constraints in the
    Aftermath of Financial Crises." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 6, no. 2 (2014): 1­28.
    https://doi.org/10.1257/mac.6.2.1.
Moriconi, Simone, Giovanni Peri, and Riccardo Turati. "Skill of the Immigrants and Vote of the Natives:
     Immigration and Nationalism in European Elections 2007-2016." NBER Working Paper Series,
     2018, 25077. https://doi.org/10.3386/w25077.
Mukand, Sharun, and Dani Rodrik. "The Political Economy of Ideas: On Ideas Versus Interests in
    Policymaking," March 2018. https://drodrik.scholar.harvard.edu/publications/ideas-versus-
    interests.
Mutz, Diana C. "Status Threat, Not Economic Hardship, Explains the 2016 Presidential Vote."
    Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 115, no. 19
    (2018): E4330­39. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1718155115.
Naoi, Megumi, "Survey Experiments in International Political Economy: What We (Don't) Know About
     the Backlash Against Globalization," Annual Review of Political Science, 23, 2020, 333­56.
Norris, Pippa, and Ronald Inglehart, Cultural Backlash: Trump, Brexit and Authoritarian Populism,
     Cambridge University Press, 2019.
Otto, Alkis Henri, and Max Friedrich Steinhardt. "Immigration and Election Outcomes -- Evidence from
     City Districts in Hamburg." Regional Science and Urban Economics 45 (March 2014): 67­79.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.regsciurbeco.2014.01.004.
Rodrik, Dani, Has Globalization Gone Too Far? Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.,
     1997
Rodrik, Dani, The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World Economy, W.W.
     Norton, 2011.
Rodrik, Dani, "Populism and the Economics of Globalization," Journal of International Business Policy,
     vol. 1, 2018.
Rommel, Tobias, and Stefanie Walter. "The Electoral Consequences of Offshoring: How the
   Globalization of Production Shapes Party Preferences." Comparative Political Studies 51, no. 5
   (2018): 621­658. https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414017710264.
Rothwell, Jonathan T., and Pablo Diego-Rosell. "Explaining Nationalist Political Views: The Case of
    Donald Trump." SSRN Electronic Journal, 2016. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2822059.
Roupakias, Stelios, and Michael Chletsos, "Immigration and FarRight Voting: Evidence from Greece,"
    The Annals of Regional Science, 2020.
Schwartz, Cassilde, Miranda Simon, David Hudson, and Jennifer van-Heerde-Hudson, "A Populist
    Paradox? How Brexit Softened Anti-Immigrant Attitudes," British Journal of Political Science, 2020.


                                                  -29-
Sides, John, Michael Tesler, and Lynn Vavreck, Identity Crisis: The 2016 Presidential Campaign and the
     Battle for the Meaning of America, Princeton University Press, 2018.
Steiner, Nils D., and Philipp Harms, "Local Trade Shocks and the Nationalist Backlash in Political
     Attitudes: Panel Data Evidence from Great Britain," Gutenberg School of Management and
     Economics, May 2020.
Swank, Duane, and Hans-Georg Betz. "Globalization, the Welfare State and Right-Wing Populism in
    Western Europe." Socio-Economic Review 1, no. 2 (2003): 215­245.
    https://doi.org/10.1093/soceco/1.2.215.
Tabellini, Marco. "Gifts of the Immigrants, Woes of the Natives: Lessons from the Age of Mass
     Migration." The Review of Economic Studies 87, no. 1 (2019): 454­86.
     https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdz027.
Vertier, Paul, and Max Viskanic. "Dismantling the `Jungle': Migrant Relocation and Extreme Voting in
     France." SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, January 9, 2019.
     https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2963641.
Wilkinson, Will. "The Density Divide: Urbanization, Polarization, and Populist Backlash." Washington,
     D.C.: Niskanen Center, June 2019.
Young, Alasdair R. "Two Wrongs Make a Right? The Politicization of Trade Policy and European Trade
       Strategy." Journal of European Public Policy 26, no. 12 (2019): 1883­1899.
       https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2019.1678055.




                                                  -30-
Figure 1: A causal framework




Source: Author




                               -31-
Figure 2: Preferred responses to labor market displacement shocks




Source: Di Tella and Rodrik (2020)




                                                -32-
Table 1: Correlates of Trump vote in 2016 election
                                               Dependent variable: vote for Trump (2016)                            Dependent variable: switch from Obama (2012) to Trump

                                     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)      (11)      (12)
Racial inequality attitude         0.282*      0.189*      0.274*      0.246*       0.273*      0.157*         0.026*      0.035*      0.022*      0.021**   0.029*    0.029*
(5-point scale)                    (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.014)     (0.016)      (0.016)     (0.016)        (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.009)

Social class, self-reported        0.044*       0.004      0.046*      0.047*       0.043*       0.013         -0.007      -0.004      -0.005      -0.007    -0.007    -0.001
(4-point scale)                    (0.015)     (0.014)     (0.016)     (0.015)      (0.015)     (0.013)        (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.008)

Financial worries                  -0.003       0.005      -0.003      -0.013        0.001       0.000        0.011**      0.010**     0.011**     0.010**   0.010**    0.008
(4-point scale)                    (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.009)     (0.007)       (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.005)

Republican                                     0.281*                                           0.254*                     -0.045*                                     -0.047*
                                               (0.015)                                          (0.016)                    (0.015)                                     (0.015)

Trade agreements oppose                                    0.106*                               0.091*                                 0.029*                          0.027**
(binary variable)                                          (0.024)                              (0.023)                                (0.011)                         (0.011)

Immigration steals jobs                                                0.147*                   0.095*                                             0.020**             0.023**
(binary variable)                                                      (0.018)                  (0.016)                                            (0.010)             (0.010)

Bank regulation favor                                                              -0.081*     -0.051*                                                       0.021**   0.018***
(binary variable)                                                                   (0.20)     (0.018)                                                       (0.010)    (0.010)

N                                  2,153        2,144       2,137       2,149       2,134       2,115           2,153       2,144       2,137       2,149     2,134     2,115
Notes: ANES data. All specifications include age, gender, race (white), and education (high-school or below) as additional regressors.
Estimates and standard errors are generated with logistics regressions using ANES sample weights and clusters. Refer to text for description of variables.
Reported coefficients are average marginal effects. Delta-method standard errors are in parentheses.
Levels of statistical significance: * 0.01; ** 0.05.
Table 2: Correlates of switching to Trump in 2016 election among Obama (2012) voters
                                 Dependent variable: switch from Obama (2012) to Trump
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)
Racial inequality attitude         0.134*       0.127*      0.125*      0.110*        0.137*       0.102*
(5-point scale)                    (0.018)      (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.018)       (0.018)      (0.018)

Social class, self-reported        -0.020       -0.025      -0.018      -0.017        -0.020       -0.024
(4-point scale)                    (0.016)      (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)       (0.016)      (0.016)

Financial worries                  0.018**     0.016***    0.015***      0.011       0.017***       0.006
(4-point scale)                    (0.009)      (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.008)       (0.009)      (0.009)

Republican                                      0.093*                                             0.096*
                                                (0.032)                                            (0.030)

Trade agreements oppose                                     0.065*                                0.054**
(binary variable)                                           (0.023)                               (0.021)

Immigration steals jobs                                                 0.093*                    0.081**
(binary variable)                                                       (0.021)                   (0.020)

Bank regulation favor                                                                 0.025         0.029
(binary variable)                                                                     (0.24)       (0.024)

N                                    885         884          881         883          878           874
Notes: ANES data. Sample is restricted to respondents who report voting for Obama in 2012.
All specifications include age, gender, race (white), and education (high-school or below) as additional regressors.
Estimates and standard errors are generated with logistics regressions using ANES sample weights.
Reported coefficients are average marginal effects. Delta-method standard errors are in parentheses.
Levels of statistical significance: * 0.01; ** 0.05; *** 0.10. Refer to text for variable descriptions.
                                                                              Table 3: Trade
Reference        Key independent variable   Dependent variable             Main finding                                              Setting             Estimation
Autor et al.     Chinese import             Consumption of polarized       Import shocks from China contribute to: a shift to the    U.S., CZs mapped    OLS, DiD, IV
(2019)           penetration (shift-share   media; political leaning of    right in media-viewing habits and political beliefs, more onto CDs, 1990-2010
                 instrument)                campaign contributors;         competitive congressional elections, greater polarization
                                            conservative GOP gains in      in ideological orientation of campaign contributors, net
                                            Congress                       gains in the number of conservative GOP representatives,
                                                                           at the cost of moderate Democrats

Ballard-Rosa et Chinese import              Authoritarian values (as       Individuals in regions where labor markets were more         U.S., CZs, 2017         OLS, IV
al. (2018)      penetration (based on       measured by a nationally       exposed to increased import from China, and where the
                ADH instrument)             representative survey)         local population is more diverse, express more
                                                                           authoritarian values
Barone and     Chinese import              Vote shares for populist        Trade globalization (import competition with China in        Italy, Municipality,    OLS, IV
Kreuter (2019) penetration (based on       parties in national elections   particular) increases support for populist parties. Also     1992-2013
               ADH instrument)             for lower house of              increases protest vote by increasing invalid ballot papers
                                           parliament                      and decreasing turnout
Cerrato et al.   Chinese import            Individual appreciation for     1) Republican candidates consistently assumed harsher        U.S., CD, individual,   Text analysis,
(2018)           penetration based on ADH Republican presidential          stances on immigration/minority inclusion, moved from        2008-2016               IV, IV with
                 instrument. Candidates'   candidates (ANES "feeling       support of free trade to protectionism. 2) Local Chinese                             mediator (per
                 mentions of free          thermometer" data)              import competition drives negative attitudes toward                                  Dippel et al.
                 trade/immigration:                                        immigrants and ethnic/racial minorities. 3) Local import                             2018)
                 presidential candidates'                                  exposure does not significantly affect attitudes toward
                 speech data from                                          trade integration. 4) Pro-conservative effect mediated by
                 American Presidency                                       individual attitudes toward ethnic minorities/religious
                 Project                                                   groups.
Che et al.       Exposure to NTR status of US House elections,             Studies the granting of Permanent Normal Trade               U.S., County, 1992-     DiD, RD (close
(2017)           China (employment-share- protectionist voting by          Relations to China. U.S. counties subject to greater         2010                    elections), IV
                 weighted industry gap in Representatives                  competition from China via PNTR exhibit relative
                 tariff induced by NTR)                                    increases in turnout, the share of votes cast for
                                                                           Democrats and the probability that the county is
                                                                           represented by a Democrat




                                                                                                                                                                    Trade 3 of 15
                                                                                 Table 3: Trade
Reference         Key independent variable     Dependent variable             Main finding                                              Setting             Estimation
Choi et al.       NAFTA vulnerability, based   Switch from Democratic to      Exposed counties shift sharply toward the Republican      U.S., CZ, county,   Event-study OLS
(2020)            on a Bartik-like variable    Republican voting              party in House elections following the 1993 passage of    1980-2016 (focus on
                  that relies on 1990 tariff                                  NAFTA. Also see employment decline but no population      pre/post NAFTA
                  protection and industry                                     decline, limited wage effects on average                  passage in 1993)
                  mix
Colantone and     Chinese import               Regional shares of Brexit      Chinese import shocks lead to higher leave vote share     U.K., NUTS-3 region, OLS, IV
Stanig (2018a)    penetration (based on        leave votes, individual vote                                                             2016 (Brexit
"Global           ADH instrument; using        based on British Election                                                                referendum)
Competition       industry specialization in   Study
and Brexit"       1989 and 1990-2007 data)
Colantone and     Chinese import               Attitudes from ESS and EVS:    Chinese import shocks lead to lower support for           15 Western           OLS, IV
Stanig (2018b)    penetration (based on        political (toward democracy,   democracy and liberal values, but has no bearing on       European countries,
"The Economic     ADH instrument)              liberalism, etc.); personal    individual private attitudes. Leads to cultural but not   NUTS-2 region, 1988-
Determinants...                                (authoritarian parenting,      economic concerns about immigration.                      2008
"                                              traditional values, etc.);
                                               immigration
Colantone and     Chinese import shock         Ideology scores from    Chinese import shocks lead to increased support for 1)           15 Western           OLS, IV
Stanig (2018c)    (based on ADH                Comparative Manifesto   nationalist and isolationist parties, 2) increased support       European countries,
"The Trade        instrument)                  Project                 for radical-right parties, an 3) a general rightward shift in    NUTS-2 region, 1988-
Origins..."                                                            electorate                                                       2007
Dippel et al.     Imports from/exports to Party vote shares in federal Find effect of trade exposure on far-right populist voting,      Germany, County      OLS, IV, IV with
(2018) (builds    China with ADHM           elections                  but not on other-party votes. When considering the               (Landkreis), 1987-   mediator
on their 2015     instrument, labor market                             Trade exposure -> Labor market effects -> Populist voting        2009
WP, which is      conditions from IAB's HES                            channel, find that labor market explains 107-137% of
focused less on   database                                             total effects on populist voting due to trade exposure. Do
the metrics                                                            some additional analysis to relax these bounds if
component)                                                             identification assumptions are relaxed, find that labor
                                                                       market explains at least 70% of total efect
Jensen et al.     Trade exposure in goods Incumbent vote share in U.S. Incumbents fare worse in counties experiencing a drop in         U.S., County, Labor   OLS
(2017)            and services,             presidential elections     low-wage manufacturing employment, but fare better               Market Area, 1992-
                  distinguishing between                               when employment rises in high-wage manufacturing and             2012
                  import and export                                    service sectors
                  exposure



                                                                                                                                                                    Trade 4 of 15
                                                                                Table 3: Trade
Reference       Key independent variable     Dependent variable              Main finding                                               Setting              Estimation
Malgouyres      Imports exposure based       Front National vote share in    Small but significant effect of import exposure on the     France, Small        OLS, IV
(2017)          on sector exposure to low-   national elections              propensity of communities to vote for the FN               communities
                wage country imports,                                                                                                   (cantons), 1995-2012
                instrumented with China
                export exposure of other
                similar countries (data:
                DADS matched employer-
                employee dataset, UN
                Comtrade trade flows)
Margalit (2011) Requests for trade           Incumbent vote share in U.S.    A 1 pp increase in the share of county workforce losing a U.S., County, 1996-   OLS
                adjustment assistance        presidential elections (with    job due to foreign competition lowers incumbent vote      2004
                from Department of Labor     focus on change in George       share by 0.15 pp, twice as large as the vote share
                                             W. Bush vote share in 2000      dropdue to job losses caused by other factors
                                             and 2004 elections)
Rommel and      Exposure to occupation,      Economic policy preferences     Offshorability associated with support for leftist and     18 Western          OLS, probit
Walter (2017)   respondent education         and support for various         center-right parties, not associated with support for      European countries, random effects
                (from ESS)                   families of political parties   populist right parties                                     Individual, 2002-
                                             (from Comparative Manifesto                                                                2010
                                             Project)
Steiner and     China shift-share import     Within-individual changes in    Individuals in regions with greater exposure to higher     British Household    OLS, with
Harms (2020)    penetration variable         attitudes on nationalism and    imports from China express more nationalistic sentiments   Panel Study,         lagged
                                             economic policy                 and become more critical of EU and international           individual, 1999-    individual
                                                                             cooperation. There is no evidence that trade shocks        2008                 preferences
                                                                             produce economic policy attitudes to shift to the left.




                                                                                                                                                                   Trade 5 of 15
                                                                            Table 4: Immigration
Reference        Key independent variable Dependent variable                Main finding                                                 Setting                  Estimation
Barone et al.    Immigrant share, using   Center-right vote share           More voting for center-right coalition in municipalities     Italy, Municipality,     OLS, IV
(2016)           shift-share IV           (which includes extreme and       with larger inflows of immigrants. Smaller absolute (but     2001-2008
                                          moderate right)                   greater relative) effect on extreme-right voting than on
                                                                            moderate right voting.
Becker and       Migration from accession Vote shares for UKIP party in Places that received large numbers of migrants from              U.K., Local authority    Best subset
Fetzer (2017)    countries (relative to EU  European Parliamentary          Eastern Europe saw small, but statistically significant      district, individual,    selection, DiD
                 migration in the past, and elections. Also use British     increases in the vote shares for the UKIP. EU accession      1999-2014 (with          using
                 to total population)       Election Study data on          decreased wages at lower end of income distribution          focus on 2004            propensity
                                            individual preferences                                                                       migration shock)         score matching
Becker et al.    Growth rate of migrants    Brexit leave vote in 380 local Vote Leave share strongly associated with growth rate of      U.K., Local authority    OLS, penalized
(2016)                                      authorities                     migrants from EU accession countries. Also strongly          areas, wards, 2016       OLS
                                                                            associated with old age, low education, high                 (Brexit referendum)
                                                                            manufacturing employment share, high unemployment.
Brunner and      Immigrant share,           Shares of anti-immigrant        1pp increase in the local share of culturally different      Switzerland,             OLS, IV
Kuhn (2018)      instrumented with          votes (based on votes on        immigrants results in a 1.25pp increase in anti-             Community, 1970-
                 immigrant share in         amendments related to           immigration votes in an average national vote about          2010
                 (broader) local labor      migration policy, taking        immigration. Also see increase in vote shares for right-
                 market. Also incorporate advantage of Swiss direct         wing Swiss People's Party
                 cultural distance measure democracy); vote share of
                                            Swiss People's Party
Caselli et al.   Change in immigrant        Vote share of far-right parties Over 2001-2008, greater immigration, larger trade shock,     Italy, local labor   IV
(2020)           stock, shift-share                                         and robotization are all associated with greater support     markets, 2001, 2008,
                 instruments for Chinese                                    for far-right parties. Over 2008-2013, greater immigration   2013
                 imports and robotization                                   is associated with less support for far-right parties but
                                                                            with more support for the new Five Star movement. No
                                                                            effect of Chinese imports is found in the latter period.

Dinas et al.     Refugee influxes in some Vote shares for Golden        Increase in vote share for Golden Dawn in islands                Greece,              OLS, DiD, IV
(2019)           Aegean islands (natural    Dawn, an extreme right-wing impacted by refugee crisis                                       Island/municipality,
                 experiment -- also does IV Greek party                                                                                  2015 (compares Jan
                 using distance from                                                                                                     and Sep elections)
                 Turkish coast)




                                                                                                                                                                Immigration 6 of 15
                                                                            Table 4: Immigration
Reference       Key independent variable Dependent variable                 Main finding                                               Setting                Estimation
Dustmann et al. Change in refugee          Change in vote share for anti-   Increase in refugee share significantly increases vote     Denmark,               OLS (with
(2016)          allocation (under a quasi- immigrant/far-right parties      share for anti-immigrant and both far-right and center-    Municipality, 1989-    natural
                random allocation policy)                                   right parties                                              1998                   experiment
                                                                                                                                                              geneating quasi-
                                                                                                                                                              random
                                                                                                                                                              variation)
Edo et al.         Immigrant share, using       Vote shares for far-right and OLS and IV estimates suggest that immigration increases France, Department, Multinomial
(2019)             shift-share IV               far-left parties              support for far-right candidates and tends to have a weak municipality, canton, logit, OLS, IV
                                                                              negative effect on the support for far-left candidates at 1988-2017
                                                                              the departmental and regional levels. Effect on far-right
                                                                              driven by low-educated immigrants from non-Western
                                                                              countries
Eichengreen et Foreign pop share,               Vote share for Bryan          Bryan vote share lower in manufacturing counties, higher U.S., County, 1896     OLS
al. (2017)         manufacturing/farm           (populist in 1896 election)   in those with larger Chinese share, also associated with (McKinley-Bryan
                   output                                                     crop prices and mortgage interest rates                    election)
Gerdes and         Share of population of non- Vote shares for various        Anti-immigration parties win votes as a result of increase Denmark,             OLS (fixed-
Wadensjö           Western origin               parties, with a focus on far- in non-western share, but so does a pro-immigation party Municipality, 1989- effect
(2010)                                          left and far-right parties                                                               2001                 specification),
                                                                                                                                                              IV
Halla et al.       Immigrant share (and         Vote shares for FPÖ           Inflow of immigrants into community has significant        Australia,           OLS, IV
(2017)             changes in immigrant         (Freedom Party of Austria, a impact on FPÖ vote share                                    Community, 1971-
                   share), uses Bartik style IV far-right party)                                                                         2013
Harmon (2018) Share of population of non- Vote shares in municipal            Increasing ethnic diversity has a negative effect on the   Denmark,             OLS, IV
                   Western origin,              elections of 1981 and 2001 electoral success of traditional left-wing parties and a      Municipality, 1981-
                   instrumented with            and in national elections, of positive effect on the electoral success of anti-immigrant 2001
                   measure of availability of far-left and far-right parties nationalist parties
                   rental housing in 1970
Hill et al. (2019) Shares of Hispanic and non- Change in Republican vote      There is a negative relationship between increase in       U.S., precinct-level OLS
                   citizen foreign-born         share in Presidential         Hispanic shares and increase in Republican (Trump) vote observations in 7
                   population                   elections                     share                                                      states, 2012-2016




                                                                                                                                                             Immigration 7 of 15
                                                                             Table 4: Immigration
Reference       Key independent variable Dependent variable                 Main finding                                                   Setting               Estimation
Mayda et al.    Low and high skilled         Vote shares for Republicans    Increase in high-skilled immigrants decreases the share of     U.S., County,         OLS, IV
(2019)          immigrant share, with shift- in House, Senate, and          Republican votes, while an inflow of low-skilled               individual, 1990-
                share style instrument       presidential elections; Pew    immigrants increases it. Mostly due to effect on existing      2010
                                             survey data                    citizens' votes, independent of country of origin
Mendez and      (Change in) foreign-born Change in vote for major           Latin-American immigration increased natives'                  Spain, Province,      OLS, IV
Cutillas (2014) population share, with       leftist (PSOE) over major      participation rate and their support for the major leftist     1996-2011
                shift-share instrument       conservative (PP) party in     party (PSOE) over the major conservativeparty (PP).
                                             presidential elections, vote   African immigration increased natives' support for anti-
                                             share for anti-immigrant       immigration formations relative to the PP, leaving
                                             formations (parties)           unaffected the participation rate
Moriconi et al. High- and low-skilled        Party that individual voted    Strong negative association between highly-educated            12 European            OLS, IV
(2018)          immigrant share, using       for/supports, scored based     immigrant share & nationalist intensity; strong positive       countries, Individual,
                shift-share IV               on its nationalist bent (per   association between less-educated immigrant share &            2007-2016
                                             the Manifesto Project). Uses   nationalist intensity; changes in prefs in response to high-
                                             data from ESS                  and low-skilled immigrant share is stronger for less-
                                                                            educated and older voters. Shift mostly driven by change
                                                                            in vote preferences, not turnout
Otto and        Foreign-born population Vote shares for far-right and Positive and substantial impact of growing shares of                 Germany (Hamburg), OLS (fixed-
Steinhardt      share, with shift-share       Green parties in regional and foreigners on the political success of extreme right-wing      City district, 1987- effect
(2014)          instrument                    national elections            parties, negative association with vote share for Green        2000                 specification),
                                                                            party                                                                               IV
Roupakias and Share of immigrants in          Vote share of three far right An increase in the immigrant share, especially from non-       Greece, 51 regions, IV with fixed
Chletsos (2020) local population, with shift- parties in national elections OECD countries, increases support for far right parties,       2004-2012            effects for
                share instrument                                            while decreasing support for far left party (Syriza)                                regions; WLS;
                                                                                                                                                                OLS
Tabellini (2019) European immigration to     Public spending, legislator    Immigration triggered hostile political reactions, such as     U.S., Cities, 1910-  OLS, IV
                 U.S. cities (exogenous      ideology                       the election of more conservative legislators, higher          1930
                 variation ue to policy                                     support for anti-immigration legislation, and lower
                 changes; also shift-share                                  redistribution.
                 IV)




                                                                                                                                                               Immigration 8 of 15
                                                                            Table 4: Immigration
Reference       Key independent variable      Dependent variable            Main finding                                              Setting             Estimation
Vertier and     Presence of temporary         Change in vote share for      In the presence of a CAO, the percentage growth rate of France, Municipality, OLS, IV
Viskanic (2019) migrant centers (CAOs),       Front National between 2012   vote shares for the FN between 2012 and 2017 is reduced 2012-2017
                instrumented with             and 2017                      by about 12.3pp. Effects dissipate spatially and are most
                presence of holiday village                                 pronounced for cities that received small number of
                in same municipality                                        migrants, suggestive of contact hypothesis




                                                                                                                                                       Immigration 9 of 15
                                                                         Table 5: Financial globalization
Reference         Key independent variable     Dependent variable               Main finding                                              Setting               Estimation
Ahlquist et al.   Repayment of mortgages       Vote shares for PiS (populist-   Those exposed to shock more likely to demand              Poland, Individual,   Logistic
(2018)            denominated in Swiss         right party) demand for          government support. Among former government voters, 2015                        regression
                  francs. (Take advantage of   government bailouts.             Swiss franc borrowers were more likely to desert the
                  surprise revaluation of      Authors' survey data from        government and vote for the largest opposition party, the
                  Swiss franc in 2015)         2015, prior to election          PiS. This brought the PiS a parliamentary majority

Bergh and         KOF globalization index     Vote shares of European           Increase in vote share for populist parties positively  33 European             OLS
Gustafsson        (combines trade and         populist parties                  associated with globalization index                     countries, Country,
(2019)            financial globalization)                                                                                              1980-2016
Doerr et al.      Exposure to bank failures Nazi vote shares                 Greater exposure to bank failure in 1930 -> greater Nazi Germany, Bank-firm        OLS
(2019)            (particularly those of                                     gains. Unemployment did not impact Nazi support, but       pair (each firm
                  Danat and Dresdner),                                       income decline driven by exposure to Jewish-led bank led typically was closely
                  using data on firm-bank                                    to sizable increase in Nazi support (relative to other     connected to one
                  relationshps for 5610 firms                                failing non-Jewish bank). Places with history of anti-     bank), city, 1931
                  during the Great                                           Semitism showed greater effect. In places without this     (banking crisis--
                  Depression. Digitized for                                  history, income change accounted for all the political     studies Nazi Party
                  the first time by authors                                  change                                                     support between
                                                                                                                                        1930 and 1932/33)
Funke et al.  Financial crises              Vote shares of far-left and far- Post-crisis: vote swings to far-right parties; increased   20 developed            OLS, local
(2016)                                      right parties in parliamentary fragmentation and street protests. Far-right parties         countries, Country,     projection
                                            elections; street protests       increase vote share by 30% after financial crisis, but not 1870-2014
                                                                             after normal recessions or non-financial macro shocks.
Gyöngyösi and Foreign currency              Far-right vote shares in         Vote share of populist far-right increased significantly   Hungary, Zip code,      OLS
Verner (2020) borrowing/debt exposure Parliamentary election                 more in zip codes with greater exposure to household       1998-2018 (focus on
                                                                             foreign currency debt                                      2010)
Mian et al.   Banking, currency,            Size of governing coalition;     Following a financial crisis, voters become more extreme, 70 countries (from
(2014)        inflation, debt crises (using political                        ruling coalitions become weaker, fractionalization         RR dataset), Country,
              Reinhart and Rogoff           fragmentation/fractionalizati increases. Financial crises put pressure on debtors, and 1975-2010
              comprehensive dataset on on; vote shares of                    the debt overhang/creditor-debtor conflict that occurs
              financial crises)             government parties; political afterward tends to deepen the downturn
                                            poliarization/leaning (WVS,
                                            ANES, DPI data)j; IMF
                                            structural reforms



                                                                                                                                                  Financial Globalization 10 of 15
                                                                         Table 5: Financial globalization
Reference      Key independent variable       Dependent variable               Main finding                                              Setting             Estimation
Swank and Betz Trade openness, capital        Vote shares for radical right-   Trade openness and transnational flows of capital have    16 Western          Tobit MLE
(2003)         mobility, foreign asylum       wing populist parties in         contributed to success of radical right-wing parties in   European countries,
               seekers, social welfare        national parliamentary           Western Europe. However, effect is attenuated in states   Election, 1981-1998
               protection at national level   elections                        with strong welfare




                                                                                                                                                Financial Globalization 11 of 15
                                                                           Table 6: Economic insecurity
Reference        Key independent variable   Dependent variable                Main finding                                                  Setting              Estimation
Algan et al.     Unemployment               Vote shares of populist           Increase in unemployment during crisis associated             26 EU countries,     OLS, DiD, IV
(2017)           (instrumented with         parties; Brexit vote;             w/increased voting for populist parties, decreased trust in   NUTS-2 region, 2000-
                 construction share)        trust/attitudes (toward           political institutions                                        2017
                                            immigrants, police, etc.) from
                                            ESS
Anelli et al.    Exposure to automation     Ideological leaning of            Higher exposure to automation increases support for           14 Western           OLS, IV
(2019)           (regional based on         electoral districts/indiv.        nationalist and radical-right parties, both at the regional   European countries,
                 industry mix; individual   votes, based on nationalism       and at the individual level                                   NUTS-2 region, 1993-
                 based on occupation;       scores from Manifesto                                                                           2016
                 instrumented with other-   Project
                 country robot use)
Bossert et al.   Economic insecurity (a   Support for political parties  Economic insecurity predicts support for parties of the            UK, U.S., and            logistic
(2019)           measure based on changes                                right, greater support for Donald Trump before the 2016            Germany, panel of        regressions
                 in income)                                              US Presidential election, and theUK leaving the European           individuals
                                                                         Union in the 2016 Brexit referendum.
Chen (2018)      Unemployment               Voting for Sanders/Trump;    Unemployment during Great Recession associated with                U.S.,                    DiD, logistic
                                            GSS attitudes/trust measures increased left-wing populism; higher immigrant inflows             Individual/"region"      fixed effects
                                                                         associated with increased right-wing populism                      (9 total in the U.S.),
                                                                                                                                            2006-2016
Dal Bó et al.    Economic "winners" and Vote shares of Sweden                 Local increase in "insider-outsider gap" and share of         Sweden, Individual,      OLS
(2019)           "losers" due to 2006-2011 Democrats                          "vulnerable insiders" associated with larger gains for        precinct,
                 policy reforms. Individuals                                  Sweden Democrats                                              municipality, 1979-
                 classified based on register                                                                                               2012
                 data and based on risk of
                 automation replacement

De Bromhead      Pre/post 1929 (market      Vote shares of fascist anti-      GDP growth was negatively related to the vote for             28 countries,       Semi-
et al. (2013)    crash), GDP growth         system parties and of             extreme right-wing parties. "impact was                       Election, 1919-1939 parametric
                                            communist parties                 greatest in countries with relatively short histories of                          fixed-effects
                                                                              democracy, with electoral                                                         Tobit
                                                                              systems that created low hurdles to parliamentary
                                                                              representation, and which had
                                                                              been on the losing side in World War I."



                                                                                                                                                        Economic insecurity 12 of 15
                                                                               Table 6: Economic insecurity
Reference       Key independent variable       Dependent variable                 Main finding                                                   Setting                Estimation
Fetzer (2019)   Exposure to welfare cuts       Vote shares for UKIP from          Significant association between exposure to UK                 U.K. Local authority   OLS, IV (event-
                at district level (dawing on   Westminster, European, and         government austerity-induced welfare cuts and                  district,              study
                Beatty and Fothergill 2013     local council elections; newly     subsequent support for UK Independence Party                   constituency,          specification)
                data), individual exposure     constructed individual panel                                                                      individual, 2000-
                to benefits from USOC          dataset                                                                                           2016 (focus on 2010
                survey                                                                                                                           reforms)
Gomez and       Unemployment rate at the     Dichotomous variable        Higher unemployment is associated with greater                          56 elections in 15     OLS, with
Ramiro (2017)   national level               indicating whether          propensity to vote for radical left parties                             European countries,    individual level
                                             respondent voted for a                                                                              1996-2016              controls
                                             radical left party
Guiso et al.    Economic insecurity,         Vote shares of populist     Economic insecurity is associated with increased voting                 All European           Two-step
(2018)          attitudes, education (ESS parties (using van Kessel      for populist parties but decreased turnout                              countries, Individual, Heckman probit
                data)                        definition and a 3D                                                                                 2002-2014
                                             definition); also emphasize
                                             turnout
Hobolt and      European Election Study Defection from mainstream People who experienced economic downturns (decline in                          17 Western          Multinomial
Tilley (2016)   data on personal economic to challenger parties and non- household income, job loss) more likely to turn away                    European countries, logit
                challenge, attitudes         voting                      from mainstream party. Immigration/EU                                   Individual, 2014
                toward immigration/EU                                    integration/redistribution preferences tended to
                integration, political                                   influence which parties people switched to
                affiliation. Focus on people
                who switched from
                mainstream to challenger
                party

Im et al. (2019) Risk of automation at         Vote share for populist            Individuals "just about managing" on current income are        11 Western          Multinomial
                 occupational level (per       parties in last election (ESS      generally significantly driven toward radical-right voting     European countries, logit
                 Arntz et al. 2016)            data)                              by increasing threat of automation. Effect is not observed     Individual, 2012-
                                                                                  for those who already find it difficult or very difficult to   2016 (ESS rounds 6-
                                                                                  live on their current income.                                  8)




                                                                                                                                                           Economic insecurity 13 of 15
                                                                          Table 6: Economic insecurity
Reference       Key independent variable      Dependent variable             Main finding                                                 Setting                  Estimation
Iversen et al.  Vulnerability to losing out   Populist values, based on      Support for populist values associated with being a low-     16 developed             OLS, IV (for
(2017)          from the shift to             WVS and ESS                    income male; decreases in years of schooling                 countries, Individual,   education
                "knowledge economy,"                                                                                                      1995-2012                policy change
                based on demographic                                                                                                                               analysis)
                variables and quasi-
                random variation from
                education policy changes
Rothwell (2016) Immigrant share, income,      Favorable view of Trump        No clear story emerges--Trump voters tend to live in         U.S., Individual/CZ,     Probit
                employment,                   (Gallup data)                  racially and culturally isolated zip codes and CZs, but      2016
                demographics, etc. -- big                                    unclear if material well-being or financial variables such
                horse race regression                                        as trade exposure play a role
                drawing on Gallup
                variables




                                                                                                                                                     Economic insecurity 14 of 15
                                                                           Table 7: Culture & identity
Reference        Key independent variable       Dependent variable             Main finding                                             Setting                   Estimation
Enke (2019)      Universalist vs communal       Trump vote share (also         Vote share of politicians (esp Donald Trump) matches the U.S., Individual,         OLS, IV
                 moral values, via nationally   examines Trump's supply of     moral values of the electorate--more communal people county, 2008-2018
                 representative survey and      moral language relative to     tended to vote for Trump
                 MFQ data; moral content        other candidates, voting for
                 of politician speeches         Trump relative to other GOP
                                                candidates)
Gidron and Hall Subjective social status        Support for parties of         Lower levels of subjective social status associated with     20 developed           OLS
(2017)          (based on International         populist right                 support for right-wing populist parties                      democracies,
                Social Survey Program --                                                                                                    Individual, 2009
                ISSP)                                                                                                                       (primarily)
Inglehart and Many demographic and           Voted for populist party in       Cultural values are consistently statistically significant   31 European            Logistic
Norris (2016); economic variables from previous national election              predictors of populist voting, while economic indicators     countries, Individual, regression
Norris and      ESS (age, sex, employment, (dummy)                             are not                                                      2002-2014
Inglehart       job sector, cultural values,
(2019)          etc.)
Kurer (2020)    Employment transitions of Voting intentions of         Relative to survivors in routine jobs, workers who move              Germany,              Marginal
                workers who perform          individuals in panel      from routine work to unemployment reduce support for                 Switzerland, and      structural
                routine tasks                                          right-wing populist parties, which author interprets as              U.K., individual,     models
                                                                       evidence for social status anxiety rather than economic              since 1980s           (MSM)
                                                                       insecurity
Mutz (2018)      Perceived status threat of Vote choice (Clinton or    Trump voting best accounted for by the movement of the               U.S., Individual, 2012 OLS/logistic
                 historical high-status     Trump), feelings           Democratic candidate away from the average American--                and 2016               regression in
                 groups, perceived distance thermometer toward parties especially on trade. Perceived status threat strong                                         panel with
                 from both candidates                                  predictor of supporting Trump                                                               fixed effects
                 (using representative
                 panel survey conducted in
                 2012 and 2016)

Sides, Tesler,   Attitudes towards racial       Vote for Trump/Republican      Attitudes towards racial inequality and illegal immigration U.S., Individual, 2012 Logistic
and Vavreck      inequality and illegal         candidate in presidental       drove the vote towards Trump in 2016 eleciton; there is and 2016 (primarily) regression
(2018)           immigration (from ANES)        election                       little evidence that economic anxiety is associated with
                                                                               the Trump vote.



                                                                                                                                                     Economic insecurity 15 of 15
