                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               CONCENTRATION SCREENS FOR HORIZONTAL MERGERS

                                         Volker Nocke
                                      Michael D. Whinston

                                      Working Paper 27533
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27533


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2020




We thank Nate Miller and Matt Weinberg for generously providing the data we use in Section 4,
and for responding so helpfully to our many questions and requests. We also thank Carl Shapiro
for sharing his knowledge of Merger Guidelines history, Joe Farrell, Luke Froeb, Bernhard
Ganglmair, Louis Kaplow, John Kwoka, Craig Peters, Patrick Rey, Nancy Rose, Steve Salop,
Mark Satterthwaite, Nicolas Schutz, Carl Shapiro, Paolo Somaini, John Vickers, Ali Yurukoglu
and seminar audiences at Berkeley, Mannheim, Stanford, the 2019 Northwestern University
antitrust conference, and the New Zealand Competition Commission for comments, and Federico
Innocenti and Zi Yang Kang for their excellent RA work. Nocke gratefully acknowledges
financial support from the German Research Foundation (DFG) through CRC TR224 (Project
B03). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Volker Nocke and Michael D. Whinston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Concentration Screens for Horizontal Mergers
Volker Nocke and Michael D. Whinston
NBER Working Paper No. 27533
July 2020
JEL No. L0,L4

                                         ABSTRACT

Concentration-based screens for horizontal mergers, such as those employed in the US DOJ and
FTC Horizontal Merger Guidelines, play a central role in merger analysis. However, the basis for
these screens, in both form and level, remains unclear. We show that there is both a theoretical
and an empirical basis for focusing solely on the change in the Herfindahl index, and ignoring its
level, in screening mergers for whether their unilateral effects will harm consumers. We also
argue, again both theoretically and empirically, that the levels at which the presumptions
currently are set may allow mergers to proceed that cause consumer harm.


Volker Nocke
Department of Economics
University of Mannheim
 Germany
volker.nocke@gmail.com

Michael D. Whinston
Sloan School of Management
and Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
100 Main St
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
whinston@mit.edu
          Concentration Screens for Horizontal Mergers
                       Volker Nocke                Michael D. Whinston

                                          July 12, 2020

                               First version: September 2019



                                              Abstract
          Concentration-based screens for horizontal mergers, such as those employed in the
       US DOJ and FTC Horizontal Merger Guidelines, play a central role in merger analysis.
       However, the basis for these screens, in both form and level, remains unclear. We
       show that there is both a theoretical and an empirical basis for focusing solely on the
       change in the Herfindahl index, and ignoring its level, in screening mergers for whether
       their unilateral effects will harm consumers. We also argue, again both theoretically
       and empirically, that the levels at which the presumptions currently are set may allow
       mergers to proceed that cause consumer harm.


1      Introduction
Concentration measures play a central role in merger analysis. The current Department of
Justice and Federal Trade Commission Horizontal Merger Guidelines state various presump-
tions ­ both safe harbor presumptions and presumptions of anticompetitive effects ­ based on
the level of the post-merger Herfindahl index and the change that the merger induces in that
index (both naively computed, by adding the merging firms' pre-merger shares together).
While many other factors come into play in the agencies' analyses, these concentration-based
    
     We thank Nate Miller and Matt Weinberg for generously providing the data we use in Section 4, and
for responding so helpfully to our many questions and requests. We also thank Carl Shapiro for sharing
his knowledge of Merger Guidelines history, Joe Farrell, Luke Froeb, Bernhard Ganglmair, Louis Kaplow,
John Kwoka, Craig Peters, Patrick Rey, Nancy Rose, Steve Salop, Mark Satterthwaite, Nicolas Schutz, Carl
Shapiro, Paolo Somaini, John Vickers, Ali Yurukoglu and seminar audiences at Berkeley, Mannheim, Stan-
ford, the 2019 Northwestern University antitrust conference, and the New Zealand Competition Commission
for comments, and Federico Innocenti and Zi Yang Kang for their excellent RA work. Nocke gratefully ac-
knowledges financial support from the German Research Foundation (DFG) through CRC TR224 (Project
B03).
    
     Department of Economics, University of Mannheim, and School of Economics, University of Surrey;
email: volker.nocke@gmail.com
    
     Department of Economics and Sloan School of Management, MIT; email: whinston@mit.edu


                                                   1
presumptions have a significant impact on agency decisions, especially in screening mergers
for further review.1 Surprisingly, perhaps, the basis for these presumptions in both form and
level remains unclear.2
    In this paper, we examine these presumptions, focusing on a merger's likely unilateral
effects.3 We make two points: First, we show that there is both a theoretical and an empirical
basis for focusing solely on the change in the Herfindahl index, and ignoring its level, in
screening mergers for whether their unilateral effects will harm consumers. This point has
been recognized by others before us (e.g., Shapiro, 2010; Froeb and Werden, 1998) and,
indeed, is made in the 2010 Guidelines for the case of mergers in differentiated product
industries, but is still not yet widely appreciated.4 Here we go further in demonstrating why
this is so theoretically and in providing empirical evidence in support of this proposition.
Second, we argue, again both theoretically and empirically, that the levels at which the
presumptions currently are set may be too lax, especially in creating a safe harbor based
on the post-merger Herfindahl index, at least unless one is crediting large synergies or a
significant presumption that entry, repositioning, or other factors would prevent any anti-
competitive effects of the typical merger.5
    Throughout, we focus on the use of concentration measures at the initial screening stage,
when information on margins, diversion ratios and cost synergies is unlikely to be known.
We therefore adopt the perspective that there is some standard presumption regarding cost
synergies and elasticities that the agency uses at the screening stage.6 As we discuss later,
the standard presumptions regarding elasticities may depend on how narrowly markets are
being defined.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the history of concentration
screens in the various versions of the Horizontal Merger Guidelines.7
    In Section 3, we examine three canonical models of competition in which one might hope
that there would be a clear relationship between equilibrium concentration measures and the
   1
      Moreover, when the agencies challenge mergers in court, these concentration measures are frequently
emphasized by the agencies, and often factor significantly in courts' decisions even if other, more dispositive
information may be available at that point.
    2
      See Schmalensee (1987, pp. 47-50) for one previous discussion of the Guidelines concentration thresholds.
    3
      Miller and Weinberg (2017) provide evidence that horizontal mergers may also lead to coordinated
effects, as noted in the agencies' Guidelines.
    4
      Shapiro (2010, p. 63, fn 53) notes that "There is no good link between the level of the HHI and unilateral
price effects with differentiated products." See also his discussion on pp. 68-9. The 2010 Guidelines (p. 21)
note that "The Agencies rely much more on the value of diverted sales than on the level of the HHI for
diagnosing unilateral price effects in markets with differentiated products." The 2006 Commentary on the
1992 Guidelines makes a similar point on p.16, noting that for unilateral effects "[t]he concentration of the
remainder of the market often has little impact on the answer...."
    5
      Kwoka (2017) reaches a similar conclusion about the safe harbor in a study examining outcomes identified
in retrospective studies of 9 mergers.
    6
      In some cases, information on margins, diversion ratios and cost synergies may still not be known after
further investigation.
    7
      Throughout, we focus on the U.S. agencies' screening criteria, but similar points apply to many other
jurisdictions. For example, the European Commission also has horizontal merger guidelines that adopt
thresholds based on the Herfindahl level and its change.


                                                       2
effect of a merger on consumer surplus: the Cournot model of output/capacity competition
in homogeneous good industries, and the multinomial logit and constant elasticity of substi-
tution models of differentiated product price competition. As in Werden (1996), Froeb and
Werden (1998), and Farrell and Shapiro (2010), our focus in this analysis is on the level of
marginal cost reduction (the "synergy" or "efficiency gain") required to prevent a merger
from harming consumers.8 We show that this critical level of efficiencies depends in these
models on the merging firms' shares, but not on the shares of non-merging firms. In fact, for
mergers between symmetric firms in the Cournot model, given the market demand elasticity,
the required synergy depends solely on the (naively-computed) change in the Herfindahl in-
dex, and not at all on its post-merger level. We also examine how the levels of the required
synergies depend on the merging firms' shares. In the Cournot model, with synergies of
3% and common levels of market demand elasticity, consumer harm occurs when the merg-
ing firms' shares are much like those in the 1968 Guidelines ' thresholds. In contrast, the
threshold levels of merger-induced change in the Herfindahl index are more lenient, but still
restrictive, in the multinomial logit and constant elasticity of substitution models of price
competition.
    The theoretical models of Section 3 are certainly special. In Section 4, we provide an
empirical investigation of how mergers' effects on consumers are related to concentration
measures in one industry. We focus on possible mergers in brewing. Using the estimated
demand system in Miller and Weinberg (2017), a random-coefficient nested logit demand
system that is not covered by our theoretical analysis, and treating each local market sepa-
rately, we compute for various hypothetical (local) mergers the efficiency improvement that
would be required to prevent consumer harm. The results show that, as in the models of
Section 3, the required efficiency gain is strongly related to the (naively computed) change
in the Herfindahl index and not very related to the level of the post-merger Herfindahl (once
one conditions on the change in the Herfindahl). The levels of the merger-induced change
in the Herfindahl necessary to prevent consumer harm in these markets generally fall in the
range of those we derive in the theoretical models of Section 3. The levels required indicate
that if the typical merger in these markets would result in a 3% efficiency gain then many of
these hypothetical mergers falling into the current safe harbor, and in particular those with
post-merger Herfindahl levels below 1500, would be likely to harm consumers. As well, for
a 3% percent efficiency gain, the results indicate that mergers whose post-merger Herfindahl
levels are between 1500-2500 and that change the Herfindahl by more than 200 would often
harm consumers.
    In Section 5 we provide a discussion of our results and consider whether there are other
ways to justify the current Guidelines' focus on the level of the Herfindahl index.
    We conclude in Section 6 and note a number of areas of research that would help further
   8
     Our analysis is thus complementary to that in Nocke and Schutz (2019) who show that, absent effi-
ciencies, the merger-induced loss in consumer surplus is approximately proportional to the naively-computed
change in the Herfindahl index, where the approximations are taken around small market shares and around
monopolistic competition conduct.


                                                    3
           Figure 1: Anticompetitive presumptions in the 1968 Merger Guidelines


strengthen the basis for concentration-based horizontal merger screening thresholds. Overall,
our results suggest that modifying concentration screens to emphasize the change in the
Herfindahl index more, and the post-merger level less, could raise consumer welfare, and
that it is likely that current concentration-based presumptions allow some mergers that lead
to consumer harm to proceed.


2        History of the Merger Guideline Concentration Screens
The first version of the Merger Guidelines ­ issued solely by the Department of Justice ­
appeared in 1968, shortly after the 1963 Philadelphia National Bank decision and roughly
contemporaneous with the Neal Report on antitrust policy. As described by Shapiro (2010),
the 1968 Guidelines approach toward horizontal mergers was focused entirely on prevent-
ing increases in concentration and it proposed concentration thresholds that were markedly
more stringent than those today. Those presumptions, summarized in Figure 1, were largely
dependent on the shares of the two merging firms. For mergers in markets in which the
four-firm concentration ratio was above 75%, a merger would be blocked if a firm with a 4%
share wanted to acquire another firm with a 4% share, and a firm with a 15% share could
not acquire a firm with a 1% share.9 For markets with a four-firm concentration ratio below
75%, the thresholds were not much more lenient: a merger between two 5% firms would be
blocked.
   The DOJ's 1982 Guidelines represented a marked change, with the Herfindahl index
(HHI) replacing the four-firm concentration ratio, but more importantly with the level of mar-
ket concentration having much more importance, and with much more lenient standards.10
Figure 2 depicts the 1982 screening thresholds, which depend on the naively-computed post-
merger level of the HHI (measured out of 10,000) and the naively-computed merger-induced
change in HHI (labelled "HHI" in the figure). For example, a merger between two 5%
     9
     Somewhat curiously, the 1968 screens depended on which merger partner was the acquirer.
    10
     Shapiro (2010) describes well the other significant innovations in the 1982 Guidelines, and the continuing
increase over time in consideration of other market factors in analyzing prospective mergers. One factor that
may have ameliorated to some extent the more lenient standards was the introduction in the 1982 Guidelines
of the Horizontal Monopolist Test for market definition, which may have led to narrower market definitions.



                                                      4
          Figure 2: Screening thresholds in the 1982 Horizontal Merger Guidelines


share firms, which would lead to a 50 point increase in the HHI, rather than being challenged
became presumptively legal. More specifically, mergers in "unconcentrated" markets with a
post-merger HHI below 1000 fell into the (moderately shaded) green zone of the figure, repre-
senting mergers that were unlikely to be challenged. In "moderately concentrated" markets,
with post-merger Herfindahl indices between 1000 and 1800, a merger was "more likely than
not" to be challenged if it fell into the (lightly shaded) yellow zone because HHI was above
100, while mergers for which HHI was below 100 fell into the green zone. In "highly con-
centrated markets" with a post-merger HHI above 1800, mergers whose HHI were below
50 fell into the green zone, those with HHI between 50 and 100 fell into the yellow zone,
while those with HHI above 100 fell into the (darkly shaded) red zone that meant that the
DOJ was "likely to challenge." The 1992 Horizontal Merger Guidelines, issued for the first
time jointly by the DOJ and FTC, maintained these presumptions.11
    Most recently, the 2010 revision of the Horizontal Merger Guidelines relaxed these stan-
dards. As depicted in Figure 3, it raised the safe harbor level of the HHI from 1000 to 1500,
the threshold for considering a market highly concentrated from 1800 to 2500, and the critical
levels of HHI in highly concentrated markets from 50 to 100 for the safe harbor, and from
100 to 200 for the presumption of harm (thresholds in moderately concentrated markets were
not changed).12
    Notably, while the theoretical and empirical basis for neither the 1968 Guidelines nor the
1982 changes were ever clearly laid out by the agencies, the reason for the change in 2010 was
  11
      The 1992 Guidelines did change "more likely to be challenged than not" for the yellow zone to "poten-
tially raise significant competitive concerns." The 1982 Guidelines also had a presumption of anticompetitive
harm, eliminated in the 1992 Guidelines, if the acquirer was the leading firm in the industry, had a share of
at least 35%, was more than twice as large as the second largest firm, and was acquiring a firm with at least
a 1% share.
   12
      At the same time, the 2010 revision continued the move of the Guidelines away from rigid structural
presumptions and toward reliance on a range of evidence of potential anticompetitive effects in making final
determinations about whether to initiate an enforcement action.



                                                     5
         Figure 3: Screening thresholds in the 2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines


made explicit: the aim was to enhance transparency by making the thresholds conform more
closely with actual agency practice (see Shapiro, 2010). So, once again, no explicit economic
rationale was offered.
    Figure 4 depicts actual FTC enforcement results for those horizontal mergers that received
second requests from 1996-2011.13 A merger received an "enforcement action" if the FTC
sought to block or modify it. Evident in the figure is both the strong effect of the level of
concentration on the likelihood of enforcement and the fact that many mergers that fell into
the "red zone" anticompetitive presumption nonetheless were approved in the end (without
conditions). Because the figure does not break out the change in the Herfindahl index for
levels below 200, nor the level of the Herfindahl below 1800, it does not provide evidence
on how the FTC treated mergers in the green zone safe harbor that were issued a second
request. However, the same FTC report indicates (see Federal Trade Commission, 2013,
Table 3.1), that of the 1359 second requests considered in Figure 4, only 29 involved mergers
with HHI less than 100 and 11 of those where in markets with a post-merger HHI above
1800 and so may have been in the yellow zone. While the report leaves unclear the number of
second requests for mergers falling into the part of the green zone representing unconcentrated
markets in which HHI is above 100, this low number likely reflects an important asymmetry
in the treatment given to the red zone anticompetitive presumption versus the green zone
safe harbor: mergers that fall into the safe harbor, perhaps because of a low post-merger
Herfindahl index, are typically simply allowed without further scrutiny, while those that fall
into the anticompetitive presumption category are scrutinized further and may be allowed
based on other factors.
  13
    See "Horizontal Merger Investigation Data: Fiscal Years 1996-2011," Federal Trade Commission, Jan-
uary 2013; available at https://www.ftc.gov/os/2013/01/130104horizontalmergerreport.pdf.




                                                  6
Figure 4: FTC horizontal merger enforcement frequencies for mergers receiving a second
request, as a function of the post-merger level of the Herfindahl index and the merger-induced
change in the Herfindahl index, 1996-2011. [Source: Federal Trade Commission (2013)]


3     Theoretical Analysis
Analysis of horizontal mergers focuses on weighing the risk of anticompetitive reductions in
competition against the prospect for merger-related efficiencies. Concentration screens for
mergers must therefore aim to capture, based on firms' market shares, the likely balance
of these two effects for the "typical" merger. Since absent any efficiency gains a horizon-
tal merger will generally (weakly) increase prices, any merger screen aimed at preventing
consumer harm that would allow some mergers and block others must implicitly be relying
on some presumption of the efficiency gain that, on average, should be credited to a typical
merger. As such, we focus throughout the paper on how the required efficiency gain is related
to measures of concentration.
    In general, models of oligopolistic competition need not produce a clean relationship
between the effect of a merger and market shares, let alone concentration measures such as
the Herfindahl index. In this section, however, we focus theoretically on three models that
do, the Cournot model of output/capacity competition in a homogeneous good industry and
the multinomial logit and constant elasticity of substitution models of price competition.


3.1    Mergers in the Homogeneous-Goods Cournot Model
Consider an industry with a set F of firms producing a homogeneous good with constant
returns to scale and competing in a Cournot fashion. Let cf denote the (constant) marginal


                                              7
cost of firm f  F , and P (Q) inverse demand, where Q is aggregate output. We impose
standard assumptions ensuring that there exists a unique Nash equilibrium in quantities:
that for any Q such that P (Q) > 0, we have P  (Q) < 0 and P  (Q) + QP  (Q) < 0; moreover,
limQ P (Q) = 0.
   Let Q denote the pre-merger aggregate equilibrium output. For simplicity, we assume
that all firms in F are active before the merger in that maxf F cf < P (Q ). The pre-merger
market share of firm f , sf , satisfies

                                           P ( Q ) - cf
                                            sf = -      ,
                                            Q P  ( Q )
                                                       !
and the pre-merger Herfindahl index is given by H = f F s2 f.
   Consider a merger M = {m, n} between firms m and n. Given their pre-merger market
shares sm and sn , their combined pre-merger market share is sM  sm + sn . The naively-
computed post-merger Herfindahl index is given by
                                                "
                                   H = s2 M +         s2
                                                       f,
                                                           f  F \M


and the naively-computed merger-induced change in the index by H  H - H = 2sm sn .
For reasons that will become clear later, let HM  (s2      2   2
                                                     m + sn )/sM denote the within-merger
Herfindahl index, whose value lies between 1/2 and 1, and let

                                                   sm c m + sn c n
                                            cM =                   .
                                                         sM

denote the output-weighted average marginal costs of the merger partners prior to the merger.
We denote the merged firm's post-merger marginal cost by cM .
    We seek to relate the merger-induced efficiency gains necessary to make the merger have
no effect on consumer surplus -- that is, to be "CS-neutral" -- to the pre-merger market
structure.14 Recall from Farrell and Shapiro (1990) (see also Nocke and Whinston, 2010)
that merger M is CS-neutral if and only if

                             P ( Q ) - cM = [ P ( Q ) - cm ] + [ P ( Q ) - cn ] .                           (1)

   It is instructive to begin with the simple case in which the two merger partners are
symmetric: cm = cn  cM and thus sm = sn  sM /2. Using equation (1), the merger is
CS-neutral if the fractional change in the merger partners' marginal cost satisfies

                                        cM - cM   P ( Q ) - cM
                                                =              .                                            (2)
                                          cM           cM
   14
     Under the regularity conditions we assume, a reduction in a firm's marginal cost expands output and
lowers price. Thus, any larger synergy than that required for CS-neutrality will result in the merger benefiting
consumers, while any lower synergy will result in the merger harming consumers.


                                                       8
From the merger partners' pre-merger first-order conditions, we have
                                              #    sM $
                                            
                                cM = P ( Q ) 1 -         ,
                                                    2!
where !  -P (Q )/[Q P  (Q )] is the pre-merger price elasticity of demand. Substituting for
cM on the right-hand side of equation (2), we obtain
                                                                  %
                                                    sM                H
                                   cM - cM           2!               2
                                           =                 =        %       .                            (3)
                                     cM      1      - s2M
                                                         !       !-       H
                                                                          2


That is, for a given demand elasticity, the required efficiencies are perfectly related to and
increasing in the naively-computed change in the Herfindahl index, and completely indepen-
dent of the level of the Herfindahl index. Any relationship between consumer harm and
the level of the Herfindahl index would therefore need to come through a relationship be-
tween the Herfindahl and the elasticity of demand, but in general there is no clear theoretical
relationship between the two.15
    The change in the Herfindahl required to prevent harm to consumers at various levels of
the market demand elasticity and efficiency gain are also striking if one views the merging
firms achieving a 5% synergy as fairly optimistic for the typical horizontal merger. Table 1
shows these levels, as well as the corresponding market share levels for the merging firms.
For example, in a market with a demand elasticity of 1.5, a merger of symmetric firms that
results in a 5% synergy would lower consumer surplus if the (naively-computed) change in
the Herfindahl exceeds 102, which corresponds to the merging firms having roughly a 7%
share. Were the industry symmetric, that would be a market with 13 firms. With a 3%
synergy the change in the Herfindahl would need to be below 38 to prevent consumer harm,
regardless of the level of the post-merger Herfindahl. This is a level similar to that in the
1968 Guidelines. Still, in markets in which the elasticity of demand reaches 2.5, with a
5% synergy some mergers that fall into the anticompetitive presumption category of the
2010 Guidelines because they have a post-merger Herfindahl above 2500 and a change in the
Herfindahl above 200 would actually be beneficial for consumers (if H < 283).
    Importantly, Table 1 also shows that if elasticity information is available, it should be used
to adjust the screening thresholds for the required change in the Herfindahl.16 This relation
  15
      Under the standard regularity conditions we assume, an increase in output lowers the elasticity of
demand. However, as is well known, there is no clear relationship between the level of the Herfindahl index
and the level of output in a market. For example, an increase in the number of firms will raise output and
lower the Herfindahl index, but a reduction in cost for the most efficient firm in the market will raise output
but increase the Herfindahl index. As well, the elasticity of demand may affect the number of active firms
and thus the Herfindahl index.
   16
      Note that there is a relation between the market demand elasticity ! and the pre-merger HHI given
margins: (p - c)/p = H/!, where c is the industry-level average marginal cost. However, recall that we take
the perspective that margins are not available at the screening stage, so other a priori information on likely
elasticities would need to be used here.



                                                      9
Table 1: Maximal Level of Individual Shares and H ( 10, 000) To Prevent Consumer
Harm for Various Levels of Cost Synergy in the Cournot Model

                                                                       Cost Synergy:
 Demand Elastic-                             1%          2%      3%        4%     5%       7.5%     10%
 ity
                       Individual            1           2       3        4       5        7        9
 1
                       shares
                       H                     2           7       17       30      45       97       165
                       Individual            1           3       4        6       7        10       14
 1.5
                       shares
                       H                     4           17      38       67      102      219      372
                       Individual            2           4       6        8       10       14       18
 2
                       shares
                       H                     8           30      68       118     181      389      661
                       Individual            2           5       7        10      12       17       23
 2.5
                       shares
                       H                     12          48      106      184     283      608      1033

between screening thresholds and the demand elasticity also indicates how these screening
thresholds should interact with market definition, since the narrower the "market," the higher
the market demand elasticity is likely to be.
   Proposition 1 shows how condition (3) generalizes to the case of mergers between asym-
metric firms:17,18

Proposition 1. For merger M to be CS-neutral, the merger-induced efficiencies have to
satisfy:                          &% ' &(                 '
                                     H
                       cM - cM        2
                                              2(1 - H M )
                               =      &% ' &         ' .                          (4)
                          cM       !-     H       HM 2
                                                             2   1- H M

Proof. We have

                         cM - cM   sm c m + sn c n - sM c M
                                 =
                           cM           sm c m + sn c n
                                   sm cm + sn cn - sM [cm + cn - P (Q )]
                                 =
                                                  sm c m + sn c n
     17
      Froeb and Werden (1998) derive an equivalent expression. Ordover, Sykes, and Willig (1982) derive an
expression for the required cost reduction as a percentage of the pre-merger price.
   18
      Note that with asymmetric merger partners this notion of merger-induced efficiencies differs from the
notion of "synergies" in Farrell and Shapiro (2010), which only counts reductions in marginal cost below
the pre-merger marginal cost of the more efficient merger partner as a merger synergy, and not any benefits
from reshuffling production across the merger partners. We believe that the measure we employ here is a
more natural benchmark when thinking about the efficiency gains to be credited to a "typical" merger. As
Farrell and Shapiro show, however, for a merger to not harm consumers in a Cournot market, it must involve
synergies in their sense.


                                                    10
                                  sn [ P ( Q  ) - c m ] + sm [ P ( Q  ) - c n ]
                                =
                                                sm c m + sn c n
                                          sn P (Q ) s!m
                                                         + sm P (Q ) s!n
                                =
                                  sm P (Q )[1 - s!    m
                                                        ] + sn P (Q )[1 - s!n ]
                                              2sm sn
                                         #      !          $
                                =                   2 +s2
                                    sM       1 - sm sM !
                                                         n


                                             H
                                             sM
                                =                                                          (5)
                                    [ ! - sM HM ]
                                    &% ' &(                              '
                                         H
                                         2
                                                       2(1 - HM )
                                =            &%        '&     ' ,
                                                   H           HM 2
                                     !-            2
                                                               
                                                                1- H M


where the first equality follows from the definition of cM , the second from equation (1), the
fourth from the pre-merger first-order conditions, and the last from substituting for sM using
the fact that since
                                    H = (sM )2 (1 - HM )                                   (6)
we have                                           )
                                                         H
                                      sM =                      .
                                                      (1 - HM )



   Intuitively, one would expect that, holding the change in the Herfindahl index fixed, the
required efficiency shrinks as the merging firms become more asymmetric. (When one of the
merging firms has zero share, there is no anticompetitive effect of the merger even absent
synergies.) The following corollary confirms this.

Corollary 1. In the Cournot model, the marginal cost reduction required to prevent a reduc-
tion in consumer surplus falls with a sum-preserving spread of the merging firms' shares.

Proof. Substituting for HM in expression (5), using the fact that (6) implies that

                                                           H
                                         HM = 1 -                  ,
                                                          ( sM ) 2

which yields
                               cM - cM           H
                                       =                    .
                                 cM      sM ( ! - sM ) +  H
Holding sM fixed, the right-hand side is increasing in H , which reaches its maximum
when the merging firms are symmetric and is monotonically decreasing as they become more
asymmetric.



                                                     11
3.2     Mergers in Differentiated Goods Industries with Price-setting
        Competition
We now consider mergers between multiproduct firms offering differentiated goods and com-
peting in prices. There is a set N of horizontally differentiated products offered by firms
in set F . Each product k  N is offered by only one firm but each firm f  F may offer
multiple products, f  N . As in the Cournot model analyzed above, we assume that firms
have constant returns to scale, with ck denoting the marginal cost of product k .
    We focus on two demand systems: constant elasticity of substitution (CES) and multi-
nomial logit (MNL). Multiproduct-firm price competition with such demands shares a useful
feature with the homogeneous-goods Cournot model: the game is aggregative in that each
firm's profit depends on the strategic choices of its rivals only through a one-dimensional ag-
gregator, and consumer surplus depends only on the value of that aggregator. The difference
between the two demand systems is that, under CES demand, total expenditure (including
the outside good) is fixed, whereas under MNL demand, total consumption (including the
outside good) is fixed.

CES demand. We begin with the case of CES demand. The demand for product k  N
is given by

                                            k   k      bk ( p k ) -
                                          D ( p ; A) =              ,
                                                            A
where                                           "
                                         A            b j ( p j ) 1 -  + A0 ,
                                                j N

is the value of the aggregator, bj and pj are the quality and price of product j , respectively,
 > 1 denotes the elasticity of substitution, and A0  0 represents the outside good.19
Consumer surplus is equal to CS(A) = log A.
    The profit of firm f equals
                                           "
                            f ((pk )kf ) =     ( p k - c k ) D k ( p k ; A) ,
                                                      k f


and therefore depends on the price of any rival's product j / f only through the value of the
aggregator A. From the first-order conditions of profit maximization, it can be shown that
   19
      The parameter  equals the product-level own-price elasticity (of demand Dj ) for a firm that takes the
level of the aggregator A as fixed. More generally, the own-price elasticity of a product j considering also the
effect on A is !j =  - ( - 1)sj , while the aggregate elasticity for the inside goods is ! =  - ( - 1)(1 - s0 ),
where s0 is the market share of the outside good.




                                                         12
firm f sets the same percentage markup µf > 0 on each of its products,20

                                            pj - cj
                                                    = µf              j  f,                            (7)
                                               pj

and that firm f 's markup µf satisfies
                                          *                                       +
                                                  - 1 Tf
                                    µf        1-         (1 - µf )                    = 1,             (8)
                                                   A

where                                                    "       , - 1- 
                                                   Tf          bk ck
                                                         k f

is firm f 's `type' (which is equal to the firm's contribution to the aggregator ­ and thus to
consumer surplus ­ if it were to price all of its products at marginal cost). Equation (8) has
a unique solution in µf , denoted m(Tf /A). The function m(·) is called the markup fitting-in
function. It is strictly increasing, m (·) > 0: Firms with higher types (larger T ) or facing less
competition (lower A) charge higher markups.
     As total expenditure on all products, including the outside good, is fixed and equal to
one (when normalizing the price of the outside good to one), the market share in revenue of
product k equals sk  pk Dk (pk ; A). The market share of firm f , sf , can be shown to satisfy
                                      "                                               *        +
                                               Tf                                         Tf
                               sf =         s =  (1 - µf )-1  S
                                               k
                                                                                                   .   (9)
                                      k f
                                               A                                          A

S (·) is called the market share fitting-in function ; it is strictly increasing: S  (·) > 0. Com-
bining equations (8) and (9), we obtain a monotonic relationship between firm f 's markup
µf and its market share sf :
                                                    1
                                        µf =      ,  -1 - .                                    (10)
                                              1 -  sf
The equilibrium aggregator level A is the unique solution in A to the market shares (including
that of the outside good) adding up to unity:
                                  " * T f + A0
                                       S       +      = 1.
                                  f F
                                           A       A

   Consider now merger M between firms m and n. The post-merger equilibrium value of
                 
the aggregator, A , then satisfies
                                      *        +       "         *        +
                                          TM                         Tf           A0
                                  S                +         S                +      = 1,
                                          A            f/M
                                                                     A            A
  20
       The equilibrium analysis here follows Nocke and Schutz (2018).


                                                             13
where T M is the merged firm's type. (If the merged firm were to produce exactly the same
product lines as the merger partners did jointly before the merger, at the same vector of
marginal costs, then we would have T M = Tm + Tn .) Hence, the merger is CS-neutral with
 
A = A , if T M is such that          *     +
                                       TM
                                  S          = sm + sn .                              (11)
                                       A
As shown in Nocke and Schutz (2019), for merger M to be CS-neutral, it must involve
synergies in that T M > Tm + Tn .21
   The following proposition indicates how large the type synergies have to be for the merger
not to hurt consumers:
Proposition 2. With CES demand, for merger M to be CS-neutral, the merger-induced type
synergy has to satisfy
                                                    &                ' -1
                                                              sM
                          TM                      sM  +      1- sM
                                =       &           ' -1         &                  ' -1 .               (12)
                        Tm + Tn                   sm                         sn
                                      sm  +      1- s m
                                                             + sn  +        1- sn


Proof. From equations (9) and (10), we obtain
                                                   *          + - 1
                                Tf             1-        sf
                                   = sf ( - 1)       +              .                                    (13)
                                A                      1 - sf

Hence, for merger M to be CS-neutral, the post-merger type T M has to satisfy
                                                  *          + - 1
                               TM             1-        sM
                                  = sM ( - 1)       +              .                                     (14)
                               A                      1 - sM

Combining (13) and (14), yields equation (12).

   Proposition 2 shows that, similar to the Cournot model, the magnitude of the required
type synergies depends only on the pre-merger market shares of the merger partners and not
on the concentration in the rest of the industry. As noted by Nocke and Schutz (2019), the
proposition implies that a larger merger (i.e., an increase in sm or sn and thus in sM  sm +sn )
requires larger synergies.
   While the required type synergy depends on both merger partners' shares, rather than
simply on H , a sum-preserving spread of their market shares--which decreases H --does
reduce the required synergy:
Corollary 2. With CES demand, a sum-preserving spread of the merger partners' pre-merger
market shares (which decreases the change in the Herfindahl index) reduces the type efficien-
cies required to prevent consumer harm.
  21
    As S (0) = 0 and S  (·) < 0, the market share fitting-in function is sub-additive. The result then follows
from equation (11).


                                                     14
Proof. This follows from the convexity of s( + s/(1 - s))-1 in s, implying that a sum-
preserving spread of sm and sn increases the denominator on the r.h.s. of equation (12).

    As the notion of type synergies may be unfamiliar, the following corollary relates the size
of the required marginal cost synergies (measured as a percentage change in marginal cost,
j  (cj - cj )/cj for j  (m  n)) to pre-merger market shares, assuming the merger does
not affect the number and qualities of the merger partners' products. The corollary does so
for two specific vectors of marginal cost changes:22 The first is such that all prices remain
unchanged, whereas the second is such that all percentage changes in marginal cost are the
same.23

Corollary 3. Suppose that the set of products offered--and the associated qualities--are not
affected by merger M .

(i) With CES demand, for all prices to be unaffected by the merger, the percentage change
     in the marginal cost of product j  m, j , has to satisfy
                                                        sM - sm
                                      j = -                                .
                                               (1 - sm )[ (1 - sM ) + sM ]

(ii) With CES demand, if the marginal cost of each product j  (m  n) changes by the same
     fraction , then for consumer surplus to remain unchanged  has to satisfy
                                  .                    &             ' -1               11/(1-)
                                                             sM
                           /                     sM  +      1- s M                       2
                        =1-0            &          ' -1              &              ' -1 3        .
                                                sm                           sn
                                      sm  +    1- sm
                                                            + sn  +         1- sn


Proof. See Appendix A.

    According to part (i) of the corollary, for all prices to remain unchanged with CES demand,
every product of each merger partner must have the same percentage reduction in marginal
cost, with the required cost synergy being larger for the smaller merger partner. Part (ii) of
the corollary gives the required synergies (i.e., percentage marginal cost changes) when those
are the same for all products.
    To get an idea of the magnitudes involved, consider a merger among symmetric firms
(i.e., sm = sn ). Table 2 depicts the maximal shares and change in the Herfindahl index for
a symmetric merger not to harm consumers for various synergy levels, assuming that there
is no outside good (i.e., A0 = 0). The upper part of the table measures synergies in terms
   22
     There exists a continuum of vectors of marginal cost changes that leave consumer surplus unchanged.
   23
     Compared to the analyses for differentiated product price competition of Werden (1996) and Farrell and
Shapiro (2010), our result expresses the required synergies in terms of market shares only, in contrast to
their characterizations in terms of margins and diversion ratios and (in Werden, 1996) prices. Those papers'
results also focus only on deriving product-specific synergies that keep all prices unchanged, as in part (i) of
Corollary 3.


                                                       15
of percentage change in the merging firms' type (i.e., as [T M - (Tm + Tn )]/(Tm + Tn ), with
Tm = Tn for the case of a symmetric merger), whereas the lower part measures synergies in
terms of percentage change in marginal cost (i.e., as  × 100).

Table 2: Maximal Level of Individual Shares and H ( 10, 000) To Prevent Consumer
Harm for Various Levels of Type Synergy (Upper Panel) and Cost Synergy (Lower Panel)
with CES Demand

                                                          Type Synergy:
                                   1%      2%         3%      4%     5%       7.5%    10%
              Individual           1.3     2.5        3.6     4.6    5.6      7.8     9.7
      4
              shares
              H                    3.3     12.2       25.6    42.6    62.3    120.6   186.7
              Individual           1.2     2.3        3.4     4.3     5.3     7.3     9.1
      5
              shares
              H                    2.9     10.8       22.7    37.7    55.3    107.4   166.9
              Individual           1.2     2.2        3.2     4.2     5.1     7.1     8.8
      6
              shares
              H                    2.7     10.0       21.0    34.9    51.3    99.8    155.3

                                                          Cost Synergy:
                                   1%      2%         3%      4%     5%       7.5%    10%
              Individual           3.6     6.7        9.4     11.7   13.7     18.0    21.4
      4
              shares
              H                    26.6    90.1       174.9   272.0   375.9   646.1   913.4
              Individual           4.4     8.0        11.0    13.5    15.8    20.2    23.7
      5
              shares
              H                    39.4    128.6      242.0   366.9   496.3   818.6   1122.6
              Individual           5.2     9.2        12.5    15.2    17.5    22.1    25.6
      6
              shares
              H                    54.0    170.0      311.4   461.9   613.8   978.9   1310.4


    Table 2 shows that, compared to the Cournot case, at common levels of the substitution
parameter  , the maximal shares and change in the Herfindahl index are larger with price
competition and CES demand for any given cost synergy. Nevertheless, even a merger among
relatively small firms would need to entail substantial synergies to prevent consumer harm.
For example, with  = 5, a symmetric merger between two firms with a market share of 11%
each (thus raising the Herfindahl index by 242) requires a 3% reduction in marginal cost (or
more than a 10% increase in type) so as not to hurt consumers.
    Note, however, that our definition of market share coincides with that of the Guidelines
only if there is no outside good. If there is an outside good, with share s0 , the critical share
levels recorded in Table 2 would need to be adjusted by the factor 1/(1 - s0 ). To get a sense

                                                 16
for how this would change the critical shares, consider the case of an industry composed of
symmetric firms with symmetric products. In this case, the aggregate elasticity formula in
footnote 19 implies that s0 = (! - 1)/( - 1), where ! is the aggregate price elasticity of the
inside goods. For example, if ! = 1.5 and  = 5, the critical shares in Table 2 would increase
by a factor of 1.14. As in the Cournot case, this dependence of screening thresholds on the
level of the market demand elasticity shows how screening thresholds should interact with
market definition.

MNL demand. In the MNL case, the demand for product k can be written as
                                            & k k'
                                         exp b -
                                               
                                                 p

                        D k ( p k ; A) =           ,
                                             A
where the aggregator A now takes the form
                                             "           *               +
                                                              bj - p j
                                       A           exp                       + A0
                                             j N
                                                                 

and  > 0 is a price sensitivity parameter.24 As in the CES case, consumer surplus is equal
to log A.
    From the first-order conditions of profit maximization, firm f sets the same absolute
markup µf > 0 on each of its products,25

                                           p j - c j = µf         j  f.                                     (15)

As total consumption (including the outside good) is equal to one, firm f 's market share is
naturally measured in volume (rather than value), and given by
                                        "
                                   sf       D j ( p j ; A) .
                                                    j f


The markup and market share fitting-in functions are the unique solutions in µf and sf to
the following system of equations:

                                                               
                                          µf =          , µ -,
                                                         Tf
                                                                                                            (16)
                                               1 - exp - f
                                                         A
                                               Tf    & µ '
                                                         f
                                          sf =    exp -    ,                                                (17)
                                               A        
   24
      The own-price elasticity of a product j is !j = (1 - sj )pj /, while the aggregate elasticity for the inside
goods is ! = s0 p/, where s0 is the market share of the outside good and p is the quantity-weighted average
price of the inside goods.
   25
      The equilibrium analysis here follows again Nocke and Schutz (2018).




                                                          17
where                                                 *             +
                                          "               bk - ck
                                   Tf           exp
                                          k f
                                                             

is firm f 's type.
     We are interested in the synergies required for merger M between firms m and n not to
harm consumers. First, we state the MNL-analog of Proposition 2:

Proposition 3. With MNL demand, for merger M to be CS-neutral, the merger-induced
type synergy has to satisfy
                                                   &        '
                                                       1
                            TM            s M  exp   1- s M
                                 =       &       '            &   ',         (18)
                         Tm + Tn   s exp     1
                                                   + s exp      1
                                      m          1- sm         n            1- sn


where sM  sm + sn is the naively-computed market share of the merged firm.

Proof. From equations (16) and (17), we obtain
                                              *        +
                                 Tf               1
                                     = sf exp            .                                (19)
                                 A              1 - sf

Hence, for merger M to be CS-neutral, the post-merger type T M has to satisfy
                                                      *             +
                                  TM                         1
                                     = sM exp                           .                 (20)
                                  A                       1 - sM

Combining (19) and (20), yields equation (18).

   Proposition 3 shows that with MNL demand, the required synergies again do not depend
on the level of concentration among outsiders and are larger for larger mergers. In addition,
holding sM fixed, a more asymmetric merger again requires fewer type synergies:

Corollary 4. With MNL demand, a sum-preserving spread of the merger partners' pre-
merger market shares (which decreases the change in the Herfindahl index) reduces the type
synergies required to prevent consumer harm.

Proof. This follows from the convexity of s exp(1/(1 - s)) in s, implying that a sum-preserving
spread of sm and sn increases the denominator on the r.h.s. of equation (18).

    Assuming that the merger affects only marginal costs, the following corollary relates the
size of the required (absolute) marginal cost changes to pre-merger market shares:

Corollary 5. Suppose that the set of products offered--and the associated qualities--are not
affected by merger M .



                                                 18
(i) With MNL demand, for all prices to be unaffected by the merger, the change in marginal
     cost of product j  m, cj , has to satisfy

                                                ( sM - sm )
                                    cj = -                      .
                                             (1 - sM )(1 - sm )

(ii) With MNL demand, if the marginal cost of each product j  (m  n) changes by the
     same amount c, then for consumer surplus to remain unchanged c has to satisfy
                                 .                &      '      1
                                           sM exp 1-1 sM
                    c = - log 0           &     '          &   '3 .
                                              1              1
                                   sm exp 1-sm + sn exp 1-sn

Proof. See Appendix B.

    Assuming no outside good (A0 = 0), Table 3 depicts the maximal individual shares and
change in the Herfindahl index for a symmetric-firm merger at various synergy levels. The
upper part of the table measures synergies in terms of percentage change in type (as did the
upper part of Table 2 for CES demand).
    The lower part of the table measures synergies in terms of percentage change in marginal
cost (as did the lower part of Table 2 for CES demand). However, recall from Corollary 5
that ­ under MNL demand ­ what is pinned down, for a given price sensitivity parameter
, are the required absolute rather than relative cost changes. However, in the special case
in which all firms and products are symmetric, we can derive a condition for the required
percentage cost synergy  for a given price elasticity of firm-level demand:
                                                     *        +*         +
                        -c                s               1          s
                   =          =                    =                       ,            (21)
                          c      c (1 - 2s)(1 - s)     !f - 1     1 - 2s

where c is the common pre-merger marginal cost and s is the common firm-level market
share. The second equality follows from Corollary 5, and the third from equations (15)-(17),
yielding c = p - /(1 - s), and the fact that !f = (1 - s)p/. The individual shares reported
in the lower part of the table are the solutions in s (times 100) of equation (21).

   Like for the CES model, Table 3 shows that, at common firm-level elasticities, lower cost
synergies are required in the MNL model than in the Cournot model. Nonetheless, as in
the CES model, even mergers among small firms would require substantial synergies for the
merger not to harm consumers. For example, a merger between two firms with a 10% pre-
merger market share each (raising the Herfindahl index by 200) would require type synergies
exceeding 10%, and cost synergies exceeding 3% when the firm-level own-price elasticity is 5.
   As in the CES case, if there is an outside good, with share s0 , the critical share levels
recorded in Table 3 would need to be adjusted by the factor 1/(1 - s0 ). For the MNL case,
the elasticity formulas in footnote 24 imply that s0 = (1 - sj )!/!j , where sj is the market

                                             19
Table 3: Maximal Level of Individual Shares and H ( 10, 000) To Prevent Consumer
Harm for Various Levels of Type Synergy (Upper Panel) and Cost Synergy (Lower Panel)
with MNL Demand

                                                          Type Synergy:
                              1%          2%          3%      4%     5%       7.5%    10%
           Individual         1.0         1.9         2.7     3.5    4.3      6.0     7.5
           shares
           H                  1.9         7.0         14.8    24.8    36.5    71.6    112.4

                                                               Cost Synergy:
      !f                            1%          2%         3%      4%     5%       7.5%    10%
              Individual            2.8         5.4        7.6     9.7    11.5     15.5    18.8
      4
              shares
              H                     16.0        57.4       116.3   187.3   266.3   481.6   703.1
              Individual            3.7         6.9        9.7     12.1    14.3    18.8    22.2
      5
              shares
              H                     27.4        95.1       187.3   293.8   408.2   703.1   987.7
              Individual            4.5         8.3        11.5    14.3    16.7    21.4    25.0
      6
              shares
              H                     41.3        138.9      266.3   408.1   555.6   918.4   1250.0



share of each product, !j is the product-level own-price elasticity, and ! is the aggregate price
elasticity of the inside goods. Thus, s0  !/!j . For example, if ! = 1.5 and !j = 5, the critical
shares in Table 3 would increase by at most a factor of 1.43.


4    Empirical Analysis of Mergers in Brewing
The theoretical results above suggest that the presence of consumer harm from a horizontal
merger may be more strongly related to the change in the Herfindahl than to its post-merger
level. However, these models are very special, and the results of Section 3 also leave some
possibility for the level of the Herfindahl to be related to the presence of consumer harm
through its relation to aggregate conditions such as the market elasticity of demand in the
Cournot model or the outside good share in the MNL and CES models.
    In this section, we take a different approach, by looking empirically at how the synergy
required to prevent consumer harm is related to the level and merger-induced change in
the Herfindahl index (both naively computed) for various hypothetical mergers in the U.S.
brewing industry.
    We focus on the brewing industry because markets for beer are local, giving us many
hypothetical mergers with varying market shares and market conditions, and because prior
work by Miller and Weinberg (2017) has estimated a demand system and marginal costs for

                                                      20
the major beer brands. We consider the estimates from Miller and Weinberg's RCNL-1
and RCNL-3 monthly models, random-coefficient nested logit models that are not covered
by our analysis in Section 3.26 We use these demand estimates, Miller and Weinberg's
derived region/brand-specific marginal costs, and the values of the exogenous determinants
of demand in each region in January 2005 (the first month of the Miller and Weinberg
estimation sample) to simulate each possible hypothetical merger among the producers in
each of Miller and Weinberg's 39 local markets. Given the five firms in their estimation
model, this gives 10 possible mergers in each local market, for a total of 390 hypothetical
mergers.
    For each possible merger and a given specified synergy for the merging firms (which
reduces the pre-merger marginal costs of each of the merging firms' products by the same
percentage), we compute the pricing equilibrium and resulting consumer welfare.27 We do this
for various possible synergy levels, and identify the synergy level at which the merger is CS-
neutral. As well, we calculate the naively-computed post-merger Herfindahl index and the
change in the Herfindahl for that merger, with the shares for this computation including all
firms in the market, not just the five firms in the Miller and Weinberg estimation model. We
report results based on volume shares in the main text, and provide results based on revenue
shares in the Appendix.28 (Overall, the results are very similar.) We then examine how these
two characteristics of mergers are related to the required synergy across our hypothetical
mergers.
    Figures 5 and 6 plot the results for the RCNL-1 and RCNL-3 models, respectively. Each
small symbol represents a merger and its location shows that merger's naively-computed post-
merger Herfindahl index and the naively-computed merger-induced change in the Herfindahl.
Green crosses indicate mergers whose required efficiency gain is 0-5%; brown squares indicate
those with a required gain between 5% and 10%, blue circles between 10% and 15%, and red
diamonds above 15%. The visually striking aspect of the figure is that whether a merger
would require less than a 5% efficiency gain to avoid harming consumers is highly related
to the change in the Herfindahl, and seems nearly unrelated to the level of the post-merger
   26
      The difference between these two models is in the product attributes that are given random coefficients.
In RCNL-1, price, calories, and a constant receive random coefficients that depend on a consumer's income.
In RCNL-3, import status and package size (the two key determinants of price) receive random coefficients
instead of price. In general, for a given package size, import status is the key product characteristic leading
the demand estimates to diverge from the identical cross elasticity across inside goods that characterizes
a simple nested logit model (see Miller and Weinberg's Table V for the RCNL-1 model, and Table I.1 in
http://www.nathanhmiller.org/Miller%20Weinberg%20(Supplement).pdf).
   27
      Miller and Weinberg include only the flagship brands of the five firms in their demand model. With the
other brands of these firms implicitly included in the outside good, the price elevation arising in our merger
simulations is likely less than would be the price elevation were all of these firms' products included as inside
goods.
   28
      It is not clear from the Horizontal Merger Guidelines which share measures the agencies would be likely
to use in a beer merger. The Guidelines comment that "Revenues in the relevant market tend to be the best
measure of attractiveness to consumers...," but also note that "where one unit of a low-priced product can
substitute for one unit of a higher-priced product, unit sales may measure competitive significance better
than revenues."


                                                       21
Figure 5: Relationship between the synergy required for a merger to be CS-neutral and
the post-merger naively-computed Herfindahl index and its naively computed change, based
on the RCNL-1 model and volume shares [green crosses < 5%; brown squares 5-10%, blue
circles 10-15%; red diamonds > 15%]


Herfindahl (and, if anything, holding fixed the change, increases in the level of the Herfindahl
require lower efficiency gains to prevent consumer harm).
    Columns (1) and (4) of Table 4 confirm this impression, reporting on the results of a
simple linear regression of the synergy required to make a merger CS-neutral on a merger's
post-merger naively-computed Herfindahl index (referred to as "hhi" in the table), the change
in the naively-computed Herfindahl caused by the merger (referred to as "delta" in the table),
and a constant. For both RCNL models, the change in the Herfindahl is strongly significant
while the level of the post-merger Hefindahl is insignificant and small in magnitude. For
example, the RCNL-3 estimated coefficient on the post-merger Herfindahl implies that a
1000 point increase in the post-merger Herfindahl causes only a 0.38% increase in the synergy
required for consumers to not be harmed. In contrast, the estimated coefficient on the change
in the Herfindahl implies that an extra 100 points for the change leads to a 3.1% increase in
the required synergy. Note also that the R2 of both of these regressions is remarkably high,
equalling 0.85 in column (1) and 0.83 in column (4).
    Columns (2) and (5) of Table 4 explore this relationship further by expanding the spec-


                                              22
Figure 6: Relationship between the synergy required for a merger to be CS-neutral and
the post-merger naively-computed Herfindahl index and its naively computed change, based
on the RCNL-3 model and volume shares [green crosses < 5%; brown squares 5-10%, blue
circles 10-15%; red diamonds > 15%]




                                          23
ification to include second-order terms in hhi and delta. Columns (3) and (6) then restrict
the sample to the 352 mergers for which the post-merger Herfindahl is less than 4000 and
the change in the Herfindahl is less than 1000, which is both where most of the data lies and
the region where screening and presumption thresholds are likely most relevant. F-tests for
all of these estimations strongly reject both the simple linear model and a model in which
all terms involving the post-merger Herfindahl index are dropped.

Table 4: Regression of the Required Synergy on Functions of the Herfindahl and the Change
in the Herfindahl (Volume-based)


              Dependent Variable: Synergy Required to Prevent Consumer Harm
                                        RCNL-1                                 RCNL-3
                              (1)        (2)          (3)             (4)        (5)          (6)
              hhi           -.013      -.795        -.352            .038      -1.13        -.457
                            (.032)     (.202)       (.141)          (.047)     (.292)       (.218)
                            [-.41]    [-3.93]      [-2.50]           [.81]    [-3.85]      [-2.09]
             delta           2.39       3.21         2.68            3.14       4.18         3.12
                            (.062)     (.302)       (.310)         (.089)      (.044)       (.480)
                            [38.89]   [10.62]       [8.65]         [35.36]     [9.58]       [6.52]
         hhi × delta                   -4.44        -4.17                      -4.44        -3.83
                                       (1.38)       (1.01)                     (2.00)       (1.55)
                                      [-3.21]      [-4.15]                    [-2.22]      [-2.46]
             hhi2                       1.79          .81                       2.56         1.06
                                        (.45)        (.30)                      (.65)       (.46)
                                       [4.00]       [2.73]                     [3.96]       [2.30]
            delta2                      3.77         9.98                       1.71        13.36
                                       (1.66)       (2.33)                     (2.41)       (3.61)
                                       [2.27]       [4.28]                      [.71]       [3.70]
           constant         -.002       .077         .036           -.016       .102         .045
                            (.008)     (.022)       (.017)          (.011)     (.032)       (.026)
                            [-.26]     [3.47]       [2.17]         [-1.47]     [3.20]       [1.75]

         Sample              Full       Full     Restricted          Full       Full      Restricted
      # Observations         390        390         352              390        390          352
           R2                .85        .86         .82              .83        .84          .77


Notes: Dependent variable measured as 0.01 for 1% synergy, hhi is the naively-computed volume-based post-
merger Herfindahl index scaled between 0 and 1, and delta is the naively-computed merger-induced change
in the volume-based Herfindahl index scaled between 0 and 1. Standard errors are in parentheses; t-statistics
are in square brackets.


                                                     24
    In all four regressions, a greater increase in the Herfindahl increases the synergy required
for consumers not to be harmed. In contrast, while the post-merger Herfindahl does matter
in these second-order specifications, its effect is not monotonic and its magnitude is often
small. To see this point, Figures 7 and 8 plot contour lines for the estimates in the restricted
samples of columns (3) and (6). We plot contour lines for synergies of 1%, 3%, and 5%.
Thus, for example, if a merger has a 3% synergy, those mergers lying above the 3% line are
CS-decreasing, and those lying below it are CS-increasing.
    As can be seen in the two figures, the effect of the post-merger Herfindahl is quite small
for Herfindahl levels between 1500 and 2500, where a merger is expected to leave consumers
unharmed if the change in the Herfindahl is somewhere in the 150-180 range. For levels of the
post-merger Herfindahl both below and above this range, lower changes in the Herfindahl are
required for consumers to be unharmed; only at very high levels of concentration do increases
in the Herfindahl make a merger much more likely to lead to consumer harm (for a given
size of the merger-induced change). Notice, as well, that if a 3% efficiency gain is presumed,
any merger that induces an increase of more than 200 in the Herfindahl index is expected
to harm consumers, regardless of the level of the post-merger Herfindahl index. The results
here suggest a screening standard somewhere in the the middle of those suggested by the
theoretical models of Section 3 (compare Tables 1-4).
    A different way to evaluate what study of these mergers says about the Merger Guidelines'
screens is to see what the effect on consumers is of our hypothetical brewing mergers that
fall into each of the Guidelines' green, yellow, and red zones (recall Figure 3). Table 5
presents these statistics for the case in which mergers result in a 3% synergy.29 Several clear
points come out. First, a very high share of the mergers in which the post-merger Herfindahl
is below 1500, which fall in the Guidelines ' safe harbor, lead to consumer harm: 68% for
the RCNL-1 model and 76% in the RCNL-3 model. That part of the safe harbor seems to
be too lenient. On the other hand, the safe harbor at higher levels of the Herfindahl does
not seem problematic since it applies only to mergers that induce a small change in the
Herfindahl index. Likewise, the anticompetitive presumption in the red zone seems justified,
as nearly all mergers in this region harm consumers. Finally, the treatment of mergers in the
yellow zone ­ which the Guidelines ' consider potentially problematic ­ seems fine for mergers
with post-merger Herfindahls above 2500 (since for these, the change in the Herfindahl must
be below 200), but may be too lenient for mergers that lead to a post-merger Herfindahl
between 1500 and 2500. For these, an increased concern about anticompetitive harm may
be appropriate when the change in the Herfindahl is above 200.
    Finally, in Table 6 we report the same information under the presumption that mergers
lead to a 5% synergy. The table shows that with this larger presumed synergy the Guidelines'
  29
     One should be cautious in interpreting Table 5, since the characteristics of the hypothetical mergers
in our sample may not correspond to the distribution of mergers that would actually be proposed to the
agencies. Indeed, even when mergers are profitable (as all are here), which mergers get proposed is the result
of both negotiations/bidding among firms in an industry, and the treatment firms expect from the agencies
(see, for example, Nocke and Whinston, 2010 and 2013).



                                                     25
Figure 7: Contour plot showing the combinations of the naively-computed post-merger
Herfindahl (labelled here as "post hhi vol") and the naively-computed merger-induced change
in the Herfindahl ("delta hhi vol") that have no effect on consumer surplus if there is a 1%,
3%, and 5% synergy due to the merger. Points above (respectively, below) a contour line
correspond to mergers that are expected to harm (respectively, benefit) consumers. Based
on estimates in Table 4, column (3).




                                             26
Figure 8: Contour plot showing the combinations of the naively-computed post-merger
Herfindahl (labelled here as "post hhi vol") and the naively-computed merger-induced change
in the Herfindahl ("delta hhi vol") that have no effect on consumer surplus if there is a 1%,
3%, and 5% synergy due to the merger. Points above (respectively, below) a contour line
correspond to mergers that are expected to harm (respectively, benefit) consumers. Based
on estimates in Table 4, column (6).




                                             27
thresholds would be much more successful at sorting good and bad mergers among this set
of brewing mergers, although mergers in which the post-merger Herfindahl is below 1500 still
are harming consumers 24-29% of the time.


Table 5: Share of Hypothetical Brewing Mergers with 3% Efficiency Gain That Harm
Consumers Under 2010 Guidelines' Screening Thresholds (Volume-based)

           Merger Guidelines' Screening Zone                 RCNL-     RCNL-
                                                             1         3
           Green Zone (Safe Harbor)                          0.22      0.34
                       HHI < 1500                            0.68      0.76
                       HHI  (1500, 2500) and H <             0.00      0.12
                       100
                       HHI > 2500 and H < 100                0.00      0.15
           Yellow Zone                                       0.74      0.94
                       HHI  (1500, 2500) and H >             0.82      0.94
                       100
                       HHI > 2500 and H  (100, 200)          0.36      0.92
           Red Zone (Anticompetitive Presumption)            0.99      1.00



Table 6: Share of Hypothetical Brewing Mergers with 5% Efficiency Gain That Harm
Consumers Under 2010 Guidelines' Screening Thresholds (Volume-based)

           Merger Guidelines' Screening Zone                 RCNL-     RCNL-
                                                             1         3
           Green Zone (Safe Harbor)                          0.08      0.09
                       HHI < 1500                            0.24      0.29
                       HHI  (1500, 2500) and H <             0.00      0.00
                       100
                       HHI > 2500 and H < 100                0.00      0.00
           Yellow Zone                                       0.40      0.47
                       HHI  (1500, 2500) and H >             0.49      0.56
                       100
                       HHI > 2500 and H  (100, 200)          0.00      0.04
           Red Zone (Anticompetitive Presumption)            0.85      0.94



5    Discussion
The theoretical and empirical results above indicate that for screening mergers for whether
their unilateral effects will harm consumers, the merger-induced change in the (naively-

                                            28
computed) Herfindahl index should play a much more prominent role in screening than the
level of the Herfindahl. How might one then understand or justify current practice?
    One possibility, of course, is that the prominent role of the level of concentration reflects
concerns not over unilateral effects, but rather over coordinated effects, the likelihood of entry
and/or repositioning, and other factors. While this is certainly a possibility, the literature
awaits a well-articulated analysis that establishes proper screening thresholds for such effects.
    Focusing on unilateral effects, another possibility is that current horizontal merger screens
reflect not so much an aim to prevent consumer harm, but rather to prevent significant
consumer harm. In the Cournot model, for example, reducing the number of firms by one
has increasingly large price elevation effects the fewer firms are in the market. Formally, the
magnitude of the resulting shortfall in consumer surplus depends on the characteristics of
the non-merging outsiders, as can be seen by taking the derivative of consumer surplus with
respect to the merged firm's post-merger marginal cost, evaluated at the level at which the
merger would just be CS-neutral,

                                dCS (Q ) dQ        Q
                                            =-             ,
                                  dQ dcM       |F| -  (Q )

where  (Q)  -QP  (Q)/P  (Q) < 1 is the curvature of inverse demand and |F| is the pre-
merger number of active firms. Hence, at a given pre-merger equilibrium output level Q ,
the shortfall in consumer surplus is smaller the larger is the number of firms. This fact
also implies that if the antitrust agencies' goal is to ensure that the post-merger CS-level
is at least a fraction x of the pre-merger level, with x strictly less than (but close to) one,
then the required merger-induced efficiencies are decreasing in the number of firms. The key
force driving this effect is that with fewer rival firms, non-merging firms replace less of any
reduction in the merging firms' supply.
    Similarly, under price competition with MNL/CES demands, the concentration among
outsiders' market shares--akin to the Herfindahl index--comes into play, as the following
proposition shows:

Proposition 4. Assume that the market share of each non-merging firm does not exceed 0.65.
Then, with MNL or CES demand, a sum-preserving spread of the market shares of the non-
merging firms makes consumer surplus more responsive to a shortfall in the merger-induced
efficiencies.

Proof. See Appendix C.

    We explored this possibility in our brewing merger data by performing a similar analysis
to that in Section 4, but instead focusing on the level of synergy required to prevent a merger
from causing more than a 5% reduction in consumer surplus. We found evidence of a positive
effect of the level of the post-merger Herfindahl when using the RCNL-1 estimates, but not
when using the RCNL-3 estimates.


                                               29
    A related possibility is that current practice reflects the need to protect consumers given
a limited enforcement budget. In that situation, the agencies would want to focus on the
worst mergers for consumers. To explore this avenue, we looked at the relationship between
the absolute size of a merger's effect on consumer surplus and the levels of the Herfindahl
index, its merger-induced change, and market size for a 3% presumed marginal cost synergy.
We found that both the change in the Herfindahl and market size strongly predicted the
absolute level of consumer harm from a merger, but there was no significant effect of the
level of the post-merger Herfindahl once these other variables were controlled for.30


6        Conclusion
In this paper we have explored the use of concentration measures to screen horizontal mergers
for unilateral effects. Looking both theoretically and empirically, our results suggest that
screens closer in form to the 1968 guidelines than the current ones, emphasizing the change
in the Herfindahl index more than its post-merger level, would likely generate higher levels
of consumer welfare.
    In terms of stringency, our results indicate that if a 3% efficiency gain is a reasonable
presumption, then the current safe harbor for mergers in markets with post-merger Herfindahl
levels below 1500 is likely allowing many mergers that cause consumer harm, unless one
maintains a significant presumption of entry, repositioning, or other factors preventing anti-
competitive effects. As well, at this level of efficiency gain, mergers resulting in post-merger
Herfindahl levels between 1500 and 2500 and involving a Herfindahl increase over 200 may
often lead to consumer harm. The current Guidelines may be sufficiently protective of
consumers, however, if most mergers result in at least a 5% efficiency gain.
    We see several useful directions for further work to refine concentration screens for hor-
izontal mergers. First, further empirical analysis along the lines of that in Section 4 in
other markets with different estimated demand and costs would be very useful. Second,
more evidence on the synergies arising in horizontal mergers, especially conditional on mar-
ket structure, would be extremely valuable. Third, work identifying thresholds for screening
mergers for possible consumer harm due to coordinated effects would complement our anal-
ysis. Finally, continuing work on merger retrospectives is important, especially aimed at
learning both the extent to which entry, repositioning, or other factors on average amelio-
rate unilateral anti-competitive effects, and the extent to which coordinated effects arise that
exacerbate them.
    At the same time, of course, concentration screens are just one piece of the merger evalu-
ation puzzle, and are only useful when combined with effective in-depth analysis of mergers
deemed to raise possible competitive concerns.
    30
     Another possibility is that a focus on the Herfindahl is appropriate if the authority is concerned about ag-
gregate, rather than consumer, surplus (despite the law's focus on consumer harm). Farrell and Shapiro (1990)
and Nocke and Schutz (2019) discuss some aspects of the relationship between the level of the Herfindahl and
the aggregate surplus effect of a merger, but we are unaware of any results about the overall relationship.


                                                       30
References
 [1] Farrell, J. and C. Shapiro (1990), "Horizontal Mergers: An Equilibrium Analysis,"
     American Economic Review, 100: 107-126.

 [2] Farrell, J. and C. Shapiro (2010), "Antitrust Evaluation of Horizontal Mergers: An
     Economic Alternative to Market Definition," B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics 10:
     Article 9.

 [3] Froeb, L. M., and G.J. Werden (1998), "A Robust Test for Consumer Welfare Enhancing
     Mergers Among Sellers of a Homogeneous Product," Economics Letters 58: 367-9.

 [4] Kwoka, J.E. (2013), "Does Merger Control Work? A Retrospective on U.S. Enforcement
     Actions and Merger Outcomes," Antitrust Law Journal 78: 619-650.

 [5] Kwoka, J.E. (2017), "The Structural Presumption and Safe Harbor in Merger Review:
     False Positives or Unwarranted Concerns?," Antitrust Law Journal 81: 837-72.

 [6] Miller, N.H. and M.C. Weinberg (2017), "Understanding the Price Effects of the Miller-
     Coors Joint Venture," Econometrica 85: 1763-91.

 [7] Nocke, V. and N. Schutz (2018), "Multiproduct-Firm Oligopoly: An Aggregative Games
     Approach," Econometrica 86: 523-57.

 [8] Nocke, V. and N. Schutz (2019), "An Aggregative Games Approach to Merger Analysis
     in Multiproduct-Firm Oligopoly," CEPR Discussion Paper 12905, Centre for Economic
     Policy Research.

 [9] Nocke, V. and M.D. Whinston (2010), "Dynamic Merger Review," Journal of Political
     Economy 118: 1200-51.

[10] Nocke, V. and M.D. Whinston (2013), "Merger Policy with Merger Choice," American
     Economic Review 103: 1006-33.

[11] Ordover, J.A., A.O. Sykes, and R.D. Willig (1982), "Herfindahl Concentration, Rivalry,
     and Mergers," Harvard Law Review 95: 1857-74.

[12] Report of the White House Task Force on Antitrust Policy (aka The Neal Report, May
     27, 1969), originally published at 115 Cong. Rec. 11, 13890.

[13] Schmalensee, R. (1987), "Horizontal Merger Policy: Problems and Changes," Journal
     of Economic Perspectives 1: 41-54.

[14] Shapiro, C. (2010), "The 2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines: From Hedgehog to Fox in
     Forty Years," Antitrust Law Journal 77: 49-108.



                                            31
[15] U.S. Department of Justice and Federal              Trade Commission (2006),
     Commentary     on     the    Horizontal   Merger    Guidelines, available at
     https://www.justice.gov/atr/f215200/215247.

[16] U.S. Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission (2010), Horizon-
     tal Merger Guidelines, available at https://www.justice.gov/atr/horizontal-merger-
     guidelines-08192010.

[17] U.S.     Federal    Trade   Commision     (2013),    "Horizontal   Merger      In-
     vestigation      Data:       Fiscal    Years      1996-2011,"    available      at
     https://www.ftc.gov/os/2013/01/130104horizontalmergerreport.pdf.

[18] Werden, G.J. (1996), "A Robust Test for Consumer Enhancing Mergers Among Sellers
     of Differentiated Products," Journal of Industrial Economics 44: 409-13.




                                          32
Appendix

A      Proof of Corollary 3
To see part (i), note that the pre-merger marginal cost of product k  m can be written as
                                       4                    5
                                 k   k             1
                                c =p 1-                       ,
                                            (1 - sm ) + sm

where we have used equations (7) and (10). For the merged firm to charge the same prices
for all of its products (implying that its post-merger market share is sM = sm + sn ), the
post-merger marginal cost of product k has to satisfy
                                       4                    5
                                k    k             1
                               c =p 1-                        .
                                             (1 - sM ) + sM

Combining, we obtain:

                               ck - ck             sM - sm
                         k =        k
                                       =-                             .
                                  c       (1 - sm )[ (1 - sM ) + sM ]

    To see part (ii), note that:
                                       !            k
                                                      ,            -
                                                                  k 1- 
                          TM              k M     b     (1 -  ) c
                                =!                         !
                        Tm + Tn         b k ( c k ) 1-  +            k  k 1- 
                                   k m                       k n b ( c )
                                                      !          , - 1- 
                                     (1 - )1- kM bk ck
                                =!                         !
                                          k     k 1-  +              k  k 1- 
                                   k m b ( c )               k n b ( c )
                                   = (1 - )1- .

The assertion then follows from applying Proposition 2.


B      Proof of Corollary 5
To see part (i), note that the pre-merger marginal cost of product k  m can be written as

                                                         
                                        ck = pk -            ,
                                                      1 - sm

where we have used equations (15) and (16) For the merger to leave all prices unchanged
(implying that the post-merger market share is sM = sm + sn ), the post-merger marginal
cost of product k has to satisfy
                                                
                                  ck = pk -         .
                                             1 - sM


                                                 33
Combining, we obtain:

                                                           ( sM - sm )
                    ck = ck - ck =            -       =                    .
                                        1 - sm 1 - sM   (1 - sM )(1 - sm )

    To see part (ii), note that:
                                                      & k k
                                                      !           '
                                                        b -c -c
                        TM                 k M   exp        
                              =!          &         ' !             &          '
                      Tm + Tn         exp
                                              k
                                             b -c k
                                                      +        exp    b k - ck
                                  k m                      k n            
                                        , -c - !              & k k'
                                                                b -c
                                     exp             kM exp       
                              =!          &         ' !             &          '
                                              k
                                             b -c k                   b k - ck
                                  km exp        
                                                      + kn exp            
                                    *     +
                                      -c
                              = exp           .
                                       

The assertion then follows from applying Proposition 3.


C      Proof of Proposition 4
If the post-merger type T M falls short by a small fraction of the level that would restore
consumer surplus after the merger, the shortfall in consumer surplus is given by
                                              & '
                                         TM  TM
               
        dCS (A ) dA                      A
                                            S    A
      -               TM = -        & ' !                & '
           dA dT M            TM  TM                 Tf  Tf
                                  SA       +      A   S          f/M A          A
                                                                 -1             -1
                                                             S        (sM )S (S (sM ))
                            =-                                              !                               (22)
                                   S -1 ( s   M   )S    ( S -1 ( s   M )) +   f/M S
                                                                                    -1 (s )S  (S -1 (s ))
                                                                                         f            f


where the first equality follows from applying the implicit function theorem to the adding-up
condition                       *    + " * +
                                  TM              Tf      A0
                              S        +      S        +      = 1.
                                   A              A       A
                                                      f/M

    As the number of outsiders is finite, it is straightforward to see that a sum-preserving
spread of the outsiders' market shares can be decomposed into a finite number of steps where
at each step there is a sum-preserving spread of market shares involving only two outsiders.
We now prove that at any such step the denominator on the r.h.s. of equation (22) decreases,
from which the result follows.
    Let tf  Tf /A and suppose that tf > tg . We need to show that an increase in tf
and a decrease in tg such that S (tf ) + S (tg ) remains unchanged induces a reduction in




                                                            34
tf S  (tf ) + tg S  (tg ). We have:
                                            6                                   4                         5
              d [tf S  (tf ) + tg S  (tg )] 6
                                            6                                     tf S  (tf ) tg S  (tg )
                                            6                        = S ( tf )              -              .
                          dtf                 S (tf )+S (tg )=const.               S  ( tf )   S ( tg )

As S  (·) > 0, we thus only need to show that the elasticity of S  is decreasing, i.e.,

                                                   d tS  (t)
                                                             < 0.
                                                   dt S  (t)

    From the proof of Proposition 9 in Nocke and Schutz (2019), we have:

                                   1 S (t)(1 - S (t))(1 - S (t))
                           S  ( t) =                             ,
                                   t      1 - S ( t) +  S ( t) 2
                                      (2 - S (t))S (t)2 (1 - S (t))(1 - S (t))
                          S  (t) = - 2                                         ,
                                     t            [1 - S (t) + S (t)2 ]3

where  = 1 if demand is of the MNL form and  = ( - 1/ ) < 1 if it is of the CES form.
It follows that
                            tS  (t)       (2 - S (t))S (t)
                              
                                    =-                        .
                             S ( t)    [1 - S (t) + S (t)2 ]2
We thus have
                                                    d tS  (t)
                                                              <0
                                                    dt S  (t)
if and only if

   [(2 - S (t))S  (t) - S (t)S  (t)][1 - S (t) + S (t)2 ] > 2(2 - S (t))S (t)[-S  (t) + 2S (t)S  (t)],

i.e.,
                                              1 +  S ( t) 3 > 3 S ( t) 2 .
It can easily be verified that this inequality holds, for any   (0, 1] if S (t)  0.65.



D       Empirical Results for Brewing Mergers using Rev-
        enue Shares
Here we present the tables and figures for the empirical analysis of Section 4 when markets
shares and the Herfindahl index are revenue-based rather than volume-based.




                                                           35
Table 7: Regression of the Required Synergy on Functions of the Herfindahl and the Change
in the Herfindahl (Revenue-based)


              Dependent Variable: Synergy Required to Prevent Consumer Harm
                                        RCNL-1                                   RCNL-3
                              (1)        (2)           (3)             (4)        (5)          (6)
             hhi             .020       -.813        -.635            .082     -1.150         -.834
                            (.032)      (.182)       (.170)          (.045)     (.265)        (.265)
                             [.62]     [-4.46]      [-3.73]          [1.78]    [-4.34]       [-3.15]
            delta             2.30       2.72         2.41            3.01       3.49         2.85
                             (.060)     (.270)       (.325)         (.087)      (.392)       (.505)
                            [38.53]    [10.09]       [7.43]         [34.81]     [8.90]       [5.65]
        hhi × delta                     -2.86        -3.58                      -2.34         -3.23
                                        (1.17)       (1.08)                     (1.71)        (1.69)
                                       [-2.44]      [-3.30]                    [-1.37]       [-1.92]
             hhi2                        1.67         1.37                       2.38          1.80
                                         (.37)       (.36)                      (.54)          (.56)
                                        [4.46]       [3.79]                     [4.37]        [3.21]
            delta2                       2.76         7.74                        .64         9.45
                                        (1.47)       (2.31)                     (2.13)       (3.59)
                                        [1.88]       [3.35]                      [.30]       [2.63]
          constant          -.015        .086         .069           -.034       .117         .089
                            (.008)      (.022)       (.020)          (.011)     (.032)       (.031)
                           [-1.88]      [3.96]       [3.44]         [-2.96]     [3.70]       [2.85]

         Sample              Full        Full     Restricted          Full       Full      Restricted
      # Observations         390         390         343              390        390          343
           R2                .85         .86         .79              .83        .84          .74


Notes: Dependent variable measured as 0.01 for 1% synergy, hhi is the naively-computed revenue-based post-
merger Herfindahl index scaled between 0 and 1, and delta is the naively-computed merger-induced change
in the revenue-based Herfindahl index scaled between 0 and 1. Standard errors are in parentheses; t-statistics
are in square brackets.




                                                     36
Figure 9: Contour plot showing the combinations of the naively-computed post-merger
Herfindahl (labelled here as "post hhi val") and the naively-computed merger-induced change
in the Herfindahl ("delta hhi val") that have no effect on consumer surplus if there is a 1%,
3%, and 5% synergy due to the merger. Points above (respectively, below) a contour line
correspond to mergers that are expected to harm (respectively, benefit) consumers. Based
on estimates in Table 7, column (5).




                                             37
Figure 10: Contour plot showing the combinations of the naively-computed post-merger
Herfindahl (labelled here as "post hhi val") and the naively-computed merger-induced change
in the Herfindahl ("delta hhi val") that have no effect on consumer surplus if there is a 1%,
3%, and 5% synergy due to the merger. Points above (respectively, below) a contour line
correspond to mergers that are expected to harm (respectively, benefit) consumers. Based
on estimates in Table 7, column (6).




                                             38
Table 8: Share of Mergers with 3% Efficiency Gain That Harm Consumers Under 2010
Guidelines' Screening Thresholds (Revenue-based)

          Merger Guidelines' Screening Zone          RCNL-    RCNL-
                                                     1        3
          Green Zone (Safe Harbor)                   0.13     0.20
                      HHI < 1500                     0.61     0.72
                      HHI  (1500, 2500) and H <      0.00     0.06
                      100
                      HHI > 2500 and H < 100         0.00     0.06
          Yellow Zone                                0.68     0.87
                      HHI  (1500, 2500) and H >      0.80     0.90
                      100
                      HHI > 2500 and H  (100, 200)   0.21     0.75
          Red Zone (Anticompetitive Presumption)     0.96     1.00




Table 9: Share of Mergers with 3% Efficiency Gain That Harm Consumers Under 2010
Guidelines' Screening Thresholds (Revenue-based)

          Merger Guidelines' Screening Zone          RCNL-    RCNL-
                                                     1        3
          Green Zone (Safe Harbor)                   0.04     0.04
                      HHI < 1500                     0.17     0.17
                      HHI  (1500, 2500) and H <      0.00     0.00
                      100
                      HHI > 2500 and H < 100         0.00     0.00
          Yellow Zone                                0.38     0.43
                      HHI  (1500, 2500) and H >      0.48     0.55
                      100
                      HHI > 2500 and H  (100, 200)   0.00     0.00
          Red Zone (Anticompetitive Presumption)     0.77     0.87




                                       39
