                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   KICKING THE CAN DOWN THE ROAD:
       GOVERNMENT INTERVENTIONS IN THE EUROPEAN BANKING SECTOR

                                       Viral V. Acharya
                                         Lea Borchert
                                       Maximilian Jager
                                        Sascha Steffen

                                      Working Paper 27537
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27537


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 2020




We thank Tobias Berg, Allen Berger, Tim Eisert, Florian Heider, Zorka Simon, Daniel Streitz,
Anjan Thakor and seminar participants at The Financial Crisis Ten Years Afterwards conference
(Yale), the SEEK Regulating Sovereign Debt Restructuring in the Eurozone conference
(Mannheim), and ZEW (Mannheim) for valuable comments and suggestions. We thank Quirin
Fleckenstein and Can Yilanci for excellent research assistance. Contact: vacharya@stern.nyu.edu,
lea.borchert@web.de, maximilian.jager@gess.uni-mannheim.de, s.steffen@fs.de (Corresponding
Author) The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Viral V. Acharya, Lea Borchert, Maximilian Jager, and Sascha Steffen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Kicking the Can Down the Road: Government Interventions in the European Banking Sector
Viral V. Acharya, Lea Borchert, Maximilian Jager, and Sascha Steffen
NBER Working Paper No. 27537
July 2020
JEL No. E44,G21,G28,G32,G34

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the determinants and the long-run consequences of government interventions in the
eurozone banking sector during the 2008/09 financial crisis. Using a novel and comprehensive
dataset, we document that fiscally constrained governments "kicked the can down the road" by
providing banks with guarantees instead of full-fledged recapitalizations. We adopt an
econometric approach that addresses the endogeneity associated with governmental bailout
decisions in identifying their consequences. We find that forbearance caused undercapitalized
banks to shift their assets from loans to risky sovereign debt and engage in zombie lending,
resulting in weaker credit supply, elevated risk in the banking sector, and, eventually, greater
reliance on liquidity support from the European Central Bank.

Viral V. Acharya                               Maximilian Jager
Stern School of Business                       Department of Economics
New York University                            University of Mannheim
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-65                 L7, 3-5
New York, NY 10012                             68131 Mannheim
and CEPR                                       Germany
and also NBER                                  maximilian.jager@gess.uni-mannheim.de
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu
                                               Sascha Steffen
Lea Borchert                                   Frankfurt School of Finance & Management
Department of Finance                          Adickesallee 32-34
University of Mannheim                         60322 Frankfurt
L9, 1-2                                        Germany
68131 Mannheim                                 s.steffen@fs.de
Germany
lea.borchert@web.de
1     Introduction

Governments in an economy whose banking sector exhibits systemic distress have two

types of interventions at their hand: system-wide measures affecting the banking sector

as a whole and single-bank measures aimed at banks most in need (Farhi & Tirole, 2012).

In most cases, system-wide measures are performed by monetary authorities in the form of

conventional policy (i.e. lowering interest rates) and/or unconventional policy (e.g. larger-

scale asset purchase programs, such as TARP). In contrast, single-bank measures are usually

conducted by the fiscal authority with either immediate incidence of fiscal costs or using

government guarantees. Following Pazarbasioglu et al. (2011), bank-level measures in re-

cent banking crises can be grouped into three categories, which are usually implemented

sequentially as a crisis worsens: i) guarantees, ii) capital injections, iii) asset restructur-

ing/resolution. While step i) implies a short-run fiscal cost close to 0, steps ii) and iii) typi-

cally require governments to run a higher fiscal deficit, which has to be financed with higher

debt or taxes. Therefore, fiscally constrained governments may deploy guarantees and/or

engage in some form of forbearance (e.g. relax capital requirements or and asset quality

recognition norms), and, in particular, decide not to implement step ii).1

     We investigate these government interventions choices in the context of the Global Fi-

nancial Crisis (GFC) and its impact on the European banking sector. While banks across

all European countries were in distress, there was no centralized scheme at the European

level to provide aid for individual banks. Therefore, bailout decisions were subject to the

discretion and the fiscal constraints of the national governments.

     Our analysis of government interventions builds on a novel, hand-collected dataset of all

aid measures granted to eurozone banks during the 2007 to 2009 period. A key measure of

fiscal capacity is the country's ratio of government revenues to GDP (e.g. Dincecco & Prado,

2012). Higher revenues increase the capacity to recapitalize banks in distress (Stavrakeva,

2020). Another widely used measure for fiscal strength is the total debt stock as a percentage
    1 According   to Pazarbasioglu et al. (2011), step iii) is a rare event even in crisis times.




                                                                     1
                   ¨ ¸ -Kunt & Huizinga, 2013). A high government debt level can imply a
of GDP (e.g. Demirguc

tight budget, especially if debt is short term and has to be refinanced in the near future. We

thus also include the proportion of maturing debt of a country as a relevant fiscal metric. In

addition, we employ the current account surplus/deficit as a potential determinant as fiscal

constraints are likely to become more binding when a country borrows from abroad.

    We use a bank-level hazard model to analyze the time until the first government inter-

vention for a distressed bank. We show that banks located in countries with lower fiscal

capacity were at least as likely to receive any form of government support as banks located

in countries with stronger public finances.2 However, consistent with the hypothesis that

capital injections are costly in the sense that they tighten the government budget constraint

in the short run, fiscally constrained governments delayed or suspended capital injections

more than fiscally stronger countries. The effect is economically significant. For instance,

the likelihood that a bank is recapitalized increases by about 30% when the sovereign's

revenues-to-GDP ratio increases by 1 percentage point (p.p.). The result is robust across

different measures of fiscal capacity and holds after controlling for an array of bank-level,

banking sector-level, and macro-level variables, as well as political control variables, such

as CAMEL type bank-level controls, too-many-to-fail effects (Acharya & Yorulmazer, 2007;

Brown & Dinc
           ¸ , 2011), election cycles (Brown & Dinc, 2005), and other factors.

    In a next step, we investigate portfolio and lending decisions of banks that remained

undercapitalized at the end of 2009, i.e. after the GFC. A key identification challenge is

that undercapitalization itself is endogenous and depends on both pre-crisis bank charac-

teristics, i.e. banks' predisposition to require a bailout, and the ability and willingness of

governments to bail out banks. To address this challenge, we use an econometric method

developed by Hirano et al. (2003), and used, among others, by Jord`
                                                                  a and Taylor (2016),

called "inverse probability weighting".

    This method does not produce a classification as to which banks are undercapitalized but
   2 Duration analysis is widely used to analyze bank failures and/or government interventions in the banking sector (see,

e.g. Lane et al., 1986; Whalen et al., 1991; Brown & Dinc, 2005; Brown & Dinc ¸ , 2011). In particular, it has been shown to be
superior to single-period models for forecasting the occurrence of events such as bankruptcy (Shambaugh et al., 2012).



                                                              2
requires this information as an input. To that end, we classify a bank as undercapitalized

if one of the following three conditions is met: (1) the Tier 1-capital ratio is below 8%, or, if

this data is not available, (2) the equity-to-assets ratio is below 3% (the BCBS3 leverage ratio

requirement) or (3) the non-performing loans (NPL)-to-total-loans ratio is in the top 5% of

all banks in our sample at the end of 2009.4 We then regress this indicator variable of a bank

being undercapitalized on a set of bank and country characteristics (and their interaction

terms) that we found to be important determinants in our first test of whether or not a bank

is recapitalized. Since this regression captures the factors that were on average important

in determining banks' capitalization status in 2009, the difference between the prediction of

the model and the actual outcome for a banking sector can be interpreted as the degree of

the country's governmental discretion. For example, consider two banks that are similarly

weak according to their bank-level characteristics, one located in Germany and the other one

in Ireland, which both do not receive a bailout and end up being undercapitalized. Given

the higher level of fiscal capacity, the degree of forbearance for the bank in Germany would

be considered higher than the degree of forbearance for the bank in Ireland, where fiscal

capacity was more likely the binding constraint.

    Reweighting the sample with weights corresponding to the extent of governmental dis-

cretion implied by the bank's outcome then allows us to put the spotlight on those banks

that were still undercapitalized because of forbearance. From a statistical point of view, the

weights allow us to reduce (or even eliminate) the bias from endogenous treatment assign-

ment in the subsequent treatment effects models.5

    Armed with these weights, we investigate the effect of being undercapitalized on bank-
   3 BCBS   stands for Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.
   4 Our  results are robust to alternative definitions of "undercapitalized banks".
    5 This method has been used extensively in the recent literature: Angrist et al. (2018), Yim (2013), Jord`
                                                                                                             a and Taylor (2016),
Acemoglu et al. (2019), and Kuvshinov and Zimmermann (2019). The reweighting with weights based on a prediction of the
treatment status allows the bias from endogeneity of treatment assignment to be reduced. Taking the example of Kuvshinov
and Zimmermann (2019), factors which were relevant ex ante as to whether a sovereign will default ("treatment"), e.g. lower
economic growth, can also be relevant for the cost of the sovereign default ("treatment effect"). The weighting approach
allows removal of the bias caused in the default cost estimation due to differences in GDP growth between defaulted and non-
defaulted countries. The more (observable) factors one can control for, the more bias is removed and the more "exogenous"
the treatment becomes. Obviously, missing variables or information affecting both treatment status and treatment effect can
be a constraint for the method.




                                                               3
level outcomes during the period 2009 to 2012. Our second main result is that banks that

were undercapitalized at the end of 2009 were more vulnerable or financially unstable. Over

the next three years, undercapitalized banks lost further equity capital, reduced lending, but

increased their loan loss provisions compared to their better-capitalized peers. Undercap-

italized banks also increased their short-term borrowing from the European Central Bank

(ECB) using its three-year Long-Term Refinancing Operation (LTRO) facility introduced in

2011. Undercapitalized banks did not, however, have a higher probability to default, likely

because their liquidity was secured via ECB funding.

   We then analyze individual lending decisions by banks using the intersection of loan-

level data from the Thomson Reuter Dealscan and Bureau van Dijk's Amadeus database to

identify both banks and firms. Using a regression framework similar to Khwaja and Mian

(2008), which captures firm demand for loans using firm fixed effects, we find that under-

capitalized banks reduced loan supply to non-financial firms, both for relationship borrow-

ers (intensive margin) and for new borrowers (extensive margin). Investigating the effect

on lending as a function of borrower risk, we find that undercapitalized banks significantly

reduced their loan supply to risky firms relative to better-capitalized banks.

   This is intuitive as riskier lending binds (regulatory) capital. Interestingly, however, we

do not find evidence that undercapitalized banks reduced lending to risky relationship

firms, suggesting an evergreening of loans to "zombie" firms. We test this hypothesis di-

rectly using the definition of "zombie" firms in Acharya et al. (2018). This definition re-

quires a low credit quality firm to be receiving subsidized credit, i.e., paying an interest rate

below the average for highly rated borrowers of the same industry. We find that undercap-

italized banks increased the supply of credit to "zombie" firms while reducing lending to

"non-zombie" firms, relative to better-capitalized banks. We also provide evidence that the

"zombie" firms that are matched with banks that become undercapitalized in the lending

market, perform worse than similar firms matched with better-capitalized banks.

   Moreover, we investigate a behavior we call "search-for-yield lending". Within a risk

class, and therefore within a regulatory risk weight and capital cost category, undercapital-

                                               4
ized banks gamble for resurrection by seeking borrowers accepting a higher interest rate.

That is, for the same cost, undercapitalized banks prefer the potential upside relative to the

(within-rating category) risk more than better-capitalized banks do. We find strong evidence

for such behavior in the intensive margin of lending of undercapitalized banks.6

   Finally, we examine the composition of assets on undercapitalized banks' balance sheets.

We observe that they shift a considerable part of their portfolio from real sector lending

to government bonds during the period from 2009 to 2012. The average undercapitalized

(better-capitalized) bank reduces (increases) its lending portfolio by 1 p.p. (2 p.p.) of total

assets and increases (also increases) its security exposure by 5.5 p.p. (0.25 p.p.) of total

assets. These heightened government bond purchases by undercapitalized banks happen

particularly in the years 2011 and 2012 when several government bond yields had spiked

with the onset of the European sovereign debt crisis.

   Our results are robust to alternative weights in the application of Hirano et al. (2003)

that are based on other fiscal variables or timings. Not using any weights and thus treat-

ing the undercapitalization status as exogenous, however, reveals that our loan-level results

could not have been uncovered. It therefore seems to be the case that the perverse lending

incentives are particularly strong for banks whose undercapitalization is a consequence of

forbearance. Hence, the fact that governments "kicked the can down the road" on banking

sector repair affected subsequent outcomes in two ways. First, they delayed fiscal costs,

which had to be borne in the subsequent sovereign debt crisis in the form of larger amounts

of quasi-fiscal central bank support and a weakened credit supply to the real economy. Sec-

ond, they provided perverse lending incentives to banks on which they exerted forbearance,

leading to misallocation of capital in the form of "zombie" lending and search-for-yield be-

havior.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the related lit-

erature. Section 3 introduces the dataset, focusing especially on the novel, hand-collected

dataset comprising all government interventions benefiting eurozone banks over the 2007
  6 Similar   behavior has been documented in Jim´
                                                 enez et al. (2017).


                                                              5
to 2012 period. Section 4 presents empirical evidence on forbearance by fiscally weaker

governments in the European banking sector during the financial crisis from 2007 to 2009.

In Section 5, we derive which banks are undercapitalized and describe the methodology

of our treatment effects model. Sections 6 and 7 describe the main results for bank-level

outcomes and lending decisions over the 2009 to 2012 period. The analyses of government

debt holdings and the portfolio shifting of undercapitalized banks are in Section 8. Section

9 concludes.


2   Related literature

Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. First, it relates to the literature on

regulatory forbearance that dates back to at least the 1980s and the discussion of "zombie

thrifts" in the U.S. by Edward Kane and other authors, showing that regulatory forbearance

is not a new phenomenon but one that has played out over decades (see, e.g. Kane, 1989 and

references therein). More recent research in this area focuses on the drivers of (regulatory)

forbearance, e.g. why governments do not intervene in the banking sector, even though it

would be optimal from a general welfare perspective. Governments postpone the resolution

of distressed banks if there are many weak banks in the banking sector (Acharya & Yorul-

mazer, 2007: Acharya & Yorulmazer, 2008; Kroszner & Strahan, 1996; Hoshi & Kashyap,

2010; Brown & Dinc
                 ¸ , 2011) or for political economy reasons, such as timing in electoral cy-

cles (Brown & Dinc, 2005; Imai, 2009; Bian et al., 2017). Our paper highlights empirically

- as posited by some of this literature - that fiscal capacity is an additional driver behind

(regulatory) forbearance. In addition to most of the previous literature, we also investigate

the implications of (regulatory) forbearance. Gropp et al. (2017), for example, show that reg-

ulatory forbearance in the U.S. - due to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC)

decision not to let banks fail - affects growth and employment in some regions; we show that

a sovereign's debt overhang can significantly impede an undercapitalized banking sector's

recovery after a financial crisis, especially its financial stability, credit supply and risk-taking

incentives.

                                                 6
    Second, our paper adds to the growing literature investigating the cost-benefit trade-offs

involved in government interventions in the banking sector. The main benefit is that recap-

italizations help alleviate negative externalities from failing the severely undercapitalized

banks (Diamond et al., 2001). Costs mainly comprise large fiscal outlays (Acharya et al.,

2014) and moral hazard arising from bailout expectations (Mailath & Mester, 1994; Dam &

Koetter, 2012; Fischer et al., 2014).7 Several papers analyze this trade-off during the GFC,

focusing predominantly on the Capital Purchase Program in the United States (Veronesi &

Zingales, 2010; Bayazitova & Shivdasani, 2012; Li, 2013; Duchin & Sosyura, 2014; Berger et

al., 2019; Black & Hazelwood, 2013). Evidence from the U.S. suggests that recapitalizations

stabilized bank lending growth, but also increased lending to riskier borrowers. In contrast,

we investigate government interventions during the European financial and sovereign debt

crisis.8 Homar and van Wijnbergen (2017) show that timely bank recapitalizations reduce

the duration of recessions using an international sample of banking crises. We provide new

evidence that government interventions need to be large enough to overcome banks' debt

overhang problems, a theme reminiscent of the work of Caballero et al. (2008), Diamond et

al. (2001), Giannetti and Simonov (2013), and Brei et al. (2013).

    Finally, our paper relates to the literature on the role of bank capital, particularly during

financial crises. Berger and Bouwman (2013) document the importance of capital for banks,

particularly medium- and large-sized banks, during crises. Several studies document that

higher capital was associated with lower probability of bank failure during the 1990 credit

crunch (Cole & Gunther, 1995; Estrella et al., 2000; Wheelock & Wilson, 2000) and during

the 2008­2009 financial crisis (e.g. Cole & White, 2012; Berger et al., 2016). Beltratti and

Stulz (2012) find that bank capital is key to understanding bank performance during the

subprime crisis, and Fahlenbrach et al. (2012) show that poorly capitalized banks during

the Russian debt crisis also performed poorly during the subprime mortgage crisis. By
   7 While most theoretical and empirical papers highlight the negative incentives arising from government interventions

associated with decreased investor monitoring, some authors highlight that bailouts may also lower moral hazard as govern-
ment guarantees increase the charter value of banks (Keeley, 1990; Cordella & Yeyati, 2003).
   8 Homar, 2016 investigates the benefits of bank recapitalizations for publicly traded banks, highlighting that recapitaliza-

tions need to be large enough, but does not investigate the costs of interventions.



                                                              7
evaluating aggregated time series of sovereign and financial shocks simultaneously, Manzo

and Picca (2020) show that fiscal capacity of governments is an important determinant of

sovereign shocks, which in turn spill over to the financial sector. We show on a disaggregate

level that banks that were left undercapitalized by their governments during the GFC were

more likely to eventually require greater government support, performed worse, lent poorly,

and searched for yield in portfolio composition decisions.


3     Data
3.1    Government interventions

This paper builds on a novel, hand-collected dataset comprising all government interven-

tions for eurozone banks over the 2007 to 2012 period. Our primary data source is the State

Aid Register of the European Commission (EC), which contains detailed information on

government interventions in the European banking sector. The Treaty on the Functioning of

the European Union (TFEU) generally prohibits government support to individual compa-

nies but government support can be admissible in exceptional cases, such as to "remedy a

serious disturbance in the economy of a Member State" (TFEU Article 107(3.b)). Any such

exception must be reviewed and approved by the EC on a case-by-case basis and is docu-

mented in the State Aid Register.

      While the State Aid Register collects government interventions in the entire EU, we re-

strict our sample to eurozone banks to ensure that all banks in our sample have equal access

to the ECB facilities (including non-standard monetary policy measures such as the LTRO).9

Since the LTROs were provided with full allotment in our sample period, there was no het-

erogeneity in the access to the ECB funding across banks. Thus, we do not expect our results

to be biased by the existence of LTRO.

      We start building our database by manually extracting information from all State Aid

cases listed in European Commission for the 2007 to 2012 period.10 Government support
   9 We exclude Cypriot banks from our sample given the extraordinary dependence of the Cypriot banking sector on foreign

funding sources.
  10 Link to State Aid Register.




                                                           8
can be approved for one of two cases: (i) as an ad hoc support measure to an individual

bank, or (ii) as a sector-wide scheme making available a maximal amount for a certain aid

measure and being accessible to eligible banks.11

    For reasons of confidentiality, not all details of government support measures are made

available in the State Aid Register. Also, decisions on sector-wide schemes do not contain

information on individual beneficiaries. Therefore, when necessary, we augment the data

with information from banks' press releases, information from banks' regular reporting ac-

tivities, regulators' and central banks' reports, and newspaper articles. For every State Aid

case number, we further cross-check whether approved intervention measures have been

implemented.

    As in Laeven and Valencia (2008), we classify government support into four categories:

(1) recapitalizations, (2) guarantees, (3) other liquidity support and (4) troubled asset re-

lief.12 Recapitalizations comprise all measures involving government-funded capital in-

creases and conversions of existing capital or hybrid instruments into higher-order capital

instruments.13 Guarantees comprise all government guarantees on non-deposit liabilities,

including both existing and newly issued liabilities. Other liquidity support comprises all

interventions other than guarantees that are targeted at stabilizing a bank's liquidity.14 Fi-

nally, troubled asset relief programs are government interventions targeted at removing im-

paired or defaulted assets from a bank's balance sheets by means of asset sales or guaran-

tees.15
  11 Table A1 in the Online Appendix provides an example excerpt from this list for the case of Austria. Table A2 in the

Appendix provides an excerpt from a State aid case for the recapitalization of the Austrian bank Hypo Tirol.
  12 We exclude all policies that were not put into use during the financial crisis, such as deposit freezes. We also exclude

sector-wide policies such as changes in sector-wide deposit guarantees, which simultaneously benefited all banks in a country.
  13 Banks can be recapitalized using cash, ordinary shares, other Core Tier 1 capital instruments, preferred shares, silent

participations, hybrid capital instruments, commitment letters and rights issues.
  14 Our definition of liquidity support differs from the one employed in Laeven and Valencia (2008), where liquidity support

indicates liquidity support from the central bank.
  15 For each type of intervention, our database collects a wide range of characteristics including the identity of the beneficiary,

the intervention amount, the specific design of the measure, its remuneration and possible conditions for the beneficiary. We
also collect the announcement date (when available), the implementation date, the approval date by the EC and whether the
intervention was granted as part of a sector-wide intervention scheme. We provide a detailed overview of all information as
to government interventions recorded in our dataset in an Online Appendix.




                                                                 9
3.2     Bank-level and macro-level data
3.2.1    Sample construction


We obtain bank-level financial data for the 2007 to 2012 period from the Bureau van Dijk

Bankscope database. Consistent with the literature (e.g. Sufi, 2007), all information is ag-

gregated to the ultimate parent level using shareholder information from Bankscope and

various other sources. We remove all banks that receive a government intervention but can-

not be matched to the Bankscope database. We also drop banks whose ultimate parent is

not incorporated in a eurozone country, as the propensity of a bailout for these banks likely

depends on the parent's home country. The dataset is further constrained to large banks and

those of domestic importance--those whose failure creates a threat of financial contagion or

has a large negative impact on the domestic economy. That is, we keep banks with a market

share larger than 1% (measured in bank size/size of the national banking sector), with size

of at least 10% of GDP, balance sheets larger than e1 billion, or banks that are among the 5

largest banks in the country.

      We further exclude banks with very high Tier 1 ratios (> 30%) or equity-to-assets ratios

(> 20%). All those cleaning steps leave us with a sample of 830 banks, of which 76 received

at least one form of government intervention. Finally, we augment our data with country-

level variables from Eurostat, the World Bank and the IMF.

3.2.2    Summary statistics


Cross-sectional summary statistics for bank-level variables are shown in Panel A of Table

1 for the baseline year 2007. Banks show considerable variation in their overall condition

prior to the financial crisis. For example, the equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/ TA) has a cross-

sectional mean of 6.51% with a standard deviation of 2.75%. There is also considerable vari-

ation in other variables, such as loan loss provisions ( LLP/ Loans) and NPLs ( NPLs/ Loans).

Cross-sectional summary statistics for macro-level variables in 2007 are shown in Panel B

of Table 1. The variation in current account balances is striking: it ranges from a current

account deficit of -14.0% to a current account surplus of 9.9%. Similarly, the maturing gov-

                                               10
ernment debt as a share of GDP ranges from 1.2% to 18.1%.

                                                  [Table 1 about here]

3.3    Loan-level and firm-level data

We obtain loan-level data from the Thomson Reuters LPC DealScan database, which pro-

vides detailed information on European syndicated loans including information on lenders

as well as loan contract terms. For banks to be included in the sample, we follow the pre-

vious literature (e.g. Ivashina, 2009; Heider et al., 2019) and require that banks must serve

as lead arranger in the syndicate.16 If the loan allocation between syndicate members is

unknown, we divide the loan facility equally among syndicate members. Also following

the previous literature (e.g. Acharya et al., 2018; Gropp et al., 2019), we transform the data

and calculate the annual outstanding exposure of bank b in country c to non-financial firm

j, using the maturity information on each loan at the end of each year.

      We hand-match DealScan lenders to Bankscope at the ultimate parent level and match

DealScan borrowers in our sample to firms in the Amadeus database. The final loan-level

sample comprises 209 banks that arrange loans to 8,321 non-financial firms.17


4     Do weak governments delay interventions?

Governments may postpone recapitalizations by issuing rolling guarantees, by injecting just

enough capital to avoid immediate insolvency, or by allowing banks to hide their losses.

This section investigates the determinants of a government's decision not to resolve a bank's

debt overhang immediately, but to practice (regulatory) forbearance. We use Cox regression

models to formally investigate the role of a country's fiscal capacity and the overall capital-

ization of the banking sector for the timing and type of an intervention.
  16 Following Ivashina (2009), a bank is classified as lead arranger if it has any one of the following lender roles in DealScan:

administrative agent, bookrunner, lead arranger, lead bank, lead manager, agent or arranger. The subsequent results are
robust to extending the sample of lead arrangers to match the definition in Heider et al. (2019). In this case, lead banks
comprise all banks that provide 100% of a given loan or act as lead bank, lead manager, (mandated) lead arranger, joint
arranger, co-lead arranger, co-arranger, coordinating arranger, mandated arranger, (administrative) agent, or bookrunner.
  17 Possible differences in the number of lead arrangers in this paper in comparison to other papers on syndicated lending

in the European banking sector (e.g. Heider et al., 2019) may be due to the match of lenders to the Bankscope database rather
than to the smaller SNL Financials database.


                                                               11
4.1    Methodology

Theory suggests that forbearance and postponing costly capital interventions is an attrac-

tive alternative for fiscally constrained governments as new debt can only be issued at the

expense of the sovereign's creditworthiness (Acharya et al., 2014). Based on this theory, we

ask two questions. First, are fiscally constrained governments as likely as unconstrained

countries to provide recapitalizations? Second, are they equally likely to support distressed

banks, when we do not take into account the type of support (recapitalization, liquidity

support)?

      We study determinants of government interventions in the 2007 to 2009 period, using an

exponential hazard model similar to Brown and Dinc (2005).18 The hazard rate h AID,i (t),

AID  { Recap, Any}, is the instantaneous probability that bank i receives government sup-

port AID at time t, conditional on not having obtained AID prior to t. h Recap is the hazard

rate for being recapitalized, and h Any denotes the hazard rate for obtaining any type of

intervention. We follow banks from the date Lehman filed for insolvency (15 September

2008) until one of the two following exit events: (i) the bank receives its first intervention

AID  { Any, Recap} or (ii) the end of the sample period, 31 December 2009, is reached. In

the Cox regression framework, the hazard rate takes the exponential form

                      h AID,i (t) = h AID,0 (t)  exp(  0 Xi,t-1 +  1 bc,t-1 +  2 mc,t-1 ),                               (1)

where h AID,0 (t) is the baseline hazard; Xi,t-1 is a vector of bank-specific characteristics; bc,t-1

are banking-sector-specific characteristics; and mc,t-1 are macroeconomic variables. The

analysis is conducted based on daily intervention data but is robust to monthly aggregation.

Standard errors are clustered at the country level, allowing government interventions to be

correlated within a country.

      Fiscal capacity. The main determinants for our model are measures of fiscal capacity.

Different proxies have been proposed in the literature. One key measure is a country's tax
  18 Shambaugh  et al. (2012) highlight the advantage of hazard models in forecasting bankruptcy. We use logit regressions as
robustness checks. The results are very similar and remain unreported for brevity.



                                                             12
revenues (GovernmentRevenue) expressed as a percentage of GDP (Dincecco & Prado, 2012).

A larger income increases the capacity to recapitalize banks in distress (Stavrakeva, 2020).

Another widely used factor is the total debt stock ( Debt/ GDP) also measured in units of

                ¨ ¸ -Kunt & Huizinga, 2013). However, high total debt is only a potential
GDP (e.g. Demirguc

problem if government revenues are low and/or if debt has to be refinanced. We thus also

include a measure for maturing debt, by dividing the stock of outstanding government debt

by its average maturity ( MaturingDebt(%GDP)). This allows us to distinguish between

countries that have a high outstanding debt stock but a low current debt service and coun-

tries with a low stock but a high current debt service, since only the latter should be relevant

for forbearance. Lastly, we use the current account surplus/deficit (CABalance) as a poten-

tial determinant as fiscal constraints might become binding when a country borrows from

abroad (Freund & Warnock, 2007).19


                                                  Figure 1 about here


    Figure 1 shows that these metrics of fiscal constraints show substantial cross-sectional

variation, especially between GIIPS and other Eurozone countries. In case of debt-to-GDP,

government revenues-to-GDP, and current account balance, the differences were large at

the time of the onset of the global financial crisis; interestingly, debt-to-GDP (and also ma-

turing debt-to-GDP) worsen for GIIPS relative to other Eurozone countries after the global

financial crisis, whereas the current account balance improves from being in deficit towards

neutrality as for the other Eurozone countries.

A further measure that we considered is a country's current budget balance. It is a short-

term flow measure, meaning it will quickly react to dynamics that might be relevant for

bailout provision such as a deterioration of the macroeconomic environment which the gov-

ernment counteracts with a fiscal stimulus package. Moreover, it might be subject to reverse
  19 If a country is not borrowing from abroad (and c.p.
                                                       has a current account surplus), it is not at risk of becoming constrained
as it can engage in financial depression to secure its funding, e.g. through an increase in domestic taxes. However, if a
country is borrowing from abroad on a net basis, it is subject to market discipline and possible sudden stops when foreign
investors become unwilling to roll over their funds. Sudden stops have detrimental effects on future tax income through
output contractions, increases in unemployment and asset price declines (Freund & Warnock, 2007).



                                                              13
causality, if some bank aid measures were provided in 2007 as this would immediately and

significantly affect the budget balance, while it would only have minor effects on govern-

ment revenues or the stock of outstanding government debt. Hence, we decided not to

include the budget balance in our study.

      Banking sector. As a banking-sector-specific variable, we include the average book

equity-to-assets ratio ( Avg.EquityRatio). Brown and Dinc
                                                        ¸ (2011) show that governments

are less likely to intervene if the banking sector as a whole is undercapitalized (too-many-

to-fail effect). As a further relevant determinant of the need for bailouts, we include the level

of household debt over GDP ( HHDebt/ GDP). Mian et al. (2017) show that a high level of

household debt is a strong predictor of economic downturns because of the sensitivity of

mortgage credit to house price busts, which is exactly what was observed during the GFC.

We also include the number of banks that have already received a bailout ( NumberBailouts).

      Bank characteristics. We include bank-level characteristics to control for bank health

and their differential probability of becoming distressed. Specifically, we include bank

size (Total Assets/ GDP), equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/ TA), wholesale funding dependence

(ST f unding/ TA) and profitability ( ROAA). We hypothesize that larger banks with lower

capital ratios are more likely to obtain support. Short-term funding dependence, in addi-

tion, renders banks vulnerable to interbank funding freezes. ROAA might be an indicator

for a sound business model as well as high pre-crisis risk-taking. All variables are measured

at the end of the year preceding day t in the hazard model.

      Elections. As in Brown and Dinc
                                    ¸ (2011), we include proxies that relate to the political

environment in each country. We include the logarithm of the time until the next election

( LogTimetoElection) and an index indicating to what extent the current parliament is sup-

porting the European Union ( ProEU ).

4.2    Determinants of government bailouts

Table 2 reports the main results. We only show the measures of fiscal capacity; the full

specifications are reported in an Online Appendix to this paper. The dependent variable is


                                               14
h Recap in Panel A of Table 2. While the control variables are included in all regressions, we

sequentially include proxies for fiscal capacity.20


                                                   Table 2 about here


    As the main determinant of a country's fiscal strength, we include government revenues

in all four regressions. Throughout all specifications, this variable is an economically and

statistically significant predictor of recapitalizations. In columns 1 to 3, we add different

additional proxies for the financial well-being of a country. First, we add the total debt-to-

GDP ratio. While the coefficient shows the right sign - higher debt makes bailouts less likely

- the result is not statistically significant. However, for any given debt level, a higher share

of debt that has to be repaid in the current year induces immediate budgetary constraints

and thus should reduce the incentives to recapitalize banks. We find that a large proportion

of maturing debt (in the same year as the bailout decision) decreases the hazard rate and

thus the likelihood of a recapitalization (column 2). When looking at the current account

balance in column 3, the coefficient again shows an intuitive sign (higher current account

surplus predicts higher likelihood of bailouts), but is not significant. In column 4, we run a

horse race of all those three explanatory variables on top of the government revenues. We

observe that maturing debt stays highly significant and important in size. Moreover, both

the current account balance and the total debt level turn significant in this specification. A

higher current account is associated with a higher likelihood of recapitalizations. A higher

debt level is, too, suggesting that after partialling out the effect of the debt service burden,

a higher debt level corresponds to a country's willingness to spend, thus making a recap-

italization more likely. Overall, the results consistently show that countries that had more

fiscal capacity when entering the GFC in 2008 to 2009 were more likely to recapitalize their

banks.21
  20 The control variables are as expected. Larger banks and those that have more short-term funding are more likely to be

recapitalized. Banks with higher pre-crisis equity capital ratios and more profitable banks are less likely to be recapitalized.
Moreover, coefficient on Avg. Equity Ratio echoes the results from Brown and Dinc   ¸ (2011) that governments are more likely
to delay an intervention when the banking sector as a whole is weakly capitalized. A new government is less likely to
recapitalize a bank, while more Pro-EU governments are more likely to provide direct recapitalizations to banks.
  21 For robustness, we also add additional CAMELS proxies, including non-performing loan ratios, age, and loans-to-deposit




                                                              15
      In Panel B of Table 2, we show the results, where the dependent variable is Any, i.e. we

predict the likelihood of any kind of government intervention (recapitalization or liquidity

support). None of our measures of fiscal strength turns out to be a significant predictor of

government interventions.


5     Identifying undercapitalized banks at the end of 2009
5.1    Methodology

In the following we want to study the implications of banks leaving the GFC period in a

status of undercapitalization. Naturally, this status is by no means exogenous. It depends

on the capitalization of the bank before the crisis shock hits, its lending portfolio, profitabil-

ity, and many other bank-specific factors. Moreover, as shown above, it strongly depends

on whether the bank was located in a country whose government was able to provide a re-

capitalization if needed. That is, the probability of being undercapitalized at the end of 2009

depends on a bank's performance in pre-crisis years as well as the fiscal capacity of the local

government. In order to obtain a plausibly exogenous measure of undercapitalization, we

therefore have to purge these factors from our measure.

      To formalize this idea, we rely on an inverse probability weighting method developed

by Hirano et al. (2003) and recently used in a time series context by Jord`
                                                                          a and Taylor (2016),

among others. The basic idea of this method is to remove all observable factors that are as-

sociated with the treatment assignment. For this purpose, the treatment probability is esti-

mated and used to reweight the sample in all subsequent treatment effect models to reduce,

or in the optimal case even eliminate, the bias from endogenous treatment assignment.

      In our case, the bank-level treatment is "being undercapitalized at the end of 2009", i.e.

after the GFC. In order to run a logit model for estimating the treatment probability, we

need to construct a binary indicator for undercapitalization. Hence, we define a bank as
ratios. The coefficient estimates on both bank-level characteristics and macro-level variables are unchanged, while the R2 re-
mains largely unchanged. We also substitute ROAA with the z-score--the results remain quantitatively and qualitatively
unchanged. The analysis is also robust to setting the starting point of the financial crisis to 9 August 2007, when the with-
drawal of BNP Paribas from three hedge funds marked the beginning of a liquidity crisis. Logit regressions produce virtually
identical results to Cox regressions. These results remain unreported for brevity.



                                                             16
being undercapitalized if one of the following three conditions holds at the end of 2009: i)

its Tier 1-capital ratio is below 8%22 , and if Tier 1 ratio data is not available, ii) its equity-to-

assets ratio is below 3% (the BCBS leverage ratio requirement), or iii) its NPL-to-loans ratio

is in the top 5% of all banks in our sample. Our results are not very sensitive to the choice

of these criteria. Removing the third criterion, or varying the thresholds for the first two

criteria, does not qualitatively alter our results.

    We then estimate a logit model predicting the treatment status based on bank-level and

macro-level determinants (including our measures of fiscal capacity) and interactions of

bank-level and fiscal variables as of end-2007. The results are robust to using inputs as of

end-2006 (see Table A1). However, we use bank and government characteristics as of 2007

as they are arguably better predictors of post-crisis outcomes.

                                 exp(  Xi )
             Undercapi =                       ,                                                                            (2)
                               1 + (exp(  Xi )

           where       Xi =  0 × Xi,2007 +  1 × bc,2007 +  2 × mc,2007 +  3 × Xi,2007  mc,2007 .

It is important to interact bank-level and fiscal measures to create within-country variation

in the predictions at the bank level. Moreover, the interactions are economically sensible and

important. A government with higher fiscal capacity can afford to bail out bigger banks,

banks that are better capitalized, and banks that are less profitable. From this regression,

we obtain the fitted values ( Probi ) and use them to calculate "inverse probability weights"

(IPW):

                                                    1
                                       IPWi =                for treated,                                                   (3)
                                                  Probi
                                                     1
                                       IPWi =                      for non-treated.                                         (4)
                                                  1 - Probi
    The distinction in the weight calculation between treated and non-treated is important.

To reduce the endogeneity bias, a higher weight needs to imply a less predictable treatment
  22 TheFDIC defines the threshold for undercapitalization as a Tier 1-capital ratio below 4% for U.S. banks. In Europe,
however, banks benefit from more lenient policies on government debt, for example, the absence of which would result in
lower Tier 1-capital ratios (cf. Kirschenmann et al., forthcoming). As a result, 8% is roughly the first quintile in our sample,
substantially below the mean of 10.7%.



                                                              17
status. Hence, if our model failed to predict that a bank is going to be treated, we want

a higher weight than if the treatment was predicted. Thus, the weight formula for treated

banks is a decreasing function of the treatment likelihood obtained from estimating Equa-

tion 3, and vice versa for non-treated banks.23

5.2    Descriptive statistics

We report descriptive statistics in Table 3. In Panel A of Table 3, we show which banks

received government support during the 2008 to 2009 GFC and which are classified as un-

dercapitalized. Around 10% of the banks in our sample (81 out of 830) are classified as

undercapitalized according to our measure. Out of those 81 banks, 8 actually received a

recapitalization, which therefore seemed to have been insufficient to stabilize those banks.

The other 27 recapitalizations we observe were successful in that the receiving banks are not

classified as undercapitalized in 2009. These numbers suggest that recapitalizations were,

on average, a very prolific tool to stabilize banks.


                                                 [Table 3 about here]


      Panel B of Table 4 shows the share of undercapitalized banks by country at the end of

2009. The countries with the largest share of undercapitalized banks are Ireland (IE), Slove-

nia (SI) and Italy (IT), while France (FR) and Germany (DE) exhibit the lowest share of

undercapitalized banks, which is reasonable as these countries implemented large-scale re-

capitalization measures and both belong to the group of fiscally strong countries.

5.3    Likelihood of being undercapitalized

Table 4 reports the results of the logit model described in Equation 3 to calculate the IPW.

Table 4 shows that larger and better-capitalized banks are less likely to be undercapitalized
  23 This method has been applied in various economic contexts over recent years, e.g. Angrist et al. (2018), Yim (2013), Jord`
                                                                                                                              a
and Taylor (2016), Acemoglu et al. (2019), Kuvshinov and Zimmermann (2019). From a technical point of view, advantages
over a simple OLS model with control variables are: higher efficiency (Hirano et al., 2003), possibility of capturing non-
linear relationships between covariates and the treatment assignment (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983), doubly robust estimation
structure (Jord`a & Taylor, 2016) and measuring of interpretable probability weights.




                                                              18
post-GFC in countries with higher (tax) revenues, i.e. in which governments have more

fiscal space.


                                                 [Table 4 about here]


    Similarly, columns 1 to 3 show that our other measures for fiscal capacity - total debt,

maturing debt, and the current account balance - all interact with bank variables in deter-

mining the likelihood of a bank being undercapitalized. Column 4, similar to section 4, runs

a horse race of all fiscal variables, highlighting that all of them have their distinct impor-

tance. However, the average variance inflation factor for those fiscal variables in column 4

is around 25, which is beyond any acceptable threshold. Due to possible multicollinearity

of the covariates used in the specification reported in column 4, we use column 2 as our

baseline regression model.24

    We want to stress the finding that the interplay of fiscal capacity and bank characteristics

is a very important determinant of banks' capitalization outcome. Hence, specifying the in-

verse probability weighting model the way we did is crucial to fully capture the endogeneity

in the undercapitalization status driven by differences in fiscal capacity across countries.25

    Overall, the results reported in Table 4 show that being undercapitalized in 2009 is not

an exogenous event, but depends on a variety of factors. To purge these factors, we use

the IPW obtained from the baseline logit in Table 4, column 2, when evaluating the effect of

being undercapitalized on real economic outcomes in the following sections.


                                                 [Figure 2 about here]


    Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows the difference of the average IPW per country and 1.26 The

higher these values, the less the outcomes can be linked to the observable factors used as

explanatory variables in Table 4. This difference therefore helps us to assess the extent of
  24 We   provide robustness tests using weights obtained from the other regression models in the Online Appendix.
  25 Note that a country fixed effect would not suffice to adequately model the underlying mechanisms since the fiscal capacity

interacts heavily with bank-level characteristics.
  26 An IPW of 1 for the treated (i.e. undercapitalized) bank suggests that the treatment is endogenous, i.e. being undercapi-

talized is perfectly predictable based on observable characteristics.



                                                             19
discretion applied by national governments in their recapitalization decision. We find the

five GIIPS (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain) countries in the top 6 of the ranking

in Panel (a) of Figure 2. Similarly, Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows a scatterplot of the same

country-level average of IPW and the government revenue-to-GDP ratio. The plot clearly

suggests a negative relationship, i.e. fiscally stronger governments exerted less discretion.

5.4    Understanding inverse probability weights

                                      [Figure 3 about here]

      Figure 3 uses an example to demonstrate how inverse probability weighting can be un-

derstood in our setup. We document above that countries provided bailouts to their banks

as a function of their capitalization. This is shown by the vertical black lines in the graph,

where Ireland, Spain and Germany are ranked by their respective government revenues

from low to high. The vertical black lines imply that Spain and Germany bailed out banks

that had higher capital ratios compared to Ireland. That is, comparing an Irish bank (with a

4.25% capital ratio in 2007) to a German bank (also with a 4.25% capital ratio in 2007) at the

end of 2009 ignores that Irish banks have never been bailed out with such a high capital ratio;

however, a bailout was quite likely for a German bank, arguably because of Germany's fiscal

strength. Therefore, the inverse probability weighting allows us to remove the differences

indicated by the vertical black lines, which would induce a bias in subsequent treatment

effect estimations.

      By removing all the bank-specific and country-specific drivers of undercapitalization, as

well as their interactions, the resulting weights then give us an estimate of the extent of

discretion applied by the governments when deciding about recapitalizations. An under-

capitalized bank with a high weight is a bank that should have been bailed out (given its

situation) and could have been bailed out (given its governments' situation), but was not,

and vice versa for better-capitalized banks. As highlighted in the section above, these cases

of elevated discretion are themselves negatively correlated with fiscal stability. Moving for-

ward, we thus interpret our bank results as the impact of banks being undercapitalized due

                                               20
to governmental discretion linked to fiscal weakness.


6     Undercapitalization and bank balance sheets

Delaying government interventions might cause distressed banks' health to further deteri-

orate, as necessary recapitalizations are either omitted or severely limited. Undercapital-

ized banks likely have insufficient capital buffers to withstand future shocks. Moreover,

a debt overhang might increase agency costs due to moral hazard, including risk-shifting

(Meckling & Jensen, 1976; Diamond et al., 2001) and zombie-lending (Peek & Rosengren,

2005; Giannetti & Simonov, 2013; Blattner et al., 2019).

6.1   Methodology

In a first step, we ask whether banks that were left undercapitalized after the 2008­2009 GFC

further deteriorate in their health relative to other banks. We estimate the following cross-

sectional weighted-least squares (WLS) regressions, where we use the IPW as weights:

                        Yi,09-12 =  +  × Undercapi +  Xi,09 + ui ,                            (5)

                           Yi =  +  × Undercapi +  × Xi,2009 + vi .                           (6)

The dependent variable Yi,09-12 is the log change in characteristic Y of bank i over the 2009

to 2012 period. Yi are outcome variables measured at the end of 2012. The set of Yi com-

prises: equity-to-assets ratio, Tier 1-capital ratio, gross loans, loan loss provisions, share of

NPLs, return on average asset, net interest margin, and the risk weighted assets-to-total as-

sets ratio. Bank-level variables Xi,09 comprise total assets to domestic GDP (Total Assets/ GDP),

the equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/ TA), the loans-to-deposits ratio ( Loans/ Deposits) and re-

turn on average assets ( ROAA), as of end-2009. These measures are supposed to capture the

state of each bank at the beginning of the evaluated period with respect to its size, health,

funding structure, and profitability.




                                               21
6.2    Undercapitalization and bank balance sheets

The results of the balance sheet impact regressions are summarized in Panel A of Table 5.

Columns 1 and 2 highlight that while undercapitalized banks' equity-to-asset ratios further

declined in the years 2009 to 2012, their risk-weighted Tier 1-capital ratio increased. This

suggests that these banks did not build up additional equity but instead pushed the risk

weights downward by lending less to risky borrowers.


                                      [Table 5 about here]


      Column 4 shows that the level of loan loss provisions of undercapitalized banks went

up distinctly from 2009 to 2012, indicating a badly performing lending portfolio inherited

from the GFC period. All these results are highly significant and robust to using alternative

IPWs.

      Interestingly, NPLs did not increase over the 2009 to 2012 period despite the increase in

loan loss provisions (column 5). A possible interpretation is that undercapitalized banks

continued to extend loans to these borrowers to avoid writing down their exposures. The

return on assets is somewhat lower for undercapitalized banks (column 6). Net interest

margins and risk intensity (columns 7 and 8) are unaffected by undercapitalization.

      How do undercapitalized banks perform during the sovereign debt crisis? In particular,

we investigate three dimensions: whether a company needs a recapitalization, files for in-

solvency or needs funding from the LTRO introduced in December 2011 and continued in

March 2012. We report the results in Panel B of Table 5.

      While we find an economically meaningful (but statistically insignificant) positive ef-

fect of undercapitalization on the likelihood to be recapitalized, and a lower likelihood to

survive, we find a highly economically and statistically significant effect on LTRO in that

undercapitalized banks borrow substantially from the LTRO facilities compared to better-

capitalized peers. This shows that leaving banks in a state of undercapitalization, by not

providing sufficient recapitalizations during the GFC, induced higher funding needs for


                                               22
these banks down the line, again to be borne by governments' budgets, showing that gov-

ernments just kicked the can down the road.

      The results are not sensitive to the chosen weighting scheme, as Panels A and B in Table

A2 show. An alternative weighting scheme and no weighting scheme at all provide similar

albeit economically weaker results with lower explanatory power ( R2 ).


7     Undercapitalization and bank lending decisions

Figure 4 shows the "excess reduction" in lending by undercapitalized banks, i.e. the re-

duction in lending relative to all other banks, for all firms (left bars), for "high-risk" firms

(middle bars) and for "zombie" firms, in particular (right bars). The grey bars show the

descriptive differences in the lending behavior, while the black bars show the estimated

coefficients from regressions described later in the text. We leave the formal definition of

"high-risk" and "zombie" firms to the main text below. The differences are striking. While

undercapitalized banks significantly reduce their lending more relative to other banks, es-

pecially to riskier borrowers, they increase lending to "zombie" firms. In other words, the

remaining equity capital of already constrained banks appears to be withdrawn from risky,

"non-zombie", firms and tied up in lending to "zombie" firms.

                                     [Figure 4 about here]

7.1    Loan volume

So far we have seen evidence for undercapitalized banks cutting back lending (Figure 4, left

bars; Table 5, column 3). In this section, we want to drill down further into the lending de-

cisions by undercapitalized banks by investigating the lending behavior at a more granular

level.

      We start our loan-level analysis by studying the effect of government interventions on

overall loan supply. Our main dependent variable is  Loan09-12,i,c, j , which captures the

change in outstanding loan exposure of bank i in country c to firm j from the year just

                                                                    ´ et al. (2017), we define
after the financial crisis, 2009, to the year 2012. Similar to Peydro

                                               23
the change in outstanding loan exposure following the definition of Davis and Haltiwanger

(1992) as27
                                                         Loan12,i,c, j - Loan09,i,c, j
                            Loan09-12,i,c, j =                                              .                            (7)
                                                    0.5  Loan12,i,c, j + 0.5  Loan09,i,c, j
We estimate the following WLS model,

                        Loan09-12,i,c, j =  × Undercapi +  Xi,09 +  j + c + ui,c, j ,                                    (8)

where all variables are defined as before and bank-level characteristics are measured at

the end of 2009. All variables are weighted using the IPWs obtained in section 5. Fol-

lowing Khwaja and Mian (2008), we exploit the fact that some firms borrow from more

than one bank and use a within-firm estimator to disentangle loan supply from loan de-

mand. Specifically, firm fixed effects  j control for observable and unobservable firm char-

acteristics that may affect firm-level demand. Firm fixed effects are identified by multiple

bank­firm relationships, where firms borrow from at least two distinct borrowers. Bank-

level control variables Xi,09 comprise log total assets ( LogTotal Assets), the equity-to-assets

ratio (Equity/ TotAssets), the return on average assets ( ROAA), and the NPLs-to-loans ratio

( NPL/ Loans), as of end-2009.28 We also include country-level fixed effects to control for

country-level differences in credit supply. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level.29

    We present the results for the baseline specification in column 1 of Panel A of Table 6. We

find that undercapitalized banks significantly reduce their loan supply, which is consistent

with the balance sheet regressions shown above. Undercapitalized banks reduce their loan

supply by 14 p.p. more than better-capitalized banks.

                                                [Table 6 about here]

    As a robustness check, we also employ other dependent variables to measure changes

in loan supply (columns (2) and (3)). First, we use the first difference in log loan exposure
  27 Using  this definition has two main advantages. First, we avoid the regression results being driven by outliers as
 Loan09-12,i,c, j lies on the closed interval [-2,2]. Second, the measure facilitates the treatment of zeros, where either no
bank­firm relationship exists in 2009 but emerges over the 2010 to 2012 period, or the bank­firm relationship is terminated
between 2009 and 2012.
  28 This set of controls is the same set as chosen in Acharya et al. (2018).
  29 We follow Abadie et al. (2017). We interpret our reweighted sample as a quasi-experimental setting implying the need to

cluster at the treatment provision level. Since bailouts are provided at the bank level, we cluster at the bank level.


                                                             24
of bank i in country c to firm j, logLoan = log(1 + Loan12,i,c, j ) - log(1 + Loan09,i,c, j ), as in

     ´ et al. (2017).30 Second, we follow Peek and Rosengren (2005) and Giannetti and Si-
Peydro

monov (2013) and use the indicator LoanIncri,c, j that takes value 1 if bank i increases its loan

exposure to firm j from 2009 to 2012, and 0 otherwise. The results confirm the robustness

of the result in column (1): undercapitalized banks generally reduce their loan supply from

2009 to 2012.

    Simple bank lending theory suggests that weakly capitalized banks lend less to risky

borrowers, since the regulatory risk weights make such loans capital-intense. We investigate

this theory by including a measure of borrower risk ( LowRating) in the interaction terms to

investigate lending decisions with respect to borrower quality and estimate the following

WLS model:



 Loan09-12,i,c, j =  1 × Undercapi +  2 × Undercapi  LowRating j +  Xi,09 +  j + c + ui,c, j ,

                                                                                                                         (9)

where all variables are defined as before. All variables are weighted using the IPWs obtained

in section 5. The results are shown in Panel B of Table 6. We classify borrowers as risky if

their credit rating is BB or lower at the end of 2009 ( LowRating).31

    For reasons of brevity, we only report the coefficient on Undercap and the interaction

term. Consistent with Figure 4 above, we find that undercapitalized banks reduce lending

to low-quality firms, which is reasonable as these loans c.p. need to be funded with more

regulatory capital.

    It is a testable hypothesis that undercapitalized banks were more likely to sustain lending

to "zombie" firms, i.e. to extend loans to distressed firms at subsidized terms. We identify

a firm to be a "zombie" firm (Zombie) if its rating is BB or lower and it pays interest on its

loans that is below the benchmark interest of loans to very safe, publicly traded firms. To

identify if a firm pays below-benchmark interest rates, we follow the approach of Acharya,
  30 For cases where Loan12,i,c, j = 0, we normalize the growth rate to -1.
  31 For many firms we do not observe an external rating. In those cases we construct a rating using a mapping table provided

by Moody's and taking as input the interest coverage ratio and sector (cf. Acharya, Crosignani, et al., 2019).


                                                              25
Eisert, et al. (2019): we use information from Amadeus to derive a proxy for average interest

payments by firm j. Amadeus reports total interest paid and total outstanding debt of firm

j in industry s in year t. We calculate the average interest paid( r j ) by firm j by dividing

the total interest payment by the total outstanding debt in 2009. Firms have a high (low)

reliance on short-term debt if the ratio of short-term debt to long-term debt is above (below)

the median.

   We calculate the benchmark interest R as the median interest rate paid by publicly traded

firms within the same industry j in 2009 that were incorporated in non-GIIPS countries and

had an AAA or AA rating. This is done separately for firms with low and high reliance

on short-term debt (as a proxy for the maturity structure of debt). A firm pays below-

benchmark interest rates if the average interest paid on its debt r j is below the benchmark R,

with firms split according to their reliance on short-term debt. To test the change in lending

to "zombie" firms, we estimate the cross-sectional WLS regressions interacting Undercap

with Zombie:



   Loan09-12,i,c, j =  1 × Undercapi +  2 × Undercapi  Zombie j +  Xi,09 +  j + c + ui,c, j .

                                                                                           (10)

   All variables are weighted using the inverse probability weights obtained in section 5.

We report the results in Panel C of Table 6. Consistent with our hypothesis, we find that

undercapitalized banks reduce lending to "non-zombie" firms relative to better-capitalized

banks. However, they lend substantially more to "zombie" firms.

   Lastly, to maximize their cost-return trade-off, undercapitalized banks could be incen-

tivized to lend to riskier borrowers within a rating, and therefore regulatory risk weight

and capital cost category, if it allows them to charge a higher interest rate. We term this

"search-for-yield" lending, as banks seek to maximize the rent for the given cost, ignoring

the (within-rating category) risk.

   We investigate this hypothesis with the following regression:


                                              26
                Loan09-12,i,c, j =  1 × Undercapi +  2 × Undercapi  LowRating j + +         (11)

             3 × Undercapi  HighIR j + +  4 × Undercapi  LowRating j  HighIR j +            (12)

                                                               Xi,09 +  j + c + ui,c, j ,   (13)

where HighIR j is defined as a dummy which equals 1 if a firm pays interest rates above

the average in its industry in 2009. Since higher interest rates are paid by riskier borrowers,

we additionally interact this dummy with the low rating indicator from before to identify

variations within this risky borrower class. The results in Panel D of Table 6 show some

indication in favor of the hypothesis without being particularly robust.

7.2    Extensive vs. intensive margin

We also measure changes in loan supply at the extensive margin. First, to capture the

propensity to maintain lending to a relationship borrower, we construct the indicator vari-

able Relationshipi,c, j that takes value 1 if bank i has lent to firm j in the year 2009 and

therefore had a standing relationship entering the period of investigation, and 0 otherwise.

Bank­firm relationships with no lending exposure in 2009, respectively a relationship value

of 0, are then excluded from these regressions. Second, to capture a bank's willingness to

enter a new lending relationship, we use as a dependent variable the product of the loga-

rithm of the exposure and indicator NewLoani,c, j that takes value 1 if bank i has a strictly

positive (new) exposure to firm j in 2012 and 0 otherwise.

      The results of the extensive and intensive margin regressions for aggregate lending deci-

sions, estimated with WLS, are presented in Panel A of Table 7. We document a significant

effect in both the subsample for relationship borrowers and the subsample of new borrow-

ers, i.e. undercapitalized banks decreased lending to customers across the board.

      When turning to the subset of risky borrowers, interestingly, we do not find a significant

effect for relationship loans (Table 7, Panel B). A possible interpretation is that undercapital-

ized banks continue lending to lower-rated, particularly "zombie" firms, to avoid writing

                                                27
these loans off and further eroding their capital.


                                      [Table 7 about here]


      Consistent with the interpretation of "zombie" lending as effectively evergreening of

existing loans to distressed firms, we find such an effect particularly in the subsample of

relationship customers (Table 7, Panel C, column 1), but not the subsample of new relation-

ships, where the coefficient is actually negative even though statistically insignificant (Table

7, Panel C, column 2). This is intuitive, as banks would not want to engage in a new lending

relationship with a firm that is close to default.

      We provide robustness tests with respect to our model specification. In Panels C to F of

Table A2, we show that the lending results described above are robust to using a different

weighting scheme. The coefficients hardly change. Using no weight, and therefore treating

the undercapitalization status as exogenous, weakens the results distinctively. It appears

that the endogeneity associated with the classification of being undercapitalized would bias

the results for the model at hand. Hence, it proves important to use the reweighting scheme

to obtain more credible parameter estimates, in particular regarding the micro-level lending

behavior of undercapitalized banks.

7.3    Real effects

We want to substantiate our claim that continued lending to the firms we identified as "zom-

bies" is in fact evergreening, as opposed to banks using their informational advantage to

provide loans to firms that are in a solid economic state but, for example, suffer from a

short-term liquidity problem. To this end, Table 8 gives a comparison of "zombie" firms that

undercapitalized banks are lending to, compared to "zombie" firms that better-capitalized

banks are lending to. In the years 2010 to 2012, i.e. in the period where the lending was docu-

mented, the "zombie" firms matched with undercapitalized banks performed considerably

worse. Their return on assets is lower and their EBITDA over total assets is significantly

lower, as is their cash flow over total assets. Moreover, similar to the "zombie" firms in


                                               28
Acharya, Eisert, et al. (2019), our "zombie" firms have higher leverage but lower cash, even

though they are roughly of the same size. All in all, we clearly document that the economic

situation of "zombie" firms matched with undercapitalized banks would not warrant loans

to such preferential interest rates, especially because it further seems that they could pledge

less collateral as their tangibility ratio is lower than that of their peers.

      Lastly, revisiting the hypothesis about "search-for-yield lending", we turn to Panel D in

Table 7. While we have strong significance in the relationship lending column, it is impor-

tant to note that the parameter estimates almost cancel each other out, implying that there

is no economically meaningful effect to be found. In the new lending segment, however,

we observe a statistically significant coefficient with large economic magnitude. While un-

dercapitalized banks lend less to high-risk borrowers per se (negative double interaction),

they cut lending less to those risky borrowers who pay a higher interest rate (positive triple

interaction). The results thus show strong evidence in favor of "search-for-yield lending"

behavior by undercapitalized banks.32


8      Undercapitalization and portfolio composition

As a final channel of impact of being left undercapitalized, we investigate the portfolio com-

position of affected banks. As we pointed out above, undercapitalized banks engage in

serious efforts to improve their capital position, both regulatory by lending less to risky

borrowers, and economically by stalling the write-off of "zombie" loans. A further way to

reach this goal available to European banks is holding government debt issued by European

sovereigns, as the risk weights are set to 0 by the regulator for these exposures.

      For the purpose of investigating this channel, we first take a look at the change of the

securities-to-loans ratio of the banks in our sample from 2009 to 2012 by running an analo-

gous WLS regression to the one in Section 6. The results are displayed in column 1 of Table

9. The coefficient for the undercapitalization indicator is sizeable and highly significant: un-

dercapitalized banks increased their securities-to-loans ratio significantly compared to their
    32 Similar   behavior has been documented in Jim´
                                                    enez et al. (2017).


                                                                 29
better-capitalized peers.

   To get a better feel for the economic magnitudes, see Figure 5. Better-capitalized banks

increased their loan-to-assets ratio by 2 p.p. and the securities-to-assets ratio by 0.25 p.p. on

average. Undercapitalized banks, on the other hand, decreased their loans-to-assets ratio by

1 p.p. and increased their securities-to-assets ratio by 5.5 p.p. from 2009 to 2012.

                                                 [Figure 5 about here]

   In order to understand in greater detail which securities were bought by the undercapi-

talized banks, we use the EBA's stress test data providing information on government debt

holdings at the bank level. The results, estimated via WLS, for examining the change to

the domestic government debt holdings, as well as the GIIPS government debt holdings, as

a proxy for risky government debt, are displayed in columns 2 and 3 of Table 9. We docu-

ment that undercapitalized banks increased both their domestic and their GIIPS government

bond holdings significantly. To see to what extent the results in column 3 are driven by GI-

IPS banks, where the GIIPS bonds are domestic bonds, we split the results in column 3 by

including a GIIPS dummy showing that undercapitalized banks across the board increased

their GIIPS government bond holdings significantly, but banks located in GIIPS countries

did it even more.33

                                                  [Table 9 about here]

   Figure 6 helps in dissecting the time line of the government bond purchases by undercap-

italized banks in our sample during the years 2010 to 2012. While in 2010 undercapitalized

banks seemed not to be buying considerably more government debt than better-capitalized

banks, the picture changes starkly in 2011.34 Undercapitalized banks now increased their

load on GIIPS government bonds by 5.5 p.p relative to their better-capitalized peers. This

gap opened even further in 2012, reaching values of around 7.75 p.p. This time line suggests

that banks did not immediately shift to government bonds by the mere fact of leaving the
 33 As   before, we show robustness of the results using alternative weighting schemes in Panel F of Figure A2.
 34 The   shaded red area depicts the 95% confidence interval.


                                                              30
crisis undercapitalized (2009 and 2010). Instead, sovereign yields first had to rise consider-

ably to make it an attractive business, especially in the light of zero risk weights.


                                     [Figure 6 about here]


    Altogether, we see that banks not only optimized their economic and regulatory capi-

tal ratios by cutting back lending to risky borrowers and evergreening loans to "zombie"

firms, but also by massive purchases of zero risk weight government bonds during the Eu-

ropean sovereign debt crisis. This behavior kick-started the diabolic bank-sovereign loop,

as documented by Acharya et al. (2014) and others.


9   Conclusion

We analyzed the consequences of distressed banking sectors being left undercapitalized by

fiscally stretched European governments during the GFC. Despite the increasingly cross-

border nature of the European banking sector, recapitalizations of distressed banks were

closely tied to the fiscal capacity of the domestic sovereign that was also responsible for its

supervision. In the absence of an insolvency regime for banks, governments with lower fis-

cal capacity were effectively practicing forbearance instead of implementing fully fledged

recapitalizations. Such "kicking the can down the road" left distressed banking sectors vul-

nerable to future economic shocks which materialized post-2009, and led to evergreening of

loans to poor-quality borrowers by insufficiently stabilized banks as well as a shift from real

sector lending to risky government bond holdings by such banks.

    Consequently, our analysis informs the debate about the future design of the eurozone

banking sector and the desirable institutional framework to underpin it. In particular, our

results highlight the importance of reducing the dependence between the health of eurozone

banks and the immediate sovereigns both in terms of decision-making processes for bank

support and also at the fiscal level so as to minimize the possibility for forbearance in the

future. The more that supervision and resolution of banks becomes shielded from the dis-

cretionary decision-making of national governments, the lower will be the opportunity for

                                               31
governments to resort to forbearance. By centralizing the supervision of banks with the ECB

under the Single Supervisory Mechanism and by establishing the Single Resolution Mech-

anism as a common, standardized resolution scheme, the eurozone has made an important

step towards resolving these interlinkages. However, an additional necessary ingredient for

reducing forbearance is a common European fiscal backstop for recapitalization of the finan-

cial sector. To minimize moral hazard at the sovereign level, such fiscal backstops could be

accompanied by strong rules for public finances, macroeconomic stability, and pre-arranged

fiscal burden sharing.




                                            32
References
Abadie, A., Athey, S., Imbens, G. W., & Wooldridge, J. (2017). When should you adjust standard errors for
      clustering? (Tech. Rep.). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Acemoglu, D., Naidu, S., Restrepo, P., & Robinson, J. A. (2019). Democracy does cause growth. Journal
      of Political Economy, 127(1), 47­100.
Acharya, V., Crosignani, M., Eisert, T., & Eufinger, C. (2019). Zombie credit and (dis-) inflation: Evi-
      dence from europe.
Acharya, V., Drechsler, I., & Schnabl, P. (2014). A pyrrhic victory? bank bailouts and sovereign credit
      risk. The Journal of Finance, 69(6), 2689­2739.
Acharya, V., Eisert, T., Eufinger, C., & Hirsch, C. (2018). Real effects of the sovereign debt crisis in
      europe: Evidence from syndicated loans. The Review of Financial Studies, 31(8), 2855­2896.
Acharya, V., Eisert, T., Eufinger, C., & Hirsch, C. (2019). Whatever it takes: The real effects of uncon-
      ventional monetary policy. The Review of Financial Studies, 32(9), 3366­3411.
Acharya, V., & Yorulmazer, T. (2007). Too many to fail--an analysis of time-inconsistency in bank
      closure policies. Journal of financial intermediation, 16(1), 1­31.
Acharya, V., & Yorulmazer, T. (2008). Cash-in-the-market pricing and optimal resolution of bank fail-
      ures. The Review of Financial Studies, 21(6), 2705­2742.
Angrist, J. D., Jord`      ` & Kuersteiner, G. M. (2018). Semiparametric estimates of monetary policy
                      a, O.,
      effects: string theory revisited. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 36(3), 371­387.
Bayazitova, D., & Shivdasani, A. (2012). Assessing tarp. The Review of Financial Studies, 25(2), 377­407.
Beltratti, A., & Stulz, R. M. (2012). The credit crisis around the globe: Why did some banks perform
      better? Journal of financial economics, 105(1), 1­17.
Berger, A. N., & Bouwman, C. H. (2013). How does capital affect bank performance during financial
      crises? Journal of Financial Economics, 109(1), 146­176.
Berger, A. N., Imbierowicz, B., & Rauch, C. (2016). The roles of corporate governance in bank failures
      during the recent financial crisis. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 48(4), 729­770.
Berger, A. N., Makaew, T., & Roman, R. A. (2019). Do business borrowers benefit from bank bailouts?:
      The effects of tarp on loan contract terms. Financial Management, 48(2), 575­639.
Bian, B., Haselmann, R., Kick, T., & Vig, V. (2017). The political economy of bank bailouts. Unpublished
      manuscript.
Black, L. K., & Hazelwood, L. N. (2013). The effect of tarp on bank risk-taking. Journal of Financial
      Stability, 9(4), 790­803.
Blattner, L., Farinha, L., & Rebelo, F. (2019). When losses turn into loans: the cost of undercapitalized
      banks.
Brei, M., Gambacorta, L., & Von Peter, G. (2013). Rescue packages and bank lending. Journal of Banking
      & Finance, 37(2), 490­505.
Brown, C. O., & Dinc, I. S. (2005). The politics of bank failures: Evidence from emerging markets. The
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(4), 1413­1444.
Brown, C. O., & Dinc     ¸ , I. S. (2011). Too many to fail? evidence of regulatory forbearance when the
      banking sector is weak. The Review of Financial Studies, 24(4), 1378­1405.
Caballero, R. J., Hoshi, T., & Kashyap, A. K. (2008). Zombie lending and depressed restructuring in
      japan. American Economic Review, 98(5), 1943­77.
Cole, R. A., & Gunther, J. W. (1995). Separating the likelihood and timing of bank failure. Journal of
      Banking & Finance, 19(6), 1073­1089.
Cole, R. A., & White, L. J. (2012). D´   ej`
                                           a vu all over again: The causes of us commercial bank failures this
      time around. Journal of Financial Services Research, 42(1-2), 5­29.
Cordella, T., & Yeyati, E. L. (2003). Bank bailouts: moral hazard vs. value effect. Journal of Financial
      intermediation, 12(4), 300­330.



                                                     33
Dam, L., & Koetter, M. (2012). Bank bailouts and moral hazard: Evidence from germany. The Review of
       Financial Studies, 25(8), 2343­2380.
Davis, S. J., & Haltiwanger, J. (1992). Gross job creation, gross job destruction, and employment reallo-
       cation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 819­863.
Demirguc  ¨ ¸ -Kunt, A., & Huizinga, H. (2013). Are banks too big to fail or too big to save? international
       evidence from equity prices and cds spreads. Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(3), 875­894.
Diamond, D. W., et al. (2001). Should japanese banks be recapitalized? Monetary and Economic Studies,
       19(2), 1­19.
Dincecco, M., & Prado, M. (2012). Warfare, fiscal capacity, and performance. Journal of Economic Growth,
       17(3), 171­203.
Duchin, R., & Sosyura, D. (2014). Safer ratios, riskier portfolios: Banks response to government aid.
       Journal of Financial Economics, 113(1), 1­28.
Estrella, A., Park, S., & Peristiani, S. (2000). Capital ratios as predictors of bank failure. Economic policy
       review, 6(2).
Fahlenbrach, R., Prilmeier, R., & Stulz, R. M. (2012). This time is the same: Using bank performance in
       1998 to explain bank performance during the recent financial crisis. The Journal of Finance, 67(6),
       2139­2185.
Farhi, E., & Tirole, J. (2012). Collective moral hazard, maturity mismatch, and systemic bailouts. Amer-
       ican Economic Review, 102(1), 60­93.
Fischer, M., Hainz, C., Rocholl, J., & Steffen, S. (2014). Government guarantees and bank risk taking
       incentives.
Freund, C., & Warnock, F. (2007). Current account deficits in industrial countries: the bigger they are,
       the harder they fall? In G7 current account imbalances: sustainability and adjustment (pp. 133­168).
       University of Chicago Press.
Giannetti, M., & Simonov, A. (2013). On the real effects of bank bailouts: Micro evidence from japan.
       American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(1), 135­67.
Gropp, R., Mosk, T., Ongena, S., & Wix, C. (2019). Banks response to higher capital requirements:
       Evidence from a quasi-natural experiment. The Review of Financial Studies, 32(1), 266­299.
Gropp, R., Rocholl, J., & Saadi, V. (2017). The cleansing effect of banking crises. Unpublished manuscript.
Heider, F., Saidi, F., & Schepens, G. (2019). Life below zero: Bank lending under negative policy rates.
       The Review of Financial Studies, 32(10), 3728­3761.
Hirano, K., Imbens, G. W., & Ridder, G. (2003). Efficient estimation of average treatment effects using
       the estimated propensity score. Econometrica, 71(4), 1161­1189.
Homar, T. (2016). Bank recapitalizations and lending: A little is not enough (Tech. Rep.). ESRB Working
       Paper Series.
Homar, T., & van Wijnbergen, S. J. (2017). Bank recapitalization and economic recovery after financial
       crises. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 32, 16­28.
Hoshi, T., & Kashyap, A. K. (2010). Will the us bank recapitalization succeed? eight lessons from japan.
       Journal of Financial Economics, 97(3), 398­417.
Imai, M. (2009). Political influence and declarations of bank insolvency in japan. Journal of Money, Credit
       and Banking, 41(1), 131­158.
Ivashina, V. (2009). Asymmetric information effects on loan spreads. Journal of financial Economics, 92(2),
       300­319.
Jim´enez, G., Ongena, S., Peydro, ´ J.-L., & Saurina, J. (2017). Macroprudential policy, countercyclical bank
       capital buffers, and credit supply: evidence from the spanish dynamic provisioning experiments.
       Journal of Political Economy, 125(6), 2126­2177.
Jord`    ` & Taylor, A. M. (2016). The time for austerity: estimating the average treatment effect of fiscal
     a, O.,
       policy. The Economic Journal, 126(590), 219­255.
Kane, E. J. (1989). The high cost of incompletely funding the fslic shortage of explicit capital. Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 3(4), 31­47.


                                                     34
Keeley, M. C. (1990). Deposit insurance, risk, and market power in banking. The American economic
       review, 1183­1200.
Khwaja, A. I., & Mian, A. (2008). Tracing the impact of bank liquidity shocks: Evidence from an
       emerging market. American Economic Review, 98(4), 1413­42.
Kirschenmann, K., Korte, J., & Steffen, S. (forthcoming). The zero risk fallacy? banks' sovereign expo-
       sure and sovereign risk spillovers. Journal of Financial Stability.
Kroszner, R. S., & Strahan, P. E. (1996). Regulatory incentives and the thrift crisis: Dividends, mutual-
       to-stock conversions, and financial distress. the Journal of Finance, 51(4), 1285­1319.
Kuvshinov, D., & Zimmermann, K. (2019). Sovereigns going bust: estimating the cost of default.
       European Economic Review, 119, 1­21.
Laeven, L., & Levine, R. (2009). Bank governance, regulation and risk taking. Journal of financial
       economics, 93(2), 259­275.
Laeven, L., & Valencia, F. (2008). Sytemic bank crises: A new database.
Lane, W. R., Looney, S. W., & Wansley, J. W. (1986). An application of the cox proportional hazards
       model to bank failure. Journal of Banking & Finance, 10(4), 511­531.
Li, L. (2013). Tarp funds distribution and bank loan supply. Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(12), 4777­
       4792.
Mailath, G. J., & Mester, L. J. (1994). A positive analysis of bank closure. Journal of Financial Intermedia-
       tion, 3(3), 272­299.
Manzo, G., & Picca, A. (2020). The impact of sovereign shocks. Management Science.
Meckling, W. H., & Jensen, M. C. (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and
       ownership structure. Journal of financial economics, 3(4), 305­360.
Mian, A., Sufi, A., & Verner, E. (2017). Household debt and business cycles worldwide. The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1755­1817.
Pazarbasioglu, C., Laeven, M. L., Nedelescu, O. M., Claessens, S., Valencia, F., Dobler, M., & Seal,
       K. (2011). Crisis management and resolution: Early lessons from the financial crisis. International
       Monetary Fund.
Peek, J., & Rosengren, E. S. (2005). Unnatural selection: Perverse incentives and the misallocation of
       credit in japan. American Economic Review, 95(4), 1144­1166.
Peydro, ´ J.-L., Polo, A., & Sette, E. (2017). Monetary policy at work: Security and credit application
       registers evidence. Available at SSRN 2958917.
Rosenbaum, P. R., & Rubin, D. B. (1983). The central role of the propensity score in observational
       studies for causal effects. Biometrika, 70(1), 41­55.
Shambaugh, J., Reis, R., & Rey, H. (2012). The euro's three crises'[2012]. Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity, 157.
Stavrakeva, V. (2020). Optimal bank regulation and fiscal capacity. The Review of Economic Studies, 87(2),
       1034­1089.
Sufi, A. (2007). Information asymmetry and financing arrangements: Evidence from syndicated loans.
       The Journal of Finance, 62(2), 629­668.
Veronesi, P., & Zingales, L. (2010). Paulson's gift. Journal of Financial Economics, 97(3), 339­368.
Whalen, G., et al. (1991). A proportional hazards model of bank failure: an examination of its usefulness
       as an early warning tool. Economic Review, 27(1), 21­31.
Wheelock, D. C., & Wilson, P. W. (2000). Why do banks disappear? the determinants of us bank failures
       and acquisitions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(1), 127­138.
Yim, S. (2013). The acquisitiveness of youth: Ceo age and acquisition behavior. Journal of financial
       economics, 108(1), 250­273.




                                                     35
A     Figures

                 Figure 1: Developments of fiscal capacity: GIIPS vs non-GIIPS countries




                         (a) Total Debt                                            (b) Maturing Debt




                  (c) Government Revenues                                         (d) Current Account


Sources: IMF, OECD, World Bank.
Notes: GIIPS refers to Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, while non-GIIPS refers to Eurozone countries other than
GIIPS.




                                                              36
                          Figure 2: Inverse Probability Weights (IPW): Descriptives




                            (a) Deviation of IPW from unity per country ("randomness")




                        (b) Scatterplot of average IPW vs. government revenue at the coun-
                        try level


Notes: AT = Austria, BE = Belgium, DE = Germany, ES = Spain, FI = Finland, FR = France, GR = Greece, IE = Ireland, IT =
Italy, LU = Luxembourg, NL = Netherlands, PT = Portugal, SI = Slovenia.




                                                            37
Figure 3: Stylized Depiction of Endogeneity in Recapitalizations

This graph shows a stylized depiction of how recapitalization ("bailout") of banks depends on the
national government. Germany could afford to bailout banks with higher equity-to-asset ratio than
Spain and Ireland. Our statistical approach allows us to eliminate this endogeneity, while ignoring this
induces estimation bias.




                                                  38
Figure 4: Excess Reduction in Lending by Undercapitalized Banks relative to Better-capitalized
Ones

This graph shows the difference between the reduction in lending between undercapitalized and
better-capitalized banks ("excess reduction"). Positive values refer to negative loan growth, and vice
versa. "Analytical" refers to the coefficient estimates from the regression models in Section 7.
"Descriptive" refers to the purely descriptive difference between the lending reductions in the sample.
"Overall", "High Risk", and "Zombie" are all as defined in Section 7.




                                                  39
Figure 5: Evolution of Loans-to-Assets and Securities-to-Assets Ratio for Undercapitalized Banks
relative to Better-capitalized Ones

This graph shows the descriptive differences between the gross loans-to-assets ratio and the debt
securities-to-assets ratio at the end of 2012 compared to the end of 2009 on banks' balance sheets.




                                                   40
Figure 6: Evolution of GIIPS government Debt Exposure relative to 2009 for Undercapitalized
Banks relative to Better-capitalized Ones

This graph shows the evolution of the divergence of GIIPS government bond purchases between
undercapitalized banks and better-capitalized banks ("excess exposure"). Normalizing the
outstanding exposure in 2009 to 1, the graph shows by how much more the GIIPS sovereign debt
exposure has risen per year for undercapitalized banks compared to better-capitalized banks.




                                               41
B     Tables

Table 1: Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics
The table shows variable definitions and summary statistics for government aid (Panel A), bank-level (Panel B) and macro-level
(Panel C) variables. All bank-level and macro-level variables are as of end-2007.

     Panel A: Government aid

     VARIABLES               Definition                                        N     Mean     Median    SD     Min      Max
     All Aid                 Banks that received any type government aid be-   84
                             tween 2007 and 2009
     Recap                   Banks that received a recapitalization between    35     2.19     1.23    3.17    0.19     16.77
                             2007 and 2009 (descriptives refer to amounts in
                             % of total assets)



     Panel B: Bank-level variables

     VARIABLES               Definition                                        N     Mean     Median    SD     Min      Max
     Total Assets/GDP        Total assets to nominal GDP (%)                   830   3.46      0.13    13.33    0.04    128.72
     Log Loans               Log gross loans                                   826   7.83      7.38    1.52     5.53    13.23
     Loans/TA                Gross loans to total assets (%)                   826   60.91     62.64   18.63    3.16    95.39
     Net Int. Margin         Net interest margin (% of total assets)           825   2.19      2.25    0.82     0.13     4.03
     Equity/TA               Total equity to total assets (%)                  830   6.51      6.03    2.75     0.01    19.76
     Tier 1 Ratio            Tier 1 regulatory capital ratio (%)               280   9.42      8.45    3.32     4.51    24.13
     LLP/Loans               Loan loss provisions to gross loans (%)           806   0.71      0.54    1.38    -1.29    34.14
     NPLs/Loans              Non-performing loans to gross loans (%)           262   3.53      2.72    4.35     0.18    42.58
     Log Age                 Log time since incorporation                      319   3.97       4.41   1.15     0.69     7.50
     ROAA                    Return on average assets (%)                      827   0.51      0.29    0.63    -1.40     7.41
     ST funding/TA           Short-term funding to total assets (%). Short-    811    0.97     0.00     3.80   -0.10     47.89
                             term funding is calculated as Bankscope Global
                             Item `Deposits & Short-Term Funding' less
                             Bankscope Universal Item `Total Deposits'.
     Loans/Deposits          Loans to deposits (%)                             799   117.84    99.88   74.72   22.36    598.73
     Log z-score             Log z-score (Laeven & Levine, 2009)               721    4.72      4.62    1.27    0.74     7.36
     RWA/TA                  Risk-weighted assets to total assets (%)          259    67.40    72.70   20.48   10.42    95.37
     Securities/TA           Securities to total assets (%)                    826    20.83    18.73   14.25    0.05    99.74



     Panel C: Macro-level variables

     VARIABLES               Definition                                        N     Mean     Median    SD     Min      Max
     Government Revenue      Government revenues (% of nominal GDP)            13    44.16     43.36   4.36     36.20   51.68
     Total Debt              Total debt (% of nominal GDP)                     13    55.69     63.66   30.77     7.71   103.10
     Maturing Debt           Maturing government debt (% of nominal GDP)       13    10.10     11.49   5.06     1.22     18.09
     Current Account         Current account balance (% of nominal GDP)        13    -0.95     -0.33    7.35   -14.00     9.92
     Avg. Equity Ratio       Banking sector average of `Equity/TA'             13     6.88      6.83    1.38     4.11     9.07
     Avg. Tier 1 Ratio       Banking sector average of `Tier 1 Ratio'          12     9.35      9.28    1.87     6.41    12.10
     Log time to election    Logarithm of time until next election             12     6.72      7.06    0.70     5.23     7.35
     Anti/Pro EU             Anti/Pro EU scale of government (0­10)            13     1.82      0.56    2.64       0      8.76




                                                                 42
Table 2: Baseline Cox Regression for Government Interventions
The table presents the results of Cox regressions for government interventions between September 15, 2008 and December 31, 2009. Banks exit
the sample if they receive a government intervention of any type (any) or a recapitalization (recap). Hazard rates h AID , AID  { any, recap}
take the exponential form:

                                       h AID,i (t) = h AID,0 (t) · exp(  0 × Xi,t-1 +  1 × bc,t-1 +  2 × mc,t-1 ).

Bank-level variables Xi,t-1 comprise total assets to domestic GDP (Total Assets/GDP), the equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/TA), the short-term
funding ratio (ST funding/TA) and return on average assets (ROAA). Banking sector variables bc,t-1 comprise the average equity ratio
in the domestic banking sector (Average Equity Ratio) and the number of banks that already received recapitalization (Banks with recaps).
Macroeconomic variables mc,t-1 comprise the government revenues to GDP (Government Revenue), the maturing government debt to GDP
(Maturing Debt), the current account balance (CA Balance), the total government debt to GDP (Debt/GDP), real GDP growth (GDP growth),
GDP per capita ((GDP), and household debt over GDP (HH Debt/GDP) in the respective country as well as a the logarithm of the time
until the next election (Log Time to Election). Lastly, we add a control for the pro, respectively anti, EU sentiment in the current government
(Pro EU). Control variables are not displayed in the table. Tie-breaking follows the Efron rule. Standard errors are robust and adjusted for
clustering at the country level. The table reports coefficient estimates. Parentheses contain p-values. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. NFail is the number of hazard events, i.e. the number of government interventions of the respective
type. The estimation sample contains 832 banks.


                                                             Panel A - Recapitalization

                                  VARIABLES                                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)


                                  Government Revenue (%GDP)              0.23***     0.27***      0.22***     0.25***
                                                                          (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)
                                  Debt/GDP                                -0.02                                0.05**
                                                                          (0.47)                               (0.04)
                                  Maturing Debt (%GDP)                               -0.23***                 -0.43***
                                                                                      (0.00)                   (0.00)
                                  CA Balance                                                        0.03       0.11**
                                                                                                   (0.68)      (0.02)

                                  Observations                           18,826      18,826       18,826       18,826
                                  N fail                                   32          32           32           32
                                  Pseudo-R2                               0.39        0.40         0.39         0.40

                                                                  Panel B - Any aid

                                  VARIABLES                                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)


                                  Government Revenue (%GDP)              -0.03        -0.02         0.01        0.01
                                                                         (0.80)       (0.87)       (0.95)      (0.94)
                                  Debt/GDP                               -0.01                                 -0.02
                                                                         (0.74)                                (0.33)
                                  Maturing Debt (%GDP)                                -0.04                     0.09
                                                                                      (0.79)                   (0.55)
                                  CA Balance                                                       -0.07       -0.10
                                                                                                   (0.44)      (0.27)

                                  Observations                           41,234      41,234       41,234       41,234
                                  N fail                                   76          76           76           76
                                  Pseudo-R2                               0.23        0.23         0.23         0.23


                                  Cluster                               country      country     country      country
                                  Tie-break                              Efron        Efron       Efron        Efron




                                                                          43
Table 3: Descriptive Statistics of the Sample of Banks by Capitalization
The table shows the number of banks that are classified as undercapitalized and/or which received aid as well as their split across
countries.

                                  Panel A - Any aid vs. recapitalization vs. no aid

                                          Undercapitalized banks         Better-capitalized banks           Total
                Received aid                       13                               71                        84
                Received recap.                     8                               27                        35
                Received no aid                    68                              678                       746
                Total                                 81                               749                   830

                          Panel B - Capitalization status of banking sector by country

                             Number of                 Number of              Number of           Share of
                           undercapitalized         better-capitalized         banks           undercapitalized
             Country           banks                      banks                (total)             banks
             NL                      0                       19                    19                0.00%
             FR                      1                       25                    26                3.85%
             DE                      18                      437                   455               3.96%
             BE                       1                       13                    14               7.14%
             PT                       1                        9                    10               10.00%
             ES                      10                       69                    79               12.66%
             AT                       6                       35                    41               14.63%
             FI                       1                        5                     6               16.67%
             GR                       2                       10                    12               16.67%
             LU                       1                        4                     5               20.00%
             IT                      35                      110                   145               24.14%
             SI                       2                        6                     8               25.00%
             IE                       3                        7                    10               30.00%


Notes: AT = Austria, BE = Belgium, DE = Germany, ES = Spain, FI = Finland, FR = France, GR = Greece, IE = Ireland, IT =
Italy, LU = Luxembourg, NL = Netherlands, PT = Portugal, SI = Slovenia.




                                                                44
Table 4: Likelihood of a Bank being Undercapitalized
The table presents the results of a logit regression with the following specification:

                                   exp(  Xi )
                  Undercapi =                    where  Xi =  0 × Xi,2007 +  1 × bc,2007 +  2 × mc,2007 +  3 × Xi,2007  mc,2007 .
                                 1 + (exp(  Xi )
The variable Undercap takes the value 1 if a bank is classified as undercapitalized as defined in the text. Bank-level variables Xi,2007 comprise
total assets to domestic GDP (Total Assets/GDP), the equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/TA), the short-term funding ratio (ST funding/TA) and
return on average assets (ROAA), as of end-2007. Banking sector variables bc,2007 comprise the average equity ratio in the domestic banking
sector (Average Equity Ratio) and the number of banks that already received recapitalization (Banks with recaps). Macroeconomic variables
mc,2007 comprise the government revenues to GDP (Government Revenue), the maturing government debt to GDP (Maturing Debt), the current
account balance (CA Balance), the total government debt to GDP (Debt/GDP), real GDP growth (GDP growth), GDP per capita ((GDP) and
household debt over GDP (HH Debt/GDP) in the respective country as well as a the logarithm of the time until the next election (Log Time to
Election). Lastly, we add a control for the pro, respectively anti, EU sentiment in the current government (Pro EU). Control variables are not
displayed in the table. All non-binary variables are demeaned. Standard errors are robust and adjusted for clustering at the country level.
The table reports coefficient estimates. Parentheses contain p-values. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

                     VARIABLES                                                      (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)


                     Government Revenue (%GDP)                                     -0.13      -0.12       0.19       0.23**
                                                                                   (0.58)    (0.14)      (0.18)      (0.04)
                     Government Revenue (%GDP) × Total Assets/GDP                -0.03***   -0.03***     -0.01      -0.04**
                                                                                   (0.00)    (0.00)      (0.10)      (0.02)
                     Government Revenue (%GDP) × Equity/Total Assets              -0.09**    -0.11*      0.07*        0.02
                                                                                   (0.04)    (0.08)      (0.05)      (0.57)
                     Government Revenue (%GDP) × ROAA                               0.21       0.25      -0.16       -0.11
                                                                                   (0.11)    (0.24)      (0.34)      (0.30)
                     Debt/GDP                                                      -0.00                             -0.04
                                                                                   (0.97)                            (0.19)
                     Debt/GDP × Total Assets/GDP                                    0.00                             -0.01
                                                                                   (0.19)                            (0.24)
                     Debt/GDP × Equity/Total Assets                                0.02**                          -0.02***
                                                                                   (0.03)                            (0.00)
                     Debt/GDP × ROAA                                              -0.04**                           -0.25**
                                                                                   (0.02)                            (0.04)
                     Maturing Debt (%GDP)                                                   14.88*                 60.63***
                                                                                             (0.10)                  (0.00)
                     Maturing Debt (%GDP) × Total Assets/GDP                                 1.43*                   6.89**
                                                                                             (0.08)                  (0.01)
                     Maturing Debt (%GDP) × Equity/Total Assets                              9.03**                18.16***
                                                                                             (0.03)                  (0.00)
                     Maturing Debt (%GDP) × ROAA                                            -16.96*                129.98*
                                                                                             (0.08)                  (0.07)
                     Current Account                                                                     -0.26     -0.53***
                                                                                                         (0.20)      (0.00)
                     Current Account × Total Assets/GDP                                                  -0.00      -0.02**
                                                                                                         (0.55)      (0.05)
                     Current Account × Equity/Total Assets                                             -0.07***    -0.12***
                                                                                                         (0.00)      (0.00)
                     Current Account × ROAA                                                             0.19***      -0.12
                                                                                                         (0.00)      (0.38)
                     Observations                                                  781        781         781         781
                     Cluster                                                     country    country    country     country




                                                                       45
Table 5: Impact of being Undercapitalized on Banks' Balance Sheet and Sovereign Crisis Outcomes
Panel A of the table displays results from a weighted-least squares (WLS) regression of changes in balance sheet characteristics from
2009 to 2012 on the undercapitalization status and a set of control variables. The weighting scheme is obtained from running the regression
in Table 4, column 2:

                                                Yi,09-12 =  +  × Undercapi +  × Xi,2009 + ui .

Panel B of the table displays results from a weighted-least squares (WLS) regression of bank-level outcomes during the sovereign debt crisis
(2010­2013) on the undercapitalization status and a set of control variables. The weighting scheme is the same as above:

                                                   Yi =  +  × Undercapi +  × Xi,2009 + vi .

The variable Undercap takes the value 1 if a bank is classified as undercapitalized as defined in the text. Bank-level variables Xi,2009 comprise
total assets to domestic GDP (Total Assets/GDP), the equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/TA), the loans-to-deposits ratio (Loans/Deposits) and return
on average assets (ROAA), as of end-2009. Yi,09-12 is the change from end-of-year 2009 to end-of-year 2012 for one of the following
variables: equity-to-assets ratio (Equity), Tier 1 capital ratio (Tier1), total loans (Loans), loan loss provisions over loans (LLP), non-performing
loans over loans (NPL), return on average assets (ROAA), net interest margin (NIM), risk-weighted assets over total assets (RWA/TA).
Standard errors are robust and adjusted for clustering at the bank level. The table reports coefficient estimates. Parentheses contain p-values.
*, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                                             Panel A - Balance-sheet outcomes

                                (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)              (6)               (7)            (8)
 VARIABLES                 Equity09-12       Tier109-12     Loans09-12        LLP09-12      NPL09-12       ROAA09-12         N I M09-12      RWA/ TA09-12
 Constant                   1.02***           0.70**         0.19***         -1.71***         0.27           1.33***          0.27***          -0.16
                              (0.00)          (0.05)           (0.00)          (0.00)        (0.47)           (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.27)
 Log Total Assets           -0.05***           -0.03            -0.00          0.06*         -0.00           -0.09**          -0.02**           0.01
                              (0.00)          (0.23)           (0.73)          (0.08)        (0.88)           (0.05)           (0.02)          (0.53)
 Equity/Total Assets        -0.06***         -0.05***         -0.01**         0.09***        -0.00          -0.08***          -0.02**           0.01
                              (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.01)          (0.00)        (0.82)           (0.01)           (0.02)          (0.28)
 ROAA                         -0.04            0.09*            -0.03         0.69***         0.13          -0.81***           -0.04           -0.03
                              (0.30)          (0.07)           (0.16)          (0.00)        (0.12)           (0.00)           (0.17)          (0.54)
 Loans/Deposits               -0.00             0.00         -0.00***           0.00        0.00***            0.00              0.00          -0.00
                              (0.68)          (0.63)           (0.00)          (0.16)        (0.00)           (0.74)           (0.94)          (0.23)
 Undercap                    -0.09**          0.21**           -0.04*         0.74***        -0.06            -0.19             -0.04           0.02
                              (0.01)          (0.03)           (0.05)          (0.00)        (0.48)           (0.13)           (0.27)          (0.84)

 Observations                  649              261             651             439            184              554              651               210
 R-squared                    0.30             0.10            0.15            0.27           0.11             0.20             0.06              0.03
 Cluster                      bank             bank            bank            bank           bank             bank             bank              bank

                                                            Panel B - Sovereign-crisis outcomes

                                (1)              (2)             (3)
                              Recap          Survival         LTRO
 VARIABLES                  2010­13         until 2012      Uptake/TA
 Constant                   -11.03***         3.70***        48.24**
                              (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.02)
 Log Total Assets            0.71***          -0.25**         -1.83**
                              (0.00)           (0.03)          (0.03)
 Equity/Total Assets           0.08             0.06          -2.67**
                              (0.25)           (0.40)          (0.05)
 ROAA                        -0.43***         0.63***         9.32***
                              (0.00)           (0.01)          (0.00)
 Loans/Deposits                0.00             0.00           -0.02
                              (0.19)           (0.69)          (0.53)
 Undercap                      0.08            -0.18         12.06**
                              (0.92)           (0.64)          (0.01)

 Observations                  736              736             57
 (Pseudo) R-squared           0.35             0.26            0.37
 Cluster                      bank             bank            bank




                                                                        46
Table 6: Impact of being Undercapitalized on Banks' Lending Behavior ­ Overall
Panel A of the table presents the results of cross-sectional Khwaja and Mian (2008)-type bank lending regressions based on syndi-
cated loan data and estimated with weighted-least squares (WLS):

                                           y2009-12,i,c, j =  × Undercapi +  Xi,2009 +  j + c + uijc .

Panels B, C and D present the results of identical regressions with the indicator for undercapitalization interacted with dummies for
"high-risk", "zombie" or high-interest-paying firms as defined in the main text.
The unit of observation is at the bank-firm level. y2009-12,i,c, j measures the change in loan supply in the 2009 to 2012 period and is defined
in the text. The variable Undercap takes the value 1 if a bank is classified as undercapitalized as defined in the text. The weighting scheme
is obtained from running the regression in Table 4, column 2. Bank-level control variables Xi,2009 comprise log total assets (Log Total Assets),
the equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/Tot Assets), the return on average assets (ROAA), and the non-performing loans to loans ratio (NPL), as of
end-2009. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
FE denotes fixed effects. IR stands for paid interest rate.

                                                                         (1)          (2)               (3)
                                VARIABLES                                Loan       Log Loan       Loan Increase

                                                          Panel A - aggregate lending

                                Undercap                                -0.14***      -0.21***           -0.04**
                                                                         (0.01)        (0.01)             (0.05)


                                Observations                             19,943       19,943             19,943
                                R-squared                                 0.79         0.75               0.75

                                                            Panel B - risky lending

                                Undercap                                   0.05         0.07               0.01
                                                                          (0.60)       (0.68)             (0.74)
                                Undercap × Low Rating                    -0.30**      -0.43**            -0.12**
                                                                          (0.03)       (0.01)             (0.01)

                                Observations                             3,423         3,423              3,423
                                R-squared                                0.71          0.64               0.67

                                                           Panel C - zombie lending

                                Undercap                                 -0.14**      -0.21**              -0.04
                                                                          (0.03)       (0.02)             (0.17)
                                Undercap × Zombie                         0.36**       0.40*               0.07
                                                                          (0.01)       (0.06)             (0.14)

                                Observations                             3,293         3,293              3,293
                                R-squared                                 0.73          0.68               0.69

                                                        Panel D - rent-seeking lending

                                Undercap                                  0.39*         0.27              0.22**
                                                                          (0.09)       (0.35)              (0.03)
                                Undercap × Low Rating                    -0.46**       -0.52*            -0.38***
                                                                          (0.02)       (0.10)              (0.01)
                                Undercap × High IR                        -0.43*        -0.36             -0.30**
                                                                          (0.10)       (0.24)              (0.01)
                                Undercap × Low Rating × High IR            0.25         0.26              0.38**
                                                                          (0.29)       (0.49)              (0.04)

                                Observations                             2,931         2,931              2,931
                                R-squared                                 0.72          0.66               0.68

                                Cluster                                  bank          bank               bank
                                Firm FE                                  YES           YES                YES
                                Country FE                               YES           YES                YES
                                Controls                                 YES           YES                YES




                                                                       47
Table 7: Impact of being Undercapitalized on Lending Behavior ­ Intensive vs. Extensive Margin
Panel A of the table presents the results of cross-sectional Khwaja and Mian (2008)-type bank lending regressions based on syndi-
cated loan data and estimated with weighted-least squares (WLS):

                                           y2009-12,i,c, j =  × Undercapi +  Xi,2009 +  j + c + uijc .

Panels B, C and D of the table present the results of identical regressions with the indicator for undercapitalization interacted with dummies
for "high-risk", "zombie" or high-interest-paying firms as defined in the main text.
y2009-12,i,c, j measures the change in loan supply at the extensive or intensive margin in the 2009 to 2012 period and is defined in the text. The
unit of observation is at the bank-firm level. The weighting scheme is obtained from running the regression in Table 4, column 2. The variable
Undercap takes the value 1 if a bank is classified as undercapitalized as defined in the text. Bank-level control variables Xi,2009 comprise log
total assets (Log Total Assets), the equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/Tot Assets), the return on average assets (ROAA), and the non-performing
loans to loans ratio (NPL), as of end-2009. Standard errors are clustered at the bank level. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% levels, respectively. FE denotes fixed effects. IR stands for paid interest rate.

                                                                                 (1)                    (2)
                              VARIABLES                                Relationship borrowers      New borrowers

                                                          Panel A - aggregate lending

                              Undercap                                          -0.08**                  -0.20***
                                                                                 (0.01)                   (0.00)

                              Observations                                      14,411                    4,891
                              R-squared                                          0.74                      0.90

                                                             Panel B - risky lending

                              Undercap                                            0.05                     0.09
                                                                                 (0.51)                   (0.49)
                              Undercap × Low Rating                              -0.24                     -0.21
                                                                                 (0.10)                   (0.41)

                              Observations                                       2,371                    891
                              R-squared                                           0.68                    0.89

                                                           Panel C - zombie lending

                              Undercap                                          -0.05                      0.05
                                                                                (0.33)                    (0.66)
                              Undercap × Zombie                                 0.33**                     -0.24
                                                                                (0.03)                    (0.15)


                              Observations                                       2,205                    950
                              R-squared                                           0.69                    0.90

                                                        Panel D - rent-seeking lending

                              Undercap                                            0.48**                   0.16
                                                                                  (0.01)                  (0.19)
                              Undercap × Low Rating                             -0.65***                 -0.69**
                                                                                  (0.00)                  (0.05)
                              Undercap × High IR                                 -0.54**                   -0.14
                                                                                  (0.02)                  (0.46)
                              Undercap × Low Rating × High IR                   0.56***                  1.06***
                                                                                  (0.01)                  (0.01)


                              Observations                                       1,997                    796
                              R-squared                                           0.70                    0.89

                              Cluster                                            bank                     bank
                              Firm FE                                            YES                      YES
                              Country FE                                         YES                      YES
                              Controls                                           YES                      YES




                                                                       48
Table 8: Descriptive Statistics of "Zombie" Firms
The table compares some descriptive statistics of zombie firms borrowing from undercapitalized banks with zombie firms borrow-
ing from better-capitalized banks. The displayed values in Panel A are means of the variables in the year 2009. The displayed values in Panel
B are means of the variables in the years 2013 to 2016. The last column shows the p-values of a t-test for differences in means.

                     Panel A: as of 2009

                                                         Borrowing from              Borrowing from         p-value of
                     VARIABLES                        undercapitalized banks     better-capitalized banks     t-test

                     Interest Coverage Ratio                   -2.78                       1.94                 0.07
                     EBITDA/Total Assets                       0.03                        0.03                 0.80
                     ROA                                       -1.01                      0.63                  0.25
                     Cash Flow/Total Assets                     0.02                       0.03                 0.47
                     Sales/Assets                              0.14                       0.62                  0.00
                     Tangible Assets/Total Assets               0.98                       0.92                 0.00
                     Cash/Total Assets                         0.07                        0.05                 0.53
                     Liabilities/Total Assets                  0.70                        0.80                 0.02
                     Log Total Assets                          18.96                      19.32                 0.38
                     Panel B: as of 2013­2016

                                                         Borrowing from              Borrowing from         p-value of
                     VARIABLES                        undercapitalized banks     better-capitalized banks     t-test

                     Interest Coverage Ratio                   -1.87                      14.06                 0.00
                     EBITDA/Total Assets                       0.03                        0.05                 0.05
                     ROA                                       -1.16                      1.51                  0.00
                     Cash Flow/Total Assets                     0.02                       0.06                 0.00
                     Sales/Assets                              0.30                       0.72                  0.00
                     Tangible Assets/Total Assets               0.72                       0.88                 0.00
                     Cash/Total Assets                         0.04                        0.06                 0.00
                     Liabilities/Total Assets                  0.81                        0.69                 0.00
                     Log Total Assets                          19.47                      19.68                 0.22




                                                                       49
Table 9: Impact of being Undercapitalized on Banks' Portfolio Composition
The table displays results from a weighted-least squares (WLS) regression of changes in asset holdings from 2009 to 2012 on the un-
dercapitalization status and a set of control variables. The weighting scheme is obtained from running the regression in Table 4, column 2:

                                                  Yi,09-12 =  × Xi,2009 +  × Undercapi .

The variable Undercap takes the value 1 if a bank is classified as undercapitalized as defined in the text. Bank-level variables Xi,2009
comprise log total assets (Log Total Assets), the equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/TA), the NPL-to-loans ratio (NPL/Loans) and return on average
assets (ROAA), as of end-2009. Yi,09-12 is the change from end-of-year 2009 to end-of-year 2012 for one of the following variables: the
security-to-loan ratio (Securities/Loans), the domestic sovereign bond holdings (GovBonds Domestic), and the holdings of sovereign bonds
issued by GIIPS countries (GovBonds GIIPS). Standard errors are robust and adjusted for clustering at the bank level. The table reports
coefficient estimates. Parentheses contain p-values. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                      (1)              (2)                (3)            (4)
                            VARIABLES              Securities/      GovBonds          GovBonds       GovBonds
                                                   Loans09-12      Domestic09-12      GIIPS09-12     GIIPS09-12


                            Constant                    0.00            -0.07             1.50           -0.29
                                                       (0.99)           (0.95)           (0.43)          (0.81)
                            Log Total Assets            0.01             0.06             -0.10           0.02
                                                       (0.81)           (0.50)           (0.44)          (0.85)
                            Equity/Total Assets         0.03            -0.05             -0.08         -0.13**
                                                       (0.25)           (0.31)           (0.29)          (0.02)
                            ROAA                       0.21*            -0.07             0.06           -0.07
                                                       (0.08)           (0.60)           (0.80)          (0.69)
                            NPLs/Loans                 -0.01           -0.08**            -0.02          -0.01
                                                       (0.54)           (0.02)           (0.42)          (0.67)
                            Undercap                  0.44***          0.95***          1.11***          0.76**
                                                       (0.00)           (0.01)           (0.00)          (0.02)
                            GIIPS Bank                                                                  1.03***
                                                                                                         (0.00)

                            Observations                189                39             38              38
                            R-squared                  0.14               0.38           0.31            0.62
                            Cluster                    bank               bank           bank            bank




                                                                     50
Appendix

Table A1: Likelihood of a Bank being Undercapitalized ­ Robustness
The table presents the results of a logit regression with the following specification:

                                   exp(  Xi )
                  Undercapi =                    where  Xi =  0 × Xi,2006 +  1 × bc,2006 +  2 × mc,2006 +  3 × Xi,2006  mc,2006 .
                                 1 + (exp(  Xi )
The variable Undercap takes the value 1 if a bank is classified as undercapitalized as defined in the text. Bank-level variables Xi,2006 comprise
total assets to domestic GDP (Total Assets/GDP), the equity-to-assets ratio (Equity/TA), the short-term funding ratio (ST funding/TA) and
return on average assets (ROAA), as of end-2006. Banking sector variables bc,2006 comprise the average equity ratio in the domestic banking
sector (Average Equity Ratio) and the number of banks that already received recapitalization (Banks with recaps). Macroeconomic variables
mc,2006 comprise the government revenues to GDP (Government Revenue), the maturing government debt to GDP (Maturing Debt), the current
account balance (CA Balance), the total government debt to GDP (Debt/GDP), real GDP growth (GDP growth), GDP per capita ((GDP) and
household debt over GDP (HH Debt/GDP) in the respective country as well as a the logarithm of the time until the next election (Log Time to
Election). Lastly, we add a control for the pro, respectively anti, EU sentiment in the current government (Pro EU). Control variables are not
displayed in the table. All non-binary variables are demeaned. Standard errors are robust and adjusted for clustering at the country level.
The table reports coefficient estimates. Parentheses contain p-values. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.

                 VARIABLES                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)

                 Government Revenue (%GDP)                                    -0.37**     -0.32*      0.13       0.34**
                                                                               (0.05)     (0.09)     (0.53)       (0.02)
                 Government Revenue (%GDP) × Total Assets/GDP                 -0.02**    -0.02***    -0.02*      -0.04**
                                                                               (0.01)     (0.00)     (0.08)       (0.02)
                 Government Revenue (%GDP) × Equity/Total Assets                -0.08      -0.09    0.09***      0.11***
                                                                               (0.27)     (0.18)     (0.00)       (0.00)
                 Government Revenue (%GDP) × ROAA                                0.03       0.08    -0.49**      -0.56**
                                                                               (0.84)     (0.54)     (0.03)       (0.02)
                 Debt/GDP                                                     -0.03**                           -0.21***
                                                                               (0.04)                             (0.00)
                 Debt/GDP × Total Assets/GDP                                     0.00                             -0.01*
                                                                               (0.25)                             (0.09)
                 Debt/GDP × Equity/Total Assets                                0.02*                             -0.04**
                                                                               (0.09)                             (0.02)
                 Debt/GDP × ROAA                                               -0.05*                              -0.06
                                                                               (0.07)                             (0.12)
                 Maturing Debt (%GDP)                                                     -1.00                110.81***
                                                                                          (0.92)                  (0.00)
                 Maturing Debt (%GDP) × Total Assets/GDP                                   0.64                  8.71**
                                                                                          (0.35)                  (0.03)
                 Maturing Debt (%GDP) × Equity/Total Assets                                7.38                26.78***
                                                                                          (0.13)                  (0.00)
                 Maturing Debt (%GDP) × ROAA                                             -17.69*                  19.54
                                                                                          (0.08)                  (0.24)
                 Current Account                                                                     -0.29*     -0.74***
                                                                                                      (0.06)      (0.00)
                 Current Account × Total Assets/GDP                                                   -0.00      -0.02**
                                                                                                      (0.92)      (0.04)
                 Current Account × Equity/Total Assets                                              -0.11***    -0.16***
                                                                                                      (0.00)      (0.00)
                 Current Account × ROAA                                                              0.38***     0.32***
                                                                                                      (0.00)      (0.00)
                 Observations                                                  766         766         766          766
                 Cluster                                                     country     country    country    country




                                                                       51
Table A2: Impact of being Undercapitalized on Various Measures ­ Alternative Weights
The table presents the results of re-running the weighted-least squares (WLS) specifications from Tables 5 to 9 with alternative
weighting schemes. The weights are obtained from Table A1, column 2, or are all set to 1, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the
bank level. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.


                                                         Panel A - Balance-sheet variables

                      (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)          (5)              (6)             (7)             (8)
 VARIABLES         Equity09-12     Tier109-12      Loans09-12         LLP09-12      NPL09-12        ROAA09-12      N I M09-12      RWA/ TA09-12

                                                   Panel A.1 - weights from Table A1, column 2

 Undercap            -0.10***        0.22*             -0.04          0.72***            -0.00        -0.13           -0.02             0.03
                      (0.01)         (0.07)           (0.11)          (0.00)             (0.98)      (0.31)          (0.55)            (0.75)

 Observations         608             247             610               417              177          519             610               199
 R-squared            0.30            0.08            0.17              0.27             0.10         0.25            0.08              0.05

                                                                Panel A.2 - no weight

 Undercap            -0.13***        0.18*           -0.05**          0.79***            -0.04        -0.10           -0.07            -0.05
                      (0.00)         (0.09)           (0.03)           (0.00)            (0.58)      (0.56)          (0.13)            (0.39)

 Observations         669             271             671               456              198          564             671               219
 R-squared            0.25            0.08            0.13              0.23             0.04         0.16            0.03              0.06

                                                      Panel B - Sovereign-crisis performance

                       (1)            (2)              (3)
                      Recap         Survival         LTRO
 VARIABLES           2010-13       until 2012      Uptake/TA

                                                    Panel B.1 - weights from Table A1, column 2

 Undercap              0.05           -0.33          11.83**
                      (0.94)         (0.40)           (0.01)

 Observations         689             689              56
 R-squared            0.35            0.26            0.36

                                                                Panel B.2 - no weight

 Undercap              0.57           -0.40          9.45**
                      (0.28)         (0.24)          (0.03)

 Observations         758             758              62
 R-squared            0.33            0.25            0.29

                                                             Panel C - Aggregate lending

                      (1)            (2)              (3)                (4)            (5)
 VARIABLES            Loan         Log Loan      Loan Increase      Relationship      New
                                                                     borrowers      borrowers

                                                   Panel C.1 - weights from Table A1, column 2

 Undercap            -0.15**         -0.23**         -0.04**          -0.08**           -0.19***
                      (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.05)           (0.05)            (0.00)

 Observations        19,632          19,632          19,632            14,169            4,822
 R-squared            0.79            0.74            0.75              0.74              0.90

                                                                Panel C.2 - no weight

 Undercap             -0.10          -0.18*            -0.02            -0.05           -0.17***
                      (0.13)         (0.08)           (0.40)           (0.25)            (0.00)

 Observations        20,152          20,152          20,152            14,542            4,961
 R-squared            0.78            0.74            0.75              0.73              0.89



                                                                     52
                                   Panel D - Risky lending

                          (1)           (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
VARIABLES                 Loan        Log Loan       Loan Increase    Relationship     New
                                                                       borrowers     borrowers


                        Panel D.1 - weights from Table A1, column 2

Undercap                   0.03           0.04            0.00            0.04          0.08
                          (0.79)         (0.83)          (0.98)          (0.66)        (0.55)
Undercap × Low Rating    -0.28**        -0.39**         -0.11**           -0.21         -0.16
                          (0.04)         (0.02)          (0.01)          (0.13)        (0.50)

Observations              2,748         2,748            2,748           2,330         296
R-squared                 0.67          0.59              0.62           0.66          0.95

                                     Panel D.2 - no weight

Undercap                  -0.00          0.08             0.01            0.03          0.14
                          (0.99)        (0.70)           (0.77)          (0.72)        (0.33)
Undercap × Low Rating     -0.14         -0.32*          -0.09**           -0.11         -0.07
                          (0.24)        (0.07)           (0.05)          (0.41)        (0.81)

Observations              3,458         3,458            3,458           2,392         905
R-squared                 0.69          0.62              0.66           0.66          0.89

                                   Panel E - Zombie lending

                          (1)           (2)               (3)              (4)           (5)
VARIABLES                 Loan        Log Loan       Loan Increase    Relationship     New
                                                                       borrowers     borrowers

                        Panel E.1 - weights from Table A1, column 2

Undercap                  -0.14*        -0.19*           -0.05            -0.06         0.05
                          (0.05)        (0.07)          (0.12)           (0.32)        (0.66)
Undercap × Zombie         0.35**         0.35            0.07            0.33**         -0.23
                          (0.03)        (0.12)          (0.13)           (0.04)        (0.15)

Observations              2,579         2,579            2,579           2,166         306
R-squared                 0.70          0.64              0.64           0.69          0.96

                                     Panel E.2 - no weight

Undercap                  -0.12          -0.16           -0.04            -0.04         0.11
                          (0.13)        (0.17)          (0.26)           (0.49)        (0.36)
Undercap × Zombie          0.31          0.23           0.11**            0.27         -0.37*
                          (0.11)        (0.37)          (0.03)           (0.12)        (0.05)

Observations              3,314         3,314            3,314           2,218         959
R-squared                 0.72          0.66              0.68           0.67          0.90




                                                53
                                        Panel F - Rent-seeking lending

                                        (1)                (2)               (3)             (4)           (5)
VARIABLES                               Loan             Log Loan       Loan Increase   Relationship     New
                                                                                         borrowers     borrowers

                                  Panel F.1 - weights from Table A1, column 2

Undercap                                 0.34               0.24            0.18*           0.44**        0.14
                                        (0.13)             (0.43)           (0.05)          (0.02)       (0.25)
Undercap × Low Rating                  -0.42**             -0.47           -0.34**        -0.64***      -0.64*
                                        (0.02)             (0.14)           (0.01)          (0.00)       (0.07)
Undercap × High IR                      -0.39              -0.33           -0.27**         -0.50**       -0.12
                                        (0.12)             (0.29)           (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.50)
Undercap × Low Rating × High IR          0.21               0.22            0.34**         0.58***      1.02***
                                        (0.40)             (0.58)           (0.04)          (0.01)       (0.01)

Observations                            2,883              2,883            2,883          1,959         786
R-squared                                0.71               0.65             0.67           0.68         0.89

                                                Panel F.2 - no weight

Undercap                                 0.06               0.15            0.13             0.14          0.16
                                        (0.78)             (0.63)          (0.17)          (0.42)        (0.16)
Undercap × Low Rating                   -0.14              -0.24           -0.21*          -0.30         -0.51
                                        (0.52)             (0.45)          (0.08)          (0.19)        (0.30)
Undercap × High IR                      -0.11              -0.20           -0.19*           -0.13         -0.07
                                        (0.63)             (0.53)          (0.10)          (0.56)        (0.71)
Undercap × Low Rating × High IR          0.07               0.05            0.20             0.28          0.80
                                        (0.80)             (0.90)          (0.21)          (0.29)        (0.12)

Observations                            2,957              2,957            2,957          2,014         806
R-squared                                0.70               0.64             0.67           0.68         0.89

                                           Panel G - Sovereign debt

                                       (1)                 (2)              (3)             (4)
VARIABLES                           Securities/         GovBonds        GovBonds        GovBonds
                                    Loans09-12         Domestic09-12    GIIPS09-12      GIIPS09-12

                                  Panel G.1 - weights from Table A1, column 2

Undercap                               0.49***             0.92**          1.06***        0.73**
                                        (0.00)             (0.01)           (0.01)         (0.03)
GIIPS Bank                                                                                1.07***
                                                                                           (0.00)

Observations                             180                  38             37              37
R-squared                                0.16                0.37           0.35            0.62

                                                Panel G.2 - no weight

Undercap                               0.40***             0.89**           0.69          -0.97**
                                        (0.00)             (0.02)          (0.17)          (0.02)
GIIPS Bank                                                                                1.15***
                                                                                           (0.00)
Undercap × GIIPS                                                                          1.54***
                                                                                           (0.00)

Observations                             208                  41             39              39
R-squared                                0.08                0.26           0.05            0.62




                                                        54
Online Appendix

                  Figure A1: Government Interventions: GIIPS vs. non-GIIPS countries




                                      (a) Frequency of Interventions by Categories




                                         (b) Share of Interventions by Categories


Notes: GIIPS refers to Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, while non-GIIPS refers to Eurozone countries other than
GIIPS.




                                                              55
Table A1: Overview of State Aid Cases in the EU Financial Sector (Excerpt)
The table provides an excerpt from the overview of State aid cases in the EU financial sector according
to European Commission (2017).




                                                  56
Table A1 (continued): Overview of State Aid Cases in the EU Financial Sector (Excerpt)




                                         57
Table A2: State aid N 214/2008 - Recapitalization of Hypo Tirol (Excerpt)
The table provides an excerpt from State aid case N 214/2008 on the recapitalization of the Austrian
bank Hypo Tirol.




                                               EUROPEAN COMMISSION




                                                                                                    Brussels, 17.6.2009
                                                                                                    C (2009) 4691 final corr.


                          In the published version of this decision, some information                PUBLIC VERSION
                          has been omitted, pursuant to articles 24 and 25 of Council
                          Regulation (EC) No 659/1999 of 22 March 1999 laying
                          down detailed rules for the application of Article 93 of the            WORKING LANGUAGE
                          EC Treaty, concerning non-disclosure of information
                          covered by professional secrecy. The omissions are
                          shown thus [...].
                                                                                              This document is made available for
                                                                                                  information purposes only.



                   Subject:          State aid N 214/2009 ­ Austria
                                     Aid measures provided to Hypo Tirol Bank AG


                   Sir,


                   1.     PROCEDURE

                        (1)       Austria informed the Commission of the measure covered by this decision by letter
                                  dated 25 February 2009, registered with the Commission on 7 April 2009.
                                  Complementary information, necessary for the Commission's assessment of the
                                  compatibility of the aid, was submitted by Austria, dated 12 May 2009, 18 May
                                  2009, 20 May 2009, 28 May 2009, 8 June 2009 and 10 June 2009.


                   2.     BACKGROUND AND BENEFICIARY

                        (2)       Hypo Tirol Bank Aktiengesellschaft (in the following "Hypo Tirol") is a credit-
                                  institution in the form of a joint stock company. The Austrian federal state (Land)
                                  Tirol is, indirectly via the Landes-Hypothekenbank Tirol Anteilsverwaltung, sole
                                  owner of the bank.

                        (3)       Hypo Tirol is active in universal banking, insurance broking, in private banking
                                  and in the leasing business. Hypo Tirol is active in Tirol, in Italy (focussing on the
                                  region of Südtirol), and, as a niche bank, in Zurich, Munich and Vienna.



                   Dr. Michael SPINDELEGGER
                   Bundesminister für europäische und internationale Angelegenheiten
                   Ballhausplatz 2
                   A - 1014 Wien

                   Commission européenne, B-1049 Bruxelles ­ Belgique
                   Europese Commissie, B-1049 Brussel ­ België
                   Telefon: 00 32 (0) 2 299.11.11




                                                                                         58
Table A2 (continued): State aid N 214/2008 - Recapitalization of Hypo Tirol (Excerpt)




                (4)    In 2008 Hypo Tirol employed in average 786 employees and its balance sheet
                       amounted to approx. EUR 13 billion, with earnings before tax of approx. EUR 16.6
                       million. While Hypo Tirol is not amongst Austria's largest banks, it is positioned
                       among the important Austrian banks and is, when measured by balance sheet size,
                       the biggest bank in Western Austria.

                (5)    Due to the financial crisis Hypo Tirol was confronted with losses and downgrades
                       in its credit business, forcing it to reinforce its capital position. Hypo Tirol incurred
                       losses [...] which affected its financial results in a manner that excluded the
                       possibility of an allocation to reserves. As per 13 December 2008 the tier 1 capital
                       ratio amounted to [...] which is low compared to similar banks. In order to ensure a
                       sustainable tier 1 capital ratio of above 7% comparable to its peers and [...] whilst
                       at the same time preserving its rating and possibilities for refinancing the aid
                       measure described below was notified.


           3.     THE FINANCIAL SUPPORT MEASURE

                (6)    Hypo Tirol issues tier 1 hybrid capital (Partizipationskapital) in the amount of up
                       to EUR 100 million, corresponding to 1.6% of the risk-weighted assets (RWA).
                       This capital does not confer voting rights and is not cumulative in its payments to
                       the subscribers.

                (7)    The capital will be issued via financial instruments and will be subscribed by
                       private investors. The financial instruments have a dividend of 5% payable
                       annually provided the bank shows a profit. As from 16 May 2014 the dividend
                       amounts to EURIBOR (12 months) plus 200 basis points payable annually
                       provided the bank shows a profit.

                (8)    Land Tirol issues a State guarantee for the principal capital amount subscribed by
                       the investors for a period of ten years, which is called in the case of a bankruptcy of
                       Hypo Tirol.

                (9)    For this guarantee, Hypo Tirol is paying to Land Tirol a progressively increasing
                       guarantee fee, starting with 3.9% in the first three years, and rising to 6.6% in year
                       number ten (see table).


           Year           1-3         4        5          6          7          8           9          10

           %         3,9              4,2      4,5        4,8        5,1        5,6         6,1        6,6
           Guarantee




                Confidential information




                                                           59
Table A2 (continued): State aid N 214/2008 - Recapitalization of Hypo Tirol (Excerpt)




                (10)   For the bank, therefore, the total cost of the capital injection amounts to 8.9% in
                       year one, and rises progressively to 9.5% in year five. Thereafter, the total
                       remuneration is comprised of an increasing guarantee fee and a dividend of 12
                       months Euribor plus 200 basis points.

                (11)   The financial instruments do not have a fixed maturity. After ten years, i.e. after the
                       expiry of the guarantee, the private investors have a put option towards the Land
                       Tirol, i.e. they can sell the financial instruments to the Land Tirol. Likewise, Land
                       Tirol has a purchase option. It is envisaged that Tirol makes use of the purchase
                       option and that the capital is subsequently redeemed by the bank. In case this does
                       not happen and if Land Tirol were to remain the owner of the capital, Hypo Tirol
                       commits itself to pay a dividend of Euribor (12 months) plus 860 basis points in
                       year 11. In the 12th year the dividend payable to Land Tirol increases by additional
                       100 basis points to Euribor (12 months) plus 960 basis points. From year 13
                       onwards the dividend amounts to Euribor (12 months) plus 1000 basis points.


           4.    AUSTRIA'S POSITION

                (12)   Austria considers the bank to be fundamentally sound and has provided evidence to
                       that effect.

                (13)   Austria explained that it was necessary for Hypo Tirol to reinforce its capital
                       position through a measure that would qualify as tier 1 capital under the applicable
                       solvency regulations.

                (14)   Austria considers that the measure constitutes state aid within the meaning of
                       Article 87(1) EC. Austria believes that the aid is compatible with the common
                       market under Article 87(3)(b) of the EC Treaty in the context of the current crisis.

                (15)   Austria considers that the measure is not a recapitalisation stricto sensu, as the aid
                       is restricted to guaranteeing the nominal value of the capital provided by private
                       investors, but accepts the application of the Recapitalisation Communication1. The
                       measure is not envisaged under the scope of the Austrian scheme N 557/2008.

                (16)   Austria has provided a letter from the Austrian Financial Supervisory Authority
                       which considers Hypo Tirol due to its size and strong regional position an
                       important element in the Austrian banking sector.

                (17)   Austria commits to submit a viability plan for the bank after six months. However,
                       if the bank is no longer fundamentally sound, Austria commits to submit a
                       restructuring plan.




           1
                Communication from the Commission ­ "The recapitalisation of financial institutions in the current
                financial crisis, limitation of aid to the minimum necessary and safeguards against undue distortions of
                competition", OJ C 10, 15/01/2009, p. 2




                                                               60
Table A3: Bankscope IDs
The table provides the Bankscope IDs corresponding to the banks' balance sheet characteristics em-
ployed in this study.

                                  Panel A: Bank-level variables
                                  [t] VARIABLES     Bankscope ID
                                  Total Assets      2025
                                  Loans/TA          2001 divided by 2025
                                  Net Int. Margin   4018
                                  Equity/TA         18165
                                  Tier 1 Ratio      18150
                                  LLP/Loans         4001
                                  NPLs/Loans        4004
                                  ROAA              3024
                                  ST funding/TA     (2003 - 2031)/2025
                                  Loans/Deposits    18245
                                  RWA/TA            30700 divided by 2025




                                                    61
