                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




HOW DO RESTRICTIONS ON HIGH-SKILLED IMMIGRATION AFFECT OFFSHORING?
                 EVIDENCE FROM THE H-1B PROGRAM

                                          Britta Glennon

                                       Working Paper 27538
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27538


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




I would like to thank Lee Branstetter, Brian Kovak, J. Bradford Jensen, Giovanni Peri, Ina
Ganguli, Elena Kulchina, Erica Fuchs, and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute,
BYU Winter Conference, ASSA, NBER Productivity Seminar, UCLA, IESE, USC, Bocconi,
Wharton, Duke, MIT, Federal Reserve Board, Georgetown University, George Washington
University, Notre Dame, Georgia Tech, and HBS. I also gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the Mack Institute for Innovation Management. The statistical analysis of firm-level data on
U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), United
States Department of Commerce under arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality
requirements. I thank Bill Zeile, Jim Fetzer, and Ray Mataloni for helpful discussions on the BEA
data. All errors and omissions remain my own responsibility. The views expressed are those of
the author and do not reflect official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Britta Glennon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
How Do Restrictions on High-Skilled Immigration Affect Offshoring? Evidence from the
H-1B Program
Britta Glennon
NBER Working Paper No. 27538
July 2020
JEL No. F16,F22,F23,J61,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

Skilled immigration restrictions may have secondary consequences that have been largely
overlooked in the immigration debate: multinational firms faced with visa constraints have an
offshoring option, namely, hiring the labor they need at their foreign affiliates. If multinationals
use this option, then restrictive migration policies are unlikely to have the desired effects of
increasing employment of natives, but rather have the effect of offshoring jobs. Combining visa
data and comprehensive data on US multinational firm activity, I find that restrictions on H-1B
immigration caused foreign affiliate employment increases at the intensive and extensive
margins, particularly in Canada, India, and China.


Britta Glennon
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
bglennon@wharton.upenn.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27538
     1. Introduction

     The question of the impact of immigration on the host country has long been controversial,
but it has risen to the forefront of political debates in recent years. Unexpected political shifts
such as the Brexit vote and the election of President Trump have been attributed to voter concern
about the impact of immigration. While the debate surrounding low-skilled immigration has
captured headlines in the US, high-skilled legal immigration ­ and particularly the H-1B visa
program ­ has also been contentious. Critics of the H-1B program argue that skilled immigrants
displace native-born workers and drive down their wages.1 Indeed, H-1B rejection rates have
more than tripled since President Trump signed the Buy American and Hire American Executive
Order2 in early 2017.3 However, business leaders have decried both these recent measures and
long-standing restrictions on high-skilled immigration, arguing that the shortage of workers with
specialized skills has negatively affected the competitiveness and innovation of high-tech firms
and of the US economy.4

     Policy debates like these have spawned an extensive academic literature evaluating the
claims of each side. The debate, however, has largely overlooked the secondary consequences of
restrictions on high-skilled hiring of immigrants: multinational companies faced with decreased
access to visas for skilled workers have an offshoring option, namely, hiring the foreign labor
they need at their foreign affiliates. Understanding the response of multinational companies to
these restrictions on skilled immigrants is especially significant because they are the leading
employers of skilled immigrants and engage in the vast majority of formal innovative activities
in and outside of the US. In addition, unlike other firms5, they have the option of responding to
skilled immigration restrictions by offshoring their high-skilled activities. Despite the


1
  Richard Trumpka, the President of the AFL-CIO wrote that: "Clearly, high tech is not looking to bring in H-1B visa holders for a few years at a
time because there is a shortage of tech workers. They want a massive expansion of H-1B visa holders because they can pay them less. This is not
about innovation and job creation. It is about dollars and cents." https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2013/05/28/h1b-visa-high-tech-
workers-afl-cio-editorials-debates/2367769/ Critics like the AFL-CIO often cite the work of Hira (2010) and Matloff (2003).
2
  The Buy American and Hire American Executive Order directed four federal agencies ­ the departments of State, Labor, Justice and Homeland
Security ­ to crack down on fraud and abuse of the H-1B and other work visa programs. In response, USCIS has increased H-1B inspections and
commenced site visits of businesses employing foreign workers holding "specialized knowledge". USCIS also has significantly i ncreased
challenges and requests for more evidence.
3
  U.S. Customs and Immigration. Non-Immigrant Worker RFE Data.
https://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/USCIS/Resources/Reports%20and%20Studies/Immigration%20Forms%20Data/BAHA/non-immigrant-
worker-rfe-h-1b-quarterly-data-fy2015-fy2019-q1.pdf
4
  In Congressional testimony in 2008, Bill Gates warned that unless the U.S. expanded its H-1B program, it would be "at risk of losing its
position of technological leadership".
Eric Schmidt, speaking at MIT's Computer Science and Artificial Lab, said that limits on the H -1B visa program "make it more difficult for U.S.
companies to remain competitive." https://www.cnbc.com/2017/05/04/googles-eric-schmidt-h1b-limit-is-stupidest-us-policy.html
5
  Unless they choose to internationalize.

                                                                                                                                               3
implications of such an option being used by such significant actors in the domestic and global
economy, to the best of my knowledge, no paper has examined whether the offshoring of jobs is
a consequence of restricting skilled immigration flows. If US multinationals use this option in
response to restrictive H-1B policies ­ as their public statements suggest6 - then such restrictive
migration policies are unlikely to have the desired effects of increasing employment and earnings
of high-skilled natives, but rather have the effect of offshoring high-skilled jobs.

     This project directly examines the impact of restrictive high-skilled immigration policies on
the offshoring of high-skilled jobs by US multinational companies (MNCs). I use a unique
dataset that combines firm level data on H-1B visas and multinational firm activity to examine
whether restrictions on H-1B visas result in (1) an increase in high-skilled foreign affiliate
employment, and (2) an increase in the likelihood of opening foreign affiliates in new countries.

     The data used in this paper are constructed by combining four different datasets: (1) the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) annual surveys on US Direct Investment Abroad database,
which contains detailed microdata on the financial and operating characteristics of both the US
parent companies and their foreign affiliates, (2) H-1B visa microdata obtained by FOIA request,
(3) Labor Condition Application (LCA) data7, and (4) US Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO) patent data. These data allow me to measure exactly how constrained each firm was as
the cap grew more restrictive over time by comparing ­ at the firm-level ­ LCA requests
(demand) and issued H-1B visas (realized supply), and how their foreign affiliate employment in
each country responded to these constraints. I analyze the impact of restrictions on H-1B visas on
foreign affiliate activity using two identification strategies. The first exploits the 2004 drop in the
H-1B visa cap, while the second exploits randomized variations in firm-level excess demand
from the H-1B visa lotteries in high demand years. Both strategies yield the same result: that
restrictions on H-1B immigration caused increases in foreign affiliate activity at both the
intensive margin (US multinationals employed more people at their existing foreign affiliates)
and the extensive margin (US multinationals opened foreign affiliates in new countries). The
effects are concentrated among highly H-1B-dependent firms and R&D-intensive firms operating

6
  Carbonite: "if [we] can't get them admitted to the United States, [we'll] staff up at Carbonite offices in Canada and Europe"
https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2017/04/02/tech-industry-talent-shortage-claims-under-new-
scrutiny/EsxYnPpoKBNv1iTjRl6lLL/story.html
Amazon: "we are currently assessing alternatives that could include placement in countries other than the United States"
https://www.geekwire.com/2017/trumps-immigration-crackdown-may-force-amazon-microsoft-shift-workers-canada/
7
  Labor Condition Applications are the first step towards H-1B visas for skilled foreign-born workers in the U.S.

                                                                                                                                  4
in offshorable services sectors. The expansion of foreign affiliate employment has been largely
concentrated in three countries: China, India, and Canada.

     Two aspects of this paper are novel. First, this paper provides the first empirical evidence to
support the hypothesis that restrictions on high-skilled immigration cause the offshoring of
skilled jobs. While high-profile cases ­ like Microsoft's decision to open an R&D foreign
affiliate in Vancouver8 ­ have suggested that restricting skilled immigration flows could lead to
the offshoring of jobs, this paper presents the first empirical work both proposing this hypothesis
and examining whether this claim is indeed true. Second, it is the first paper to use a matched
firm-level dataset of H-1B visas and multinational firm activity.

     The findings of the paper have important policy implications; the offshoring of jobs appears
to be an unforeseen consequence of restricting skilled immigration flows. Even if H-1B
immigrants displace some native workers, any policies that are motivated by concerns about the
loss of native jobs should consider that policies aimed at reducing immigration have the
unintended consequence of encouraging firms to offshore jobs abroad.


     2. The Effects of a Negative Foreign Labor Supply Shock on Offshoring: Literature
        Review

     Highly-skilled workers are crucial and relatively scarce inputs into firms' productive and
innovative processes. An increasingly high proportion of these workers ­ and particularly STEM
workers ­ in the US were born abroad and immigrated to the US (Bound et al. 2014). This
phenomenon has spawned an extensive literature on skilled immigration and a heated policy
debate on the appropriate admissions levels of skilled immigrants. The literature has largely
focused on the impact of high skilled immigration along three dimensions ­ (i) the impact on
innovation, (ii) the impact on native workers' outcomes, and (iii) the impact on the source
country (brain drain). 9 The policy debate has largely centered around these same three issues.



8
  "Microsoft opens Canada center in response to US immigration problems." http://workpermit.com/news/microsoft-opens-canada-center-
response-us-immigration-problems-20070710
9
  Studies of the impact on innovation and entrepreneurship include Chellaraj, Maskus, and Mattoo (2008), Wadhwa et al. (2007), Dimmock,
Huang, and Weisbenner (2019), Akcigit, Grigsby, and Nicholas (2017), Burchardi et al. (2019), Doran and Yoon (2019), Ganguli (2015) Agrawal
et al. (2018), Borjas and Doran (2015b), Ghosh et al. (2015), Hunt (2011), Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010), Kerr and Lincoln (2010), Moser et
al. (2014), Oettl and Agrawal (2008), and Wu (2017). Docquier and Rapoport (2012) provide an extensive review on the brain drain literature.
Studies of the impact on native wages and jobs include Bound, Khanna, and Morales (2017), Turner (2017), Borjas (2005, 2003), Card (2009,
2001), Choudhury and Kim (2018), Doran et al. (2016), R. B. Freeman (2006), Friedberg 2001, Hayes and Lofstrom (2011), Hunt (2011), Kerr,

                                                                                                                                             5
     In this extensive immigration literature, there is surprisingly little focus on the role of the
firm, as was noted in Kerr, Kerr, and Lincoln (2015).10 The lacuna is particularly surprising in
the U.S. literature, since applications for skilled immigration visas like H-1B visas are made by
sponsoring firms. Fortunately, in recent years, a series of careful empirical papers have begun to
address this gap. Ashraf and Ray (2017) and Wu (2017) consider the impact of high skilled
immigration on firm innovation. Doran et al. (2016), Kerr, et al. (2015), and Mayda et al. (2017)
examine the impact on firm structure and employment. Ashraf and Ray (2017), Ghosh et al.
(2015), and Xu (2016) examine the impact on other firm outcomes.

     However, while these papers have significantly contributed to our understanding of the
impact of high-skilled immigration on firm outcomes, they have largely overlooked the
multinational nature of many of these firms in their analysis. Multinational companies (MNCs)
are the leading employers of skilled immigrants, engage in the vast majority of formal innovative
activities, and ­ unlike other firms11 - have the option of responding to skilled immigration
restrictions by offshoring their high-skilled activities. Branstetter, Glennon, and Jensen (2018)
argue that skilled labor shortages in the past ­ a result of a large IT- and software-biased shift in
innovation ­ did drive US MNCs abroad, and particularly drove them to locations with large
quantities of STEM workers who possessed IT and software skills. High-skilled immigration
provides another way of addressing this shortage, but an increasingly restrictive cap on H-1B
admissions that began in 2004 reduced the ability of US firms to use this approach to meet their
human capital needs. This line of thinking suggests that, to some degree, immigration and
offshoring are substitutes.

     Some recent papers in the international trade literature (Olney and Pozzoli 2018; Ottaviano,
Peri, and Greg C. Wright 2013) have indeed found that immigration and offshoring are
substitutes at the multilateral level, but rely on import data to measure offshoring while I directly
observe foreign affiliate employment. Furthermore, these papers largely consider the offshoring
of manufacturing and immigration of all types of workers, as opposed to focusing on high-skilled
immigration and high-skilled offshoring activity. Global production networks and global R&D


William R Kerr, et al. (2015), Lowell (2001), Matloff (2003), Mayda et al. (2017), Mithas and Lucas (2010), Ottaviano, Peri, and Wright (2012),
Peri et al. (2015), Salzman and Lowell (2007), and Tambe and Hitt (2009).
10
   Kerr, Kerr, and Lincoln (2015) provide a vivid example to support this, noting that in the 51 pages of Borjas (1994)'s classic survey of the
economics of immigration literature, the word "firm" does not appear once.
11
   Unless they choose to internationalize.

                                                                                                                                              6
networks are fundamentally different in how they operate however; while production has become
highly dispersed around the world, most formal research and development and other high-skilled
activities remain highly concentrated in a few firms' headquarters in only a few countries. This is
at least in part due to substantial frictions in international collaboration (Argote, Mcevily, and
Reagans 2003; Audretsch 1998; Patel and Pavitt 1991) that often require researchers to work in
physical proximity; tacit knowledge is best transferred in person (Polanyi 1958, 1966; Singh
2008; Szulanski 1996; Teece 1977). In keeping with this, the globalization of R&D literature has
long recognized that a central driver of globalized R&D is a host country's supply of human
capital (Hall 2010; Serapio and Dalton 1999; Siedschlag et al. 2013; Thursby and Thursby 2006),
while this is much less important for the offshoring of manufacturing. Hence, the degree to
which offshoring and immigration are substitutes could look quite different for high-skilled tasks
than for production activities.

     Offshoring and immigration could also be complementary rather than substitutable; hiring an
immigrant of a given ethnicity can actually increase a firm's offshoring in that immigrant's
country of origin through ethnic ties (Arora and Gambardella 2005; Choudhury 2016;
Choudhury and Kim 2018; Foley and Kerr 2013; Gould 1994; Hernandez 2014; Iriyama, Li, and
Madhavan 2010; Kerr 2008; MacGarvie 2005; Saxenian 2006). This literature argues that ethnic
ties facilitate the disintegration of innovative activity across borders and allow multinationals to
more easily form new affiliates abroad. This hypothesis implies that a reduction in immigration
from a given country could reduce offshoring, since it would make it more difficult for firms to
set up new foreign affiliates there without the diaspora networks. 12

     In short, the sign and magnitude of the effects, if any, of high-skilled immigration restrictions
on multinational foreign affiliate employment are still an open question.


     3. Overview of the H-1B Program

     Firms have multiple ways in which they can hire foreign high-skilled workers: the H-1B, L-
1, O, OPT, and TN visas are just a few examples.13 The first is the most widely used and is the


12
   This argument is not necessarily incompatible with substitution at the multilateral level; Olney and Pozzoli (2018) find both that immigration
substitutes for offshoring at the multilateral level and that it complements offshoring at the bilateral level. In other words, they find that while
bilateral offshoring increases with immigration from the host country, it decreases with immigration from other countries.
13
   I provide some discussion of other high-skilled visa alternatives in the appendix.

                                                                                                                                                       7
focus of this paper. The H-1B visa is a nonimmigrant14 visa that enables firms to hire foreign
workers in the US for a three-year period, renewable once for a total of six years. They make up
about 50% of temporary work visas, and are used to employ foreign workers in "specialty
occupations"15 which typically means the individual must have at least a Bachelor's degree. Firm
interviews conducted with the author suggest that U.S. firms typically use H-1B visas to hire
international students at domestic universities.

     There are five aspects of the H-1B program that are important in the context of this paper.

     First, H-1B visas are tied to the firm, so it is possible to directly infer firm hiring responses to
quantity constraints. Firms ­ not foreign workers ­ determine demand for H-1B visas. Legal and
application fees are substantial; depending on the size of the company, the H-1B filing fee alone
in 2017 was between $1,710-$6,460, not including the attorney fee.

     Second, the H-1B application process is a two-stage process. This feature allows examination
of both latent demand and realized supply. In the first stage, firms must file a Labor Condition
Application (LCA) with the Department of Labor's Employment and Training Administration
(DOLETA). This first stage measures demand. There is no limit ­ beyond cost ­ on the number
of LCAs that a firm can file, so demand is measured independent of whether an H-1B is
ultimately issued or not. In the second stage, after the LCA is approved, the firm must file an I-
129 petition with USCIS, which makes the ultimate determination about the visa application.
Constraints imposed by the H-1B cap are imposed in the second stage, where the final decision is
made, so this stage measures realized supply. The two-stage structure of the H-1B application
process allows me to measure exactly how constrained each firm was as the cap grew more
restrictive over time by comparing ­ at the firm-level ­ LCA requests (demand) and issued H-1B
visas (realized supply).

     The next two features provide sources of identification from an econometric point of view.


14
   They are called "nonimmigrant" visas because they allow those with H-1Bs to stay in the US only temporarily. However, they are also "dual
intent" visas, which means that workers can reside in the US with a nonimmigrant status while simultaneously applying for per manent residency.
15
   According to USCIS, "to qualify as a specialty occupation, the position must meet one of the following requirements: (1) a bachelor's or higher
degree or its equivalent is normally the minimum entry requirement for
the position; (2) the degree requirement is common to the industry in parallel positions among
similar organizations or, in the alternative, the position is so complex or unique that it can be
performed only by an individual with a degree; (3) the employer normally requires a degree or its
equivalent for the position; or (4) the nature of the specific duties is so specialized and complex
that the knowledge required to perform the duties is usually associated with attainment of a
bachelor's or higher degree."

                                                                                                                                                8
        Third, variations in the cap on H-1B visa supply provide a source of exogenous variation.
The number of new H-1B visas that can be issued to private sector businesses has been subject to
a cap since their inception in the Immigration Act of 1990. This cap is set by Congress and the
President. Figure 1 plots the cap on the number of H-1B visas by fiscal year. The cap only
applies to new H-1B visas issued to private sector businesses; there is no cap for the following
categories: (1) those for non-profit firms, universities, and research labs, (2) those that are an
extension of an existing H-1B visa, (3) those that have an existing H-1B visa and are changing
jobs during the period of the existing visa, and (4) citizens of countries with whom the United
States has a relevant free trade agreement.

        There are three discrete phases of interest in terms of hiring constraints over time. The first
phase is one in which the hiring constraint was not binding: throughout most of the 1990s, the
cap was set at 65,000 visas and applications rarely outstripped supply16. Phase 2 began in 1998-
2000, when the cap was increased to 195,000 visas by the American Competitiveness and
Workforce Improvement Act of 1998 and the American Competitiveness in the Twenty-First
Century Act of 2000 (AC21). During this period, the cap limits were never reached. Phase 3
occurred when trends in increasing visa availability reversed in 2004 and the cap reverted to the
initial level of 65,000 visas, although 20,000 additional visas were granted to applicants with a
graduate degree in 2006 (to a total of 85,000). Since then, the cap has not changed, and it has
been (increasingly) binding in every year since 2004. Due to data constraints, this paper focuses
on Phase 2 and 3.

        The fourth relevant characteristic of the H-1B program from an econometric point of view is
the random variation that is introduced by the process by which H-1B visas are distributed. H-1B
petitions are distributed in a first-come-first-served fashion or by lottery in especially high
demand years. The process is illustrated in Figure 2. On the first business day of each April,
USCIS begins accepting H-1B applications from firms seeking permits that will count towards
the following fiscal year. Since the H-1B visa program operates on a first-come, first-served
basis, petitions are accepted until the cap hits, at which point no more petitions are processed.
The end of the application period is demarcated by the "final receipt date", which is the date on
which they receive enough applications to fill the remaining available permits under the cap.


16
     Fiscal years 1997 and 1998 were the lone instances when the cap was reached.

                                                                                                          9
Any cap-subject petitions submitted after the final receipt date were automatically rejected. This
date is announced by USCIS in a press release every year, and it varies every year, as shown in
Table 1. On the date(s) that the available permits are exhausted, a computer-generated random
selection process selects the petitions that will be processed. Firms have no way of knowing in
advance what date the cap would be reached. The dates of the lottery are not announced in
advance and are in fact unknown in advance; they are determined by the number of applications
received on different dates. These dates are only made known to firms after the cap is reached. In
April 2007 and 2008, USCIS received so many petitions within the first week that all cap-subject
petitions were distributed by lottery for fiscal years 2008 and 2009. The lottery generated a
random negative shock in the supply of foreign-born skilled workers to firms; the second
empirical approach exploits the lottery-generated randomized variation from the H-1B visa
lotteries in those two years, which allows for a causal interpretation of the effect of constrained
foreign-born skilled worker supply on the offshoring of skilled jobs.

   The final relevant characteristic is significant for measuring demand. The timing of petitions
can be used to reveal whether an application is for a cap-subject H-1B visa. As described above,
the prerequisite to filing an H-1B petition with USCIS is obtaining an approved LCA from the
Department of Labor. An LCA cannot be filed more than six months prior to the start of
employment. In order to apply for a visa for the following fiscal year (beginning in October), one
would expect that firm to file an LCA no earlier than April. Furthermore, an LCA is only valid
for three years; the earlier the application submitted, the fewer months a foreign-born worker
would be eligible to work. In short, without any restrictions on H-1B supply, one would expect
all firms to apply for LCAs no earlier than April, and probably much later.

   However, the rising demand for H-1B visas and the first-come, first-served nature of the
distribution process changed firm behavior. Firms that needed cap-subject H-1B visas wanted to
submit their petitions as early as possible (i.e. April) to ensure the submission would be before
the final receipt date, which also meant the LCA application had to be submitted prior to April.
Figure 3 illustrates the change in the timing of LCA applications; as demand for cap-dependent
H-1B visas increased, LCA applications were filed earlier. This feature is relevant for
determining which LCA applications were for cap-dependent H-1B petitions.

   Appendix A6 provides additional information about characteristics of H-1B applicants.

                                                                                                      10
     4. Data

     I use a combination of four sources of data to generate a unique dataset that permits the
analysis of the link between MNC hiring decisions and how they respond to high-skilled
immigration constraints. The first dataset provides information about multinational activity,
including employment and R&D expenditures. The second and third are particularly useful
because they provide information about both the demand and the realized supply for foreign
workers, because they consist of both H-1B visas issued to foreign-born workers at US firms, as
well as those requested by US firms. The fourth dataset provides information about the
innovative activity of the firms, as measured by patents.

     4.1 Multinational activity data

     The data that I use to examine multinational activity are firm-level data from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis's (BEA) annual surveys on U.S. Direct Investment Abroad. BEA is under a
congressional mandate17 to track investment into and out of the United States, and as such, their
data comprise the most comprehensive available data on US multinational activity abroad. Of
particular importance is that the data includes foreign affiliate employment, which is the primary
variable of interest for this paper. The data are confidential, and only accessible at a restricted
site at the Bureau of Economic Analysis in Suitland, Maryland.

     I constructed a panel dataset of this activity from 1994 through 2014. 18 Each firm may report
on a consolidated basis for multiple affiliates in the same country under certain conditions. 19
Therefore, rather than conducting analysis at the affiliate level, I aggregate all foreign affiliate
activity up to the host country level for a given parent firm for a given year. The panel contains
2,263 firms with multinational activity.




17
   By the International Investment and Trade in Services Survey Act. The data are collected for the purpose of producing publicly available
aggregate statistics on the activities of multinational enterprises.
18
   The most extensive data are collected in benchmark years: 1994, 1999, 2004, 2009, AND 2014. The reporting requirement threshold varies by
year, size of the affiliate, and the parent's ownership stake. BEA estimates values of some variables of some aff iliates in non-benchmark years in
order to estimate a consistent universe across years. I only use the reported data in this paper.
19
   These conditions are that the affiliates operate in the same country and same industry classification or are integral parts of the same business
operation.

                                                                                                                                                11
     4.2 H-1B Data

     The second step of the data construction is to measure the firm-level hiring patterns of
foreign-born workers. The source of the information is worker-level application records from the
U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) and worker-level approved H-1B petition data from the U.S.
Customs and Immigration Services.

     Measures of firm-level demand for H-1B visas come from the DOL Labor Condition
Application (LCA) data. Before a firm can file a petition with US Customs and Immigration
Services (USCIS), they must file an LCA with the DOL.20 There is no limit (other than financial
constraints) on the number of LCAs that a firm can file. The primary purpose of the LCA is for
employers to attest to the employment details of H-1B applicants and affirm that the worker will
be employed in accordance with U.S. law. 21 This data set comprises 6.4 million records between
2001 and 2016, which I aggregate by employer-year and then link to the BEA data.

     The LCA data do not contain information on which applications are for H-1B visas that
would be cap-subject. This does not matter for the first empirical strategy, but for the second
strategy, in order to measure excess demand due to H-1B cap constraints, I infer whether a given
LCA application is for a cap-subject H-1B visa by looking at the date of the LCA application. I
assume that any LCA filed between January and April with a work start date 5-6 months in the
future represents demand for a cap-subject H-1B visa for the following fiscal year. Any LCA
filed according to a different timeline thus represents demand for non-cap-subject H-1B visas.

     Measures of realized H-1B labor supply come from I-129 H-1B visa applications, obtained
by FOIA request. These data are used in the second identification strategy. The original dataset
contains I-129 petitions from fiscal years 2004-201422, consisting of about 3.3 million petitions,
with information on the final decision regarding each petition, the type of visa being requested,
the beneficiary's country of birth, the employer name and location, the job code, compensation,




20
   These applications have been made publicly available by the DOL since 2001, and contain information on the employer's name an d address,
the occupation code of and the wage offered to the worker, and the geographic location of employment for the position to be filled by the visa
recipient.
21
   There are four main labor conditions that they are required to meet: (1) recipients of the visa must receive the same or better wages and benefits
as other similar company employees and as similar employees in the geographic area, (2) working conditions must be similar for all employees,
(3) there must not be a "strike, lockout, or work stoppage" at the employment location when the LCA is signed and submitted, (4) any employee
bargaining representatives must be notified of every application submitted.
22
   Not all cap-subject petitions that were rejected by USCIS are included.

                                                                                                                                                 12
and other administrative details. An I129 form is needed for many types of visas, but for the
purpose of this paper, the most relevant is the H-1B visa.

     Not all H-1B visas were affected by the cap. To identify the visas that were constrained, I
first remove (1) those for non-profit firms, universities, and research labs, (2) those that are an
extension of an existing H-1B visa, (3) those that have an existing H-1B visa and are changing
jobs during the period of the existing visa, and (4) citizens of five countries that were effectively
exempt from H-1B limits due to bilateral trade agreements (Australia, Canada, Chile, Mexico,
and Singapore). Second, I remove petitions that were submitted after April (the month of the
lottery); the cap was reached in April. Finally, I focus on petitions submitted for fiscal years
2008 and 2009 ­ the two years of the lottery. The remaining petitions comprise the realized H-
1B labor supply among cap-dependent petitions. Excess demand for foreign labor due to H-1B
restrictions can thus be measured by subtracting realized cap-dependent H-1B petitions from
cap-dependent LCA applications.

     An examination of the heterogeneity of H-1B petition filings by firm, industry, and country ­
shown in Appendix A6 - provides some intuition regarding which types of firms might be most
impacted by H-1B restrictions, and where the expansion of foreign affiliate activity might be
expected to take place. The median H-1B visa petition is for an Indian worker in a computer-
related occupation. Computer-related occupations accounted for 69% of H-1B petition filings in
2017, and 85% of H-1B petition filings were for workers from India or China. These results
suggest that the firms most impacted by constraints on H-1B visas would be firms dependent on
computer-related workers. They also suggest that I might expect to see large increases in foreign
affiliate employment in India and China. Finally, there is also significant skewness in H-1B visas
across firms; this suggests that a non-linear approach may be appropriate. Note that these are not
all US multinational companies; the sample of firms in my analysis is somewhat different.
Specifically, my data include US multinational firms only. They do not include US domestic
firms, foreign multinational firms, or the Indian outsourcing firms who are the largest H-1B
applicants in the US23.




23
  The importance of this distinction is illustrated in Figure A6-4; based on median compensation alone, Indian outsourcing companies hire a very
different set of workers than US multinational firms.

                                                                                                                                             13
     4.3 Patent Data

     The final source of data provides information on the innovativeness of the firm. The data are
constructed from US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patent data and includes all utility24
granted patent applications through 2017.

     4.4 Final Dataset

     The final dataset is at the firm-country-year level and contains 2,263 multinationals. Of the
2,263 multinationals, 28% filed at least one LCA in 2001, 29% applied for at least one USPTO
patent, and 15% both had at least one LCA application in 2001 and had at least one USPTO
patent at some point. Summary statistics are shown in Table 2.


     5. Empirical Approach and Results

     This section describes my estimation framework; I use two identification strategies. The first
exploits the 2004 drop in the H-1B visa cap, while the second exploits randomized variation
from the H-1B visa lotteries in high demand years. The results yield the same qualitative result
and strongly support the hypothesis that restrictions on high skilled immigration caused
increased foreign affiliate employment and made firms more likely to open up foreign affiliates
abroad.

     5.1 Identification Strategy 1: Exploiting the 2004 policy change

     The identification in this strategy is based on a plausibly exogenous shock to high-skilled
immigration supply: the sharp reduction in the annual H-1B cap in fiscal year 2004, shown in
Figure 1. As described in the "Overview of the H-1B and L-1 Visa Programs" section, the cap
was not binding in the years leading up to the reduction (1998-2004) but has been binding in
every year since 2004.

     My empirical specification can be interpreted as a difference-in-difference estimator ­
similar to that used in Ashraf and Ray (2017), Ghosh et al. (2015), Kerr and Lincoln (2010), and
Xu (2016) ­ where the treatment and control groups are categories of firms with different levels

24
  There are three types of patents: utility patents, design patents, and plant patents. Utility patents cover inventions that have a useful and specific
function and make up the majority of all patents. Language referring to a patent typically refers to utility patents. Design patents protect aesthetic
appearance, while plant patents are for the discovery or invention of plants that are asexually reproduced.

                                                                                                                                                    14
of H-1B dependency in 2001 (when the cap was not binding) and the treatment is the reduction
in the annual H-1B cap in 2004. In other words, the difference-in-differences approach relies on
pre-existing variation in demand for foreign-born skilled workers to identify how exogenous
constraints in supply affected foreign affiliate employment. Accordingly, the regression
compares the change in foreign affiliate employment before and after the policy change across
multinationals, within the same firm and country, that were more dependent on H-1B visas prior
to the policy change (the "treatment" group) and less dependent firms prior to the policy change
(the "control" group). Figure 4 provides a graphical version of the strategy, and shows that while
foreign affiliate employment growth for non-H-1B dependent firms remained fairly flat after the
policy change, extremely H-1B dependent firms experienced rapid growth in foreign affiliate
employment after the policy change. Furthermore, the trajectory of foreign affiliate employment
growth of both types of firms remained parallel and quite flat prior to the policy change. The
regression results confirm the associations in the raw data presented in Figure 4.

     In the baseline specifications, H-1B dependency is defined as the total LCA applications for
a given multinational divided by that multinational's US employment in 2001, as in Kerr and
Lincoln (2010) and Xu (2016). The dependency measure is calculated in a pre-policy year to
help address the problem of reverse causality. The dependency measure is my preferred metric
because it measures demand for H-1B visas, and it is measured independent of whether an H-1B
visa is ultimately issued or not. Furthermore, because of the high cost of application, the
dependency measure can be seen as reflecting real measured demand. Finally, the dependency
measure closely mirrors DOL's own measure of H-1B dependency, namely: "The determination
as to whether an employer is H-1B dependent is a function of the number of H-1B
nonimmigrants employed as a proportion of the total number of full-time equivalent employees
employed in the United States."25

     The regression specification is as follows:

                       ln( ) =  +  +  + 1 1   + 




25
  Labor Condition Application for Nonimmigrant Workers. ETA Form 9045CP ­ General Instructions fot he 9035 and 9035E, U.S. Department
of Labor. https://icert.doleta.gov/library/ETA_Form_9035CP_2009_Revised_03.18.09.pdf

                                                                                                                                   15
where i indexes the firm, c indexes the country, and t indexes the year. Country, firm, and year
fixed effects are captured by  ,  , and  respectively. FAemp is foreign affiliate employment.
Policy is a dummy variable, equal to one for all years after and encompassing 2004, and zero
otherwise. This is interacted with H1BDep, which is defined in one of two ways. The first is the
continuous version of H-1B dependency described above, where the number of LCA
applications (the measure of H-1B demand) by firm I in pre-policy year 2001 is normalized by a
multinational's employment in the US in pre-policy year 2001, while the second is a new
variable equal to one if the firm was in the top group of H-1B dependency26 in 2001, and zero if
the firm had zero LCA applications in 2001. All standard errors are clustered at the firm level but
are also robust to clustering at the country level. I expect 1to be positive; after the 2004
reduction in the H-1B cap, firms that were ex-ante more dependent on H-1B visas should be
more affected by the policy change and therefore more likely to expand their foreign affiliate
activity. Column 1 of Table 3 shows the results of the continuous version, while column 2 shows
the results of the binary version. Both are statistically and economically significant. The
coefficient in the binary version tells us that the 2004 policy change caused highly H-1B
dependent firms to increase their foreign affiliate employment by 27% more than a non-H-1B
dependent firm.

         A modification of this specification that interacts year fixed effects with the treatment
allows observation of time-varying effects and answers the question: was the firm response to the
cap change a one-off effect, or did the effect grow over time as firms felt more constrained? The
results are shown in Table 3, Column 3, and provide evidence that firms accelerated offshoring
over time as constraints tightened.

        The measure of foreign affiliate employment is not the ideal measure; I am interested in the
substitution of high-skilled immigrants for high-skilled foreign affiliate employment.
Fortunately, although aggregate foreign affiliate employment is not broken into more
disaggregated pieces in most years, foreign affiliate R&D employment is reported in benchmark
years, which are every five years. In this sample, the benchmark surveys are 1994, 1999, 2004,
2009, and 2014. Columns 4 and 5 of Table 3 provides the results of the same differences-in-
differences specification as that reported in Columns 1 and 2, but with a different dependent

26
     Measured in the same way as in the earlier non-linear specification.

                                                                                                     16
variable: logged foreign affiliate R&D employment. These results provide additional evidence
that the type of foreign affiliate employment affected by the H-1B restrictions were in fact
skilled employment.

An Alternate Specification
   An alternative to the more traditional differences-in-differences regression approach is a
series of cross-sectional long-differenced regression specifications, as follows:

                                         2001
                  (_,-2001 ) =  +  + 1 (  )   + ,-2001
                                         _ 

   where i indexes the firm, j indexes the industry, c indexes the country, and t is a post-policy
year. As before, FA_emp is foreign affiliate employment in country c by firm i, LCAapps is the
measure of demand (the number of LCA applications) by firm i in pre-policy year 2001, US_emp
is a multinational's employment in the US in pre-policy year 2001, and  and  capture
industry (NAICS 4-digit level) and country time trends respectively. The dependent variable is
the logged differenced foreign affiliate employment of firm i in country c, between year t and a
pre-policy year (2001). I expect 1to be positive in post-policy change years (2005-2014) and
null in pre-policy change years (2002-2004). After the 2004 reduction in the H-1B cap, firms that
were more dependent on H-1B visas should be more affected by the policy change and therefore
more likely to expand their foreign affiliate activity. Before the 2004 cap change, any pre-
existing variation in demand for foreign-born skilled workers, as measured by H-1B dependency,
should not be correlated with foreign affiliate employment growth. The main advantage of this
specification is that I can control for industry time trends or other trends among sets of firms.

   The results are shown in Table 4, where each column represents a long difference between
2001 and a later year. The results provide evidence that there were no existing pre-trends in the
differences in foreign affiliate employment growth that correspond with the measure of H-1B
dependency; 1 is not statistically significant until 2005, the first year after the policy change.
The results also show that firms that were one percentage point more H-1B dependent than
average saw a 3-8% larger increase in foreign affiliate employment than average, as a result of
increased immigration restrictions resulting from the 2004 cap drop. Since the average foreign


                                                                                                     17
affiliate in 2001 had 1,151 employees, the estimated effect at the mean is thus an increase of 35-
90 employees at every foreign affiliate.

   As with the differences-in-differences specification, the approach requires that pre-treatment
trends in foreign affiliate employment were the same for the treatment and control groups (the
parallel trends assumption). If one looks simply at how the level of foreign affiliate activity
differed between our treatment and control groups, it is apparent that firms that filed more LCAs
in 2001 were not identical to firms with fewer LCAs. For example, firms that filed large numbers
of LCAs tend to do more R&D abroad but have fewer employees abroad. However, the
difference in levels is not in of itself problematic for my specification; the threat to identification
would be if my measure of H-1B dependency were correlated with pre-treatment changes in
foreign affiliate employment.

       To test for this possibility, I include the 1994-1999 pre-trend in the baseline specification.
These results are shown in column two of Table 5, with the baseline results shown in column 1
for the purpose of comparison. The coefficient of interest gets slightly smaller, but remains
positive and statistically significant, and hence lessening any concerns about endogeneity. Note
that I only report the results for the 2013-2001 long difference; they are robust to choosing any
post-2004 year, but due to space constraints and constraints from the use of confidential data, I
only report the 2013 results here.

       Another concern might be that results are driven by systematic growth rate differences
across firms of different size, internationalization, or innovativeness to begin with. If, for
instance high-patenting firms naturally expand their activity abroad more quickly than non-
patenting firms, even within the same industry, then my results could reflect that correlation
rather than the effect of the policy change. I therefore test whether the coefficient of interest
changes when including controls for the size or type of firm in terms of their 2001 employment
quantile, 2001 sales quantile, 2001 R&D spending quantile, 2001 total patenting quantile, and
number of foreign affiliates quantile in 2001. These controls are included as group fixed effects.
The identification in these regressions, once various controls are added, is now based on the
comparison of trajectories within the same industry and the same category of employment size or
sales size or R&D size or patenting amount or degree of internationalization, depending on the


                                                                                                     18
control. Column 3 of Table 5 presents the results of a specification containing indicators for each
firm's 2001 patenting quantile; the other results can be requested separately but show the same
result: the main results remain qualitatively unaffected.

Exploring Firm Heterogeneity
     This section examines what types of firms responded most to restrictions on high-skilled
immigration flows. Multinational firms differ in their strategic needs and capabilities; these
sources of firm heterogeneity will affect how different firms respond to legal restrictions on
migration. I examine four sources of firm heterogeneity: R&D intensity, software-orientation,
offshorability, and H-1B dependency. I also explore the sensitivity to the model specification.
Finally, I examine host country heterogeneity: particularly focusing on differences between
countries which possess the necessary raw human capital (such as India or China) versus
countries where it is easy to make use of foreign affiliates with easy access to foreign born
workers (such as Canada27).

     I begin by examining firm's R&D intensity, since I expect that the firms most responsive to
restrictions on high skilled immigration would be firms that conduct high-skilled activity and are
reliant on high-skilled human capital to do so28. Column 4 of Table 5 shows the results of the
long-differenced regression run on firms that were in the top 20% of R&D-intensive firms in
2001. I find that the coefficient is larger than on the entire firm sample suggesting that the results
are driven by the firms conducting high-skilled activity, as expected.

     I follow this by examining the importance of the H-1B program for firms that hire computer-
related occupations, since computer-related occupations account for the vast majority of H-1B
petition filings. Specifically, I look at firms that patented extensively in software, where software
patents are defined in the same way as Arora, Branstetter, and Drev (2013) and Branstetter,
Drev, and Kwon (2018).29 As expected, the coefficient of interest is larger than on the entire firm


27
   Much has been made anecdotally of Canada as a destination for firms struggling with immigration constraints in the United States. See, for
example, the Envoy 2019 Immigration Trends Report, where 38% of surveyed firms were thinking about expanding to Canada because their
immigration policy is more favorable, and 21% already had at least one office there.
28
   Where R&D intensity is measured as the ratio of R&D spending to sales.
29
   Branstetter, Drev, and Kwon (2018). This methodology uses a set of keywords (e.g. "computer program" or "software") associated with
software-based technologies as defined by Bessen and Hunt (2007) to define one set of patents as software, and uses a narrow set of IPC
categories as defined in Graham and Mowery (2003) to define another set. The final population of software patents is defined as the union of
these two sets of patents. I define the software intensity of a firm as the software stock of all USPTO citation-weighted patents applied for by that
firm (in any location) by 2001. Here, I restrict to the top quartile of software-patenting firms.

                                                                                                                                                  19
sample. I also examine in more detail those industries where offshoring is a viable substitute for
immigration. As expected, if I restrict the sample to firms that operate within the most
offshorable services sectors, 30 the results are even more striking; the coefficient nearly doubles.
These results are available by request.

        Of course, the relationship between growth in multinational foreign affiliate employment and
the share of H-1B workers might be nonlinear, as suggested by the skewness in applications. I
use a non-parametric approach to examine this possibility: I divide multinationals into groups
according to their H-1B dependence in 2001. I create 7 categories of multinationals, where the
base category is all multinationals with zero LCA applications, and the remainder are divided
into five quantiles, with the top category divided into two groups. Again, I expect positive
coefficients with especially large coefficients on high-dependency multinationals, and Column 5
of Table 5 shows exactly that pattern. In particular, I find large, positive, and statistically
significant coefficients for the top bracket (with an LCA application-US employment ratio of at
least 0.0158 in 2001). In other brackets, there is no statistical significance. These estimates
suggest that the positive effect of H-1B restrictions on foreign affiliate employment is being
driven by the heaviest users of H-1B visas.

Exploring Country Heterogeneity
        I also explore country heterogeneity. The largest countries of origin for H-1B visa holders are
China and India while many of the prominent examples of companies opening foreign affiliates
abroad in response to H-1B restrictions are concentrated in Canada31. Canada is a special case for
US firms; cities like Vancouver and Toronto are geographically close to Silicon Valley and other
multinational headquarters, but Canada has much less restrictive high-skilled immigration
policies than the US. These characteristics mean that the fixed costs of offshoring are relatively
low. These facts suggest that the expansion of foreign affiliate activity could operate through two
channels: (1) a direct channel, whereby multinationals expand foreign affiliate activity in
countries where the raw human capital they need is located (e.g. India or China), or (2) an
indirect channel, whereby multinationals expand foreign affiliate activity in countries like
Canada where it is easy to open foreign affiliates housing immigrants from other countries.


30
     As defined in (Jensen and Kletzer 2010). It includes industries such as software publishing and scientific research and development services.
31
     http://www.talenteconomy.io/2017/06/19/tighter-immigration-policy-pushes-firms-open-foreign-satellite-offices/

                                                                                                                                                 20
Canada is also a special case due to geographic proximity. To test the relative effects, I construct
two samples - one of foreign affiliates in China and India (the "raw human capital" countries),
and one of foreign affiliates in Canada ­ and run the baseline differences-in-differences
regression model on these different samples, shown in Columns 2 and 3 of Table 6. This
approach is an imperfect way of measuring direct and indirect flows, but it does provide some
sense of the possible operational channels. The effects are statistically significant, positive, and
larger than the base sample for both subsets, suggesting that a lot of the expansion was
concentrated in these three countries. However, a fourth regression ­ shown in Column 4 ­ that
excludes Canada, India, and China shows that these three countries are not the only ones
impacted. The coefficient is smaller when the three countries are excluded, but it is still
economically and statistically significant. Hence, while expansion in response to immigration
restrictions was concentrated in Canada, China, and India, they were not the only countries
affected.

Extensive Margin
   The results thus far show the effect of immigration restrictions on foreign affiliate
employment at the intensive margin; because foreign affiliate employment was logged in all
regressions to this point, regressions so far have only captured the change in employment at
foreign affiliates that existed in both 2001 and the later post-policy period. It does not capture the
effect of any foreign affiliates that were opened after the policy change in response to the policy.
Both effects are of interest here, and in fact, any impact on the extensive margin represent a
much stronger strategic response by firms ­ and a larger long-term impact ­ than an impact on
the intensive margin.

   To measure the extensive margin effect, I use the long-differenced regression specification,
but I change the dependent variable to a binary variable equal to one if the firm has a foreign
affiliate in a given country by the post-policy year and equal to zero otherwise. I use a linear
probability model so that I can include time trends, but the results are robust to a logit model.
The results are shown in Table 7, and illustrate a statistically significant and consistent response
on the extensive margin ­ no matter the year ­ to the H-1B cap change in 2004. An important
caveat to the results must be made here: as noted in the data section, each firm may report on a



                                                                                                       21
consolidated basis for multiple affiliates in the same country under certain conditions,32 so I
aggregate all foreign affiliate activity up to the host country level for a given parent firm for a
given year. This implies that effects on the extensive margin will only be observed when a firm
enters a new country; the extensive margin results will not, for example, reflect a firm opening a
foreign affiliate in Vancouver if it already has a foreign affiliate in Toronto. Hence, the results
are likely smaller than the true effect.

     Table 8 drills slightly deeper into the extensive margin results using 201333. Column 1 of
Table 8 shows that that the 2004 cap decline made a one percentage point more H-1B dependent
firm 0.2% more likely to open a foreign affiliate in a new country than the average firm by 2013.
Column 2 shows the same regression specification, but instead examines the likelihood of a
multinational initiating R&D activity abroad. Here, the coefficient is slightly larger, as expected,
since one would expect skilled immigration restrictions to affect the opening of an R&D lab, but
not necessarily to affect the opening of a new manufacturing facility.

     The coefficients in Columns 1 and 2 are fairly small, even if they are statistically significant.
This is in large part due to the measurement issue described above, as well as the preponderance
of zeros in the data; the average US multinational firm in the BEA data is active in about two
countries, while the dataset includes 50 countries. To counteract this noise, Column 3 shows the
same regression but for a subset of the 25 countries with the most activity in the data, and with
the binary version of the independent variable. As expected, the coefficients become
substantially larger. The results show that the 2004 cap decline made highly H-1B dependent
firms 6% more likely to start conducting R&D in a new country than a non-H-1B-dependent
firm.

Summary and Additional Robustness Checks
     In combination, the results show that immigration restrictions had an economically and
statistically significant effect on offshoring, both on the intensive and extensive margins. But the
effect is not spread throughout all firms; the firms that responded most strongly were firms that
(1) were R&D-intensive, (2) operated in industries where services could be easily offshored, and


32
   These conditions are that the affiliates operate in the same country and same industry classification or are integral parts of the same business
operation.
33
   The results are robust to the choice of another year; I chose 2013 in response to space constraints.

                                                                                                                                                      22
(3) depended heavily on H-1B visas prior to the restrictions taking place. The effect is also not
geographically spread out; Canada, China, and India saw the largest expansion in US
multinational foreign affiliate employment.

    I implement several additional robustness checks. First, I use 2002 as the base year instead of
2001. Second, instead of normalizing applications by US employment as the H-1B dependency
measure, I use the count of applications. The results are robust to both of these robustness
checks. A third robustness check addresses the concern that LCAs are an imperfect measure of
demand for skilled H-1B visas. In particular, we know that some firms continuously file LCA
applications and only utilize some of them. In addition, some of these applications are for
continuing and transfer H-1B visa applications. A robustness check that measures H-1B
dependency in 2001 ­ our treatment measure ­ using H-1B petitions to USCIS in 2001 rather
than LCA applications to DOL in 2001 can be found in the Appendix and confirms that the
results are not driven by the imperfectness of LCAs as a measure of demand. Fourth, the results
are robust to industry-country interacted fixed effects. Finally, the Appendix also includes a
version of the baseline differences-in-differences that combines the extensive and intensive
margin by using the inverse hyperbolic sine of foreign affiliate employment as the dependent
variable rather than the natural log.

Effect on the Share of Foreign Affiliate Employment Abroad
    The analysis above aimed to establish that the level of foreign affiliate employment increased
in response to skilled immigration restrictions. However, it did not establish whether the share of
foreign affiliate employment increased. In other words, did US multinational firms simply
increase their foreign affiliate employment while also increasing their domestic employment, or
was there a shift in the location of their employees? An increase in the share of employment
abroad in response to immigration restrictions would provide even stronger evidence in support
of a substitution effect.

    I use a panel difference-in-differences regression approach similar to those used in the
analysis above to address this question:

                      =  +  +  + 1 1   + 



                                                                                                    23
where  is the share of firm i's employment in country c in time t relative to firm i's total
employment. The H-1B dependency measure is the same measure as used in all prior regressions
up to this point and can be shown in either continuous or binary form. Table 9 shows the results;
that while on average there is no clear evidence of any shift in the share of employment, when
the sample is constrained to those countries where the expansion of activity as a direct response
to skilled immigration restrictions was concentrated, there was a clear shift towards those
countries. US multinationals appear to have increased the share ­ not just the levels ­ of their
total employment and patenting to three main countries: Canada, India, and China.

Estimation Issues
   The main threat to identification comes from any shocks correlated with both the timing of
the H-1B policy and its effects across firms. In particular, the tech bubble in the late 1990s and
early 2000s may have been correlated with increases in the cap. After the bubble burst, the H-1B
visa cap was higher than average and the economy experienced a downturn. To the extent that
the recession particularly affected H-1B dependent firms, the estimates could be biased. The
direction, however, is unclear. They may have been more likely to increase foreign affiliate
activity to escape the recession in the US, which would lead to upward bias, or they may have
been more likely to shrink their firms, which would lead to a downward bias. However, the
robustness of the results to the inclusion of industry time trends in all regressions suggests that
this is not problematic; any unobserved demand shocks for highly skilled workers would need to
vary across firms within the same industry for there to be any bias.

   A separate concern surrounds the parallel trends assumption and any anticipation of the cap
decline; namely, did firms behave differently leading up to the policy change in anticipation of
soon experiencing immigration constraints, and did these behavioral differences correlate with
my constructed measures of H-1B dependency? Figure 4 does not show any clear change in
trends prior to 2004, and more rigorous tests, shown in Tables 3-7, further support the case that
firms did not change behavior in advance. Qualitative evidence also supports the argument; an
immigration lawyer told the author in discussion surrounding this policy change that: "my clients
weren't expecting it...and keep in mind that at that time, the cap wasn't being met...[the firms
thought that even if] the cap is not increased...who cares, we don't meet it anyway."



                                                                                                      24
   Both concerns are further ameliorated by the results of a second strategy, which does not
suffer from the same sources of potential bias and yet produces consistent results.

   5.2 Identification Strategy 2: Utilizing the Random Lottery Feature of the H-1B
       Application Process

   The difference-in-differences approach relies on pre-existing variation in demand for foreign-
born skilled workers to identify how constraints in supply ­ induced by a change in the cap ­
affected foreign affiliate employment. It is unable, however, to measure the precise constraints
firms faced as the cap grew more restrictive. I therefore also take another approach that measures
how constrained each firm was as the cap grew more restrictive over time by comparing ­ at the
firm-level ­ LCA requests (demand) and issued H-1B visas (realized supply). A feature of the H-
1B allocation system ­ the lottery ­ allows for a causal interpretation of the effect of constrained
foreign-born skilled worker supply on the offshoring of skilled jobs.

   The identification in this strategy exploits random variation in the allocation of H-1B
workers across U.S. multinational firms resulting from the H-1B lotteries of 2007 and 2008. In
both of those years, the number of cap-dependent H-1B visa petitions submitted within the first
month of the filing period far exceeded the annual limit of available permits in those years, as
shown in Table 1. In those years, all petitions received by the final receipt date (April 3 and April
8 respectively) were put through a computer-generated random selection process that selected
which petitions would be processed. This produced a random shock to the supply of H-1B
workers; some firms were successful in the lottery, while others were not. My approach exploits
this random H-1B variation.

   The dependent variable in this approach is the same as the differences-in-differences
approach: the change in foreign affiliate employment. However, instead of regressing the change
in foreign affiliate employment on a measure of the firm's pre-policy-change H-1B dependency,
I regress it on a measure of excess demand for foreign labor that is driven by exogenous supply
shocks. Following Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2015a), I calculate excess demand as the difference
between the firm-level demand for new H-1B workers (LCA applications that were filed early)
and the firm-level capped supply of H-1B workers (the lottery allocation of permits). I scale this
absolute measure of excess demand by the firm's US-based employment in 2007; an equivalent


                                                                                                   25
number of H-1B permits denied to two firms will represent a much larger shock for firms with
few workers in the US as opposed to for firms with many workers in the US. There are two
mechanisms at work in this approach, both generating variation in normalized excess demand
across firms. The first is the same mechanism at work in the differences-in-differences approach:
firms that are more H-1B-dependent will feel the effects of H-1B supply constraints more acutely
than those that do not hire many H-1B workers. The second is the unexpected supply shock
coming from the lottery.

    I regress the change in foreign affiliate employment growth between a pre-lottery year (2005)
and a post-lottery year (2010-2014) on the firm-level excess demand in the two lottery years
combined (2007 and 2008), as shown in the following specification:

     (_,-2005 )
                                  2007+2008
                               
                    =  +  + 1 (             ) + 2 07+08
                                                        + ,-2005
                                _2007

Where, as before, i indexes the firm, j indexes the industry, c indexes the country, and t is a post-
lottery year. FA_emp is foreign affiliate employment in country c by firm i, ExcessDemand is the
measure of excess demand (the number of LCA applications minus the number of H-1B permits
received) by firm i in lottery years 2007 and 2008 combined, US_emp is a multinational's
employment in the US in 2007, 07+08
                                    controls for the number of LCA applications a given
firm submitted, and  and  capture industry (NAICS 4-digit level) and country time trends
respectively. Results are robust to the exclusion or inclusion of the control for number of LCA
applications. The dependent variable is the logged differenced foreign affiliate employment of
firm i in country c, between a post-lottery year (t) and a pre-lottery year (2005). I expect 1to be
positive; firms that lost a larger share of their H-1B petitions should be more likely to expand
their foreign affiliate activity. All standard errors are clustered at the firm level.

        Table 10 shows that 1 is indeed significantly positive. The columns display foreign
affiliate employment growth one, two, three, four, and five years after the lottery and illustrate
that there was a persistent positive effect. The results show that a random negative shock to H-
1B supply equal to one percentage point of initial employment caused an increase in the foreign
affiliate growth rate of between 12 and 16%. This positive effect is consistent with the results

                                                                                                     26
from the differences-in-differences approach34, and provides further support for the hypothesis
that restrictions on high skilled immigration cause increased offshoring of high-skilled jobs.

           Translating these coefficients into the number of jobs offshored, I find that about 0.3
foreign affiliate jobs were created for every unfilled H-1B position. Additional details of this
calculation can be found in Appendix A7. This 0.3 estimate of substitution should be treated with
caution and is likely a lower bound for several reasons. First, it relies on calculations on the
intensive margin and does not consider increased foreign affiliate employment on the extensive
margin. Second, there are likely at least some firms that did not submit their petition(s) in time to
be considered for the lottery, which means that their behavior is not captured in the analysis.
Third, this estimate only captures how existing firms modified their strategy; new firms born into
the visa-restrictive world may have incorporated offshoring into their strategy from the
beginning. Finally, the estimate does not include foreign multinational company behavior, and
one would expect that foreign MNCs would be even more likely to substitute foreign-born US-
based skilled workers for foreign-born skilled workers at headquarters or other foreign affiliates.

           One might be concerned that some firms anticipated the lottery and increased their
submitted applications to improve their chances of winning the lottery. The two lottery years in
the empirical analysis were selected precisely to address this concern; these were the first two
years in which a lottery was held to distribute all H-1B visas. To further address this concern,
Table A5-3 in the Appendix duplicates the same analysis, but with only the 2007 lottery, and
finds the same qualitative result: that a random negative shock to H-1B supply caused an
increase in the foreign affiliate growth rate.


     6. Conclusion

     This paper documents the impact of restrictive skilled immigration policies on the offshoring
of jobs by US MNCs using a unique firm-level panel dataset that links H-1B visa data and data
on the financial and operating characteristics of US multinational firms and their foreign
affiliates. I utilize two identification strategies, the first of which exploits the 2004 drop in the H-


34
  The coefficients are not directly comparable. The two approaches have different samples (the first is much bigger since it includes
multinationals that have never applied for an H-1B while the second only includes the subset of multinationals applying for LCAs in one of those
two years). Furthermore, the key regressor is measured differently.

                                                                                                                                             27
1B visa cap, while the second exploits variation in firm-level excess demand from the H-1B visa
lotteries in high demand years. Both strategies yield the same result: that foreign affiliate
employment increased as a direct response to increasingly stringent restrictions on H-1B visas.
This effect is driven on the extensive and intensive margins; firms were more likely to open
foreign affiliates in new countries in response, and employment increased at existing foreign
affiliates. The effect is strongest among R&D-intensive firms in industries where services could
more easily be offshored. The effect was somewhat geographically concentrated: foreign affiliate
employment increased both in countries like India and China with large quantities of high-skilled
human capital and in countries like Canada with more relaxed high-skilled immigration policies
and closer geographic proximity. These empirical results also are supported by interviews with
US multinational firms and an immigration lawyer.35

        Despite the outsized role that multinational firms play in the economy ­ for example, US
multinational firms are responsible for 80% of US R&D and employ about ¼ of US private
employees ­ policy debates surrounding immigration have largely overlooked the fact that
multinational companies faced with decreased access to visas for skilled workers have an
offshoring option, namely, hiring the foreign labor they need at their foreign affiliates. This is the
first paper to provide evidence that multinational firms do in fact utilize this option ­ both at the
extensive and the intensive margin ­ and to examine the relationship between foreign affiliate
employees and immigrants, in contrast to the relationship between immigrants and native-born
workers.

        The results have important implications for understanding how multinational firms respond
to artificial constraints on resources and how they globally re-distribute those resources. The
results also have important policy implications; the offshoring of jobs appears to be an
unforeseen consequence of restricting skilled immigration flows. Even if H-1B immigrants
displace some native workers, any policies that are motivated by concerns about the loss of
native jobs should consider that policies aimed at reducing immigration have the unintended
consequence of encouraging firms to offshore jobs abroad.




35
     Quotes from these interviews can be found in the Appendix.

                                                                                                    28
   The finding that skilled foreign-born workers will be hired at foreign affiliates rather than in
the US also has important implications for the innovative capacity of the US. Skilled immigrants
have been shown to have outsized impacts on innovation in the host country through spillovers
(e.g. Hunt et al. 2017; Moser, Voena, and Waldinger 2014). The spatial diffusion of these
spillovers disappears with distance (Burchardi et al. 2019) since innovative spillovers are
geographically localized (Jaffe 1986; Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and Henderson 1993; Marshall 1890).
From a nationalistic perspective, this is problematic; if skilled foreign-born workers are at a US
firm's foreign affiliate instead of in the US, the innovative spillovers that they generate will go to
another country instead. Furthermore, the finding that immigrants often are not equally
innovative outside the United States (Kahn and Macgarvie 2016) has even wider welfare
implications. In short, restrictive H-1B policies could not only be exporting more jobs and
businesses to countries like Canada, but they also could be causing the U.S.'s innovative
capacity to fall behind. Exploring the effects on the location and direction of innovation are the
subject of ongoing effort.




                                                                                                     29
References

Agrawal, Ajay, John McHale, and Alex Oettl. 2018. "Does Scientist Immigration Harm US
     Science? An Examination of Spillovers." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
     Paper Series No. 24519.
Akcigit, Ufuk, John Grigsby, and Tom Nicholas. 2017. "Immigration and the Rise of American
     Ingenuity." NBER Working Paper.
Argote, Linda, Bill Mcevily, and Ray Reagans. 2003. "Framework and Review of Emerging
     Themes Managing Knowledge in Organizations: An Integrative Framework and Review of
     Emerging Themes." Management Science 49(August 2014):571­82.
Arora, Ashish, Lee G. Branstetter, and Matej Drev. 2013. "Going Soft: How the Rise of
     Software-Based Innovation Led to the Decline of Japan's IT Industry and the Resurgence of
     Silicon Valley." Review of Economics and Statistics 95(3):757­75.
Arora, Ashish and Alfonso Gambardella, eds. 2005. From Underdogs to Tigers: The Rise and
     Growth of the Software Industry in Brazil, China, India, Ireland, and Israel. Oxford
     University Press.
Ashraf, Rasha and Rina Ray. 2017. "Human Capital, Skilled Immigrants, and Innovation."
     Working Paper.
Audretsch, David B. 1998. "Agglomeration and the Location of Innovative Activity." Oxford
     Review of Economic Policy 14(2):18­29.
Bessen, James and Robert M. Hunt. 2007. "An Empirical Look at Software Patents." Journal of
     Economics and Management Strategy 16(1):157­89.
Borjas, George J. 2003. "The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexaming the
     Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market." Quarterly Journal of Economics
     (November):1335­74.
Borjas, George J. 2005. "The Labor-Market Impact of High-Skill Immigration." American
     Economic Review 95(2):56­60.
Borjas, George J. and Kirk B. Doran. 2015. "How High-Skill Immigration Affects Science:
     Evidence from the Collapse of the USSR." Innovation Policy and the Economy 15(1):1­25.
Bound, John, Murat Demirci, Gaurav Khanna, and Sarah Turner. 2014. "Finishing Degrees and
     Finding Jobs: U.S. Higher Education and the Flow of Foreign IT Workers." NBER Working
     Paper 20505.
Bound, John, Gaurav Khanna, and Nicolas Morales. 2017. "Understanding the Economic Impact
     of the H-1B Program on the U.S." Population Studies Center Research Report 16­857.
Branstetter, Lee, Matej Drev, and Namho Kwon. 2018. "Get With the Program: Software-Driven
     Innovation in Traditional Manufacturing." Management Science.
Branstetter, Lee, Britta Glennon, and J. Bradford Jensen. 2018. "The IT Revolution and the
     Globalization of R&D." in Innovation Policy and the Economy, Volume 19, edited by J.
     Lerner and S. Stern. University of Chicago Press.
Burchardi, Konrad B., Thomas Chaney, Tarek A. Hassan, Lisa Tarquinio, and Stephen J. Terry.
     2019. "Immigration, Innovation, and Growth." NBER Working Paper.
Card, David. 2001. "Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
     of Higher Immigration." Journal of Labor Economics 19(1):22­64.
Card, David. 2009. "Immigration and Inequality." American Economic Review 99(2):1­21.
Chellaraj, Gnanaraj, Keith E. Maskus, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2008. "The Contribution of
     International Graduate Students to US Innovation." Review of International Economics
     16(3).
                                                                                            30
Choudhury, Prithwiraj. 2016. "Return Migration and Geography of Innovation in MNEs: A
     Natural Experiment of On-the-Job Learning of Knowledge Production by Local Workers
     Reporting to Return Migrants." Journal of Economic G 16(3):585­610.
Choudhury, Prithwiraj and Do Yoon Kim. 2018. "The Ethnic Migrant Inventor Effect:
     Codification and Recombination of Knowledge Across Borders." Strategic Management
     Journal.
Dimmock, Stephen G., Jiekun Huang, and Scott J. Weisbenner. 2019. Give Me Your Tired, Your
     Poor, Your High-Skilled Labor: H-1B Lottery Outcomes and Entrepreneurial Success.
Docquier, Frédéric and Hillel Rapoport. 2012. "Globalization, Brain Drain, and Development."
     Journal of Economic Literature 50(3):681­730.
Doran, Kirk, Alexander Gelber, and Adam Isen. 2016. The Effects of High-Skilled Immigration
     Policy on Firms: Evidence from Visa Lotteries.
Doran, Kirk and Chungeun Yoon. 2019. "Immigration and Invention: Evidence from the Quota
     Acts." NBER Work.
Foley, C. Fritz and William R. Kerr. 2013. "Ethnic Innovation and U.S. Multinational Firm
     Activity." Management Science 59(7):1529­44.
Freeman, Richard B. 2006. "People Flows in Globalization." Journal of Economic Perspectives
     20(2):145­70.
Friedberg, Rachel M. 2001. "The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market."
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4):1373­1408.
Ganguli, Ina. 2015. "Immigration and Ideas: What Did Russian Scientists `Bring' to the United
     States?" Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1):S257­88.
Ghosh, Anirban, Anna Maria Mayda, and Francesco Ortega. 2015. "The Impact of Skilled
     Foreign Workers on Firms: An Investigation of Publicly Traded U.S. Firms."
Gould, David M. 1994. "Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for U .
     S . Bilateral Trade Flows." The Review of Economics and Statistics 76(2):302­16.
Graham, Stuart J. H. and David C. Mowery. 2003. "Intellectual Property Protection in the U.S.
     Software Industry." Pp. 217­58 in Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy, edited by W.
     M. Cohen and S. Merrill. Washington DC: National Academies Press.
Hall, Bronwyn H. 2010. "The Internationalization of R&D." 1­36.
Hernandez, Exequiel. 2014. "Finding a Home Away from Home: Effects of Immigrants on
     Firms' Foreign Location Choice and Performance." Administrative Science Quarterly 59(1).
Hira, R. O. N. 2010. "The H-1B and L-1 Visa Programs." Economic Policy Institute Briefing
     Paper 1­19.
Hunt, Jennifer. 2011. "Which Immigrants Are Most Innovative and Entrepreneurial? Distinctions
     by Entry Visa." Journal of Labor Economics 29(3):417­57.
Hunt, Jennifer and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. 2010. "How Much Does Immigration Boost
     Innovation?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(2):31­56.
Hunt, Jennifer, Marjolaine Gauthier-loiselle, Source American, Economic Journal, No April, By
     Jennifer Hunt, and Marjolaine Gauthier-loiselle. 2017. "How Much Does Immigration
     Boost Innovation? 1 ^ Studied Immigration Impact on a Variety of Host Country." 2(2):31­
     56.
Iriyama, Akie, Yong Li, and Ravi Madhavan. 2010. "Spiky Globalization of Venture Capital
     Investments: The Influence of Prior Human Networks." Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal
     4(2):128­45.
Jaffe, Adam B. 1986. "Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms'

                                                                                          31
     Patents, Profits, and Market Value." American Economic Review 76(5):984­1001.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. "Geographic Localization
     of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 108(3):577­98.
Jensen, J. Bradford and Lori G. Kletzer. 2010. "Measuring Tradable Services and the Task
     Content of Offshorable Services Jobs Chapter." Pp. 309­35 in Labor in the New Economy,
     edited by K. G. Abraham, J. R. Spletzer, and M. Harper. University of Chicago Press.
Kahn, Shulamit and Megan J. Macgarvie. 2016. "How Important Is U.S. Location for Research
     in Science?" The Review of Economics and Statistics 98(2).
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William R. Kerr, and William F. Lincoln. 2015. "Firms and the Economics of
     Skilled Immigration." in Innovation Policy and the Economy. Vol. 15, edited by W. R.
     Kerr, S. Stern, and J. Lerner.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, William R Kerr, and William F. Lincoln. 2015. "Skilled Immigration and the
     Employment Structures of US Firms." Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1):S186.
Kerr, William R. 2008. "Ethnic Scientific Communities and International Technology
     Diffusion." The Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3):518­37.
Kerr, William R. and William F. Lincoln. 2010. "The Supply Side of Innovation: H1B Visa
     Reforms and U.S. Ethnic Invention." Journal of Labor Economics 28(3):473­508.
Kirkegaard, Jacob Funk. 2005. "IIE Working Paper 05-15 Outsourcing and Skill Imports:
     Foreign High-Skilled Workers on H-1B and L-1 Visas in the United States." October
     3(DECEMbEr).
Lofstrom, Magnus and Joseph Hayes. 2011. H-1Bs: How Do They Stack up to US Born
     Workers?
Lowell, B. Lindsay. 2001. "Skilled Temporary and Permanent Immigrants in the United States."
     Population Research and Policy Review 20(1):33­58.
MacGarvie, Megan. 2005. "The Determinants of International Knowledge Diffusion as
     Measured by Patent Citations." Economics Letters 87(1):121­26.
Marshall, Alfred. 1890. Principles of Economics.
Matloff, Norman. 2003. "On the Need for Reform of the H-1B Non-Immigrant Work Visa in
     Computer-Related Occupations." University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform
     36(101):1­99.
Mayda, Anna Maria, Francesc Ortega, Giovanni Peri, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. 2017. "The
     Effect of the H-1B Quota on Employment and Selection of Foreign-Born Labor."
Mithas, Sunil and Henry C. Lucas. 2010. "Are Foreign IT Workers Cheaper? U.S. Visa Policies
     and Compensation of Information Technology Professionals." Management Science
     56(5):745­65.
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger. 2014. "German Jewish Emigres and US
     Invention." American Economic Review 104(10):3222­55.
Nowrasteh, Alex. 2017. "The Economics of Immigration." Cato Journal 57(3):445­47.
Oettl, Alexander and Ajay Agrawal. 2008. "International Labor Mobility and Knowledge Flow
     Externalities." Journal of International Business Studies 39(8):1242­60.
Olney, William W. and Dario Pozzoli. 2018. The Impact of Immigration on Firm-Level
     Offshoring.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P., Giovanni Peri, and Greg C. Wright. 2013. "Immigration, Offshoring,
     and American Jobs." American Economic Review 103(5):1925­59.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P., Giovanni Peri, and Greg C. Wright. 2018. "Immigration, Trade and

                                                                                           32
      Productivity in Services: Evidence from U.K. Firms." Journal of International Economics
      112:88­108.
Patel, Pari and Keith Pavitt. 1991. "Large Firms in the Production of the World's Technology:
      An Important Case of `Non-Globalisation.'" Journal of International Business Studies
      (June):1­21.
Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. 2015a. "Foreign and Native Skilled Workers:
      What Can We Learn from H-1B Lotteries?" NBER Working Paper (21175).
Peri, Giovanni, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. 2015b. "STEM Workers, H-1B Visas, and
      Productivity in US Cities." Journal of Labor Economics 33(S1):S225­55.
Polanyi, Michael. 1958. Personal Knowledge, towards a Post Critical Epistemology. Chicago,
      IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Polanyi, Michael. 1966. The Tacit Dimension. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Salzman, Hal and B. Lindsay Lowell. 2007. Into the Eye of the Storm: Assessing the Evidence on
      Science and Engineering Education, Quality, and Workforce Demand.
Saxenian, Annalee. 2006. The New Argonauts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Serapio, Manuel G. and Donald H. Dalton. 1999. "Globalization of Industrial R&D: An
      Examination of Foreign Direct Investments in R&D in the United States." Research Policy
      28(2/3):303­16.
Siedschlag, Iulia, Donal Smith, Camelia Turcu, and Xiaoheng Zhang. 2013. "What Determines
      the Location Choice of R&D Activities by Multinational Firms?" Research Policy
      42(8):1420­30.
Singh, Jasjit. 2008. "Distributed R&D, Cross-Regional Knowledge Integration and Quality of
      Innovative Output." Research Policy 37(1):77­96.
Szulanski, Gabriel. 1996. "Exploring Internal Stickiness: Impediments to the Transfer of Best
      Practice Within the Firm." Strategic Management Journal 17(Winter Special Issue):27­43.
Tambe, Prasanna and Lorin M. Hitt. 2009. H-1B Visas, Offshoring, and the Wages of US
      Information Technology Workers.
Teece, D. J. 1977. "Technology Transfer by Multinational Firms: The Resource Cost of
      Transferring Technological Know-How." The Economic Journal 87(346):242­61.
Thursby, Marie C. and Jerry G. Thursby. 2006. Here or There? A Survey of Factors in
      Multinational R&D Location. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.
Turner, Patrick S. 2017. High-Skill Immigration and the Labor Market: Evidence from the H-1B
      Visa Program.
Wadhwa, Vivek, Annalee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Gereffi. 2007. "America's New
      Immigrant Entrepreneurs."
Wu, A. 2017. Skilled Immigration and Firm-Level Innovation: The US H-1B Lottery.
Xu, Sheng-Jun. 2016. "Skilled Labor Supply and Corporate Investment: Evidence from the H-1B
      Visa Program." SSRN Electronic Journal 1­52.




                                                                                           33
Figure 1: H-1B Cap Change Over Time




Notes: This figure plots the cap on the number of H-1B visas by fiscal year. Since the Immigration Act of 1990, there has been an
annual cap on the number of new H-1B visas that can be issued to private sector businesses. This cap is set by Congress and the
President. Throughout most of the 1990s, the cap was set at 65,000 visas and applications rarely outstripped supply. It was
increased to 195,000 visas by the American Competitiveness and Workforce Improvement Act of 1998 and the American
Competitiveness in the Twenty-First Century Act of 2000 (AC21). During this period, the cap limits were never reached. The
AC21 stipulated that this reversion would happen in the absence of any additional legislation, but, despite a trend towards less
restrictive labor labs, no legislation was enacted, and the cap level reverted back to 65,000. It was raised by 20,000 in 2006, but
those additional 20,000 could only be used for applicants with a graduate degree. Although in the early 2000s, the cap was not
binding, since the cap changed in 2004, it has been binding in every year. The identification in this paper exploits the sharp
reduction in the annual H-1B cap in fiscal year 2004.




                                                                                                                                34
Figure 2: H-1B Visa Submission Timeline




Notes: On the first business day of each April, USCIS begins accepting H-1B petitions from firms seeking permits that will count
towards the following fiscal year. Petitions are accepted on a first-come, first-served basis until the cap hits, at which point no
more petitions are processed. The end of the application period is demarcated by the "final receipt date", which is the date o n
which they receive enough applications to fill the remaining available permits under the cap. Any cap-subject petitions submitted
after the final receipt date are automatically rejected.




                                                                                                                                35
                                   In High-Demand Years
                           LCA    applications      were
Figure 3: In High-Demand Years, LCA Applications Were        filed earlier
                                                      Filed Earlier



            .4
            .3
            .2
            .1
               0




                   2000                        2005                        2010                         2015
                                                            Fiscal Year


Notes: The prerequisite to filing an H-1B petition with USCIS is obtaining an approved Labor Condition Application (LCA) from
the Department of Labor; the LCA is used in this paper as the primary measure of demand. LCA application data does not
include information about whether a given LCA is for a cap-subject H-1B visa, but the timing of petitions can be used to reveal
whether an LCA application is for a cap-subject H-1B visa. An LCA cannot be filed more than six months prior to the start of
employment. In order to apply for a visa for the following fiscal year (beginning in October), one would expect that firm to file
an LCA no earlier than April. Furthermore, an LCA is only valid for three years; the earlier the application submitted, the fewer
months a foreign-born worker would be eligible to work. In short, without any restrictions on H-1B supply, one would expect all
firms to apply for LCAs no earlier than April, and probably much later. However, the rising demand for H-1B visas and the first-
come, first-served nature of the distribution process changed firm behavior. Firms that needed cap-subject H-1B visas wanted to
submit their petitions as early as possible (i.e. April) to ensure the submission would be before the final receipt date, which also
meant the LCA application had to be submitted prior to April. This figure illustrates the change in the timing of LCA
applications; as demand for cap-dependent H-1B visas increased, LCA applications were filed earlier. I infer that LCA
applications submitted in the first quarter of the calendar year are for cap-dependent H-1B petitions.




                                                                                                                                36
Figure 4: Growth in Average Foreign Affiliate Employment by H-1B Dependency




Notes: This figure plots foreign affiliate employment growth for non-H-1B dependent firms relative to very H-1B dependent
firms. Non-H-1B-dependent firms had zero LCA applications in 2001, while very H-1B dependent firms were in the top category
of H-1B dependency in 2001. H-1B dependency is defined as the total number of H-1B positions requested in LCA applications
for a given multinational divided by that multinational's US employment in 2001. Categories of H -1B dependency are measured
throughout the paper by dividing non-zero LCA applications into five quantiles, with the top category divided into two groups.
The red line demarcates the year of the 2004 policy change. The figure shows that while foreign affiliate employment growth for
non-H-1B dependent firms remained fairly flat after the policy change, very H-1B dependent firms experienced rapid growth in
foreign affiliate employment after the policy change. Furthermore, the trajectory of foreign affiliate employment growth of both
types of firms remained parallel and quite flat prior to the policy change, in keeping with the parallel trends assumption. The
regression results confirm the associations in the raw data.




                                                                                                                             37
Table 1: Final Receipt Dates of the Cap-Subject H-1B Petition Filing Period in Each Fiscal Year
          Fiscal Year                  Final Receipt Date             Days in Filing Period        Number of Lottery-Subject
                                                                                                    H-1B Petitions Received
                                                                                                    During the Filing Period
              2004                      February 17, 2004                     323
              2005                       October 1, 2004                      184
              2006                      August 10, 2005                       132
              2007                        May 26, 2006                         56
             2008*                        April 3, 2007                         3                            150,000
             2009*                        April 7, 2008                         7                            163,000
              2010                     December 21, 2009                      265
              2011                      January 26, 2011                      301
              2012                     November 22, 2011                      236
              2013                        June 11, 2012                        72
             2014*                        April 7,2013                          7                            124,000
             2015*                        April 7, 2014                         7                            172,500
             2016*                        April 7, 2015                         7                            233,000
             2017*                        April 7, 2016                         7                            236,000
             2018*                        April 7, 2017                         5                            199,000
             2019*                        April 6, 2018                         5                            190,098



Notes: On the first business day of each April, USCIS begins accepting H-1B applications from firms seeking permits that will
count towards the following fiscal year. Since the H-1B visa program operates on a first-come, first-serve basis, petitions are
accepted until the cap hits, at which point no more petitions are processed. The end of the application period is demarcated by the
"final receipt date", which is the date on which they receive enough applications to fill the remaining available permits under the
cap. Any cap-subject petitions submitted after the final receipt date were automatically rejected. This date is announced by
USCIS in a press release every year, and it varies every year, as shown in the table above. In some years, USCIS received so
many petitions within the first week that all cap-subject petitions were distributed by lottery. These years are demarcated with a
star (*), and the fourth column shows the total number of petitions on which the lottery was run. For the purposes of this paper,
the most relevant are fiscal years 2008 and 2009.




                                                                                                                                38
Table 2: Summary Statistics
Summary Statistics of MNCs in 2001
                                                N           Mean              Std. Dev       10th percentile   90th percentile
 Reporter employment                            2263        7785.2            29915.7
 Ratio of LCA Applications to US                2263         0.176             0.812                0             0.2835
 Employment in percentage point units
 Number of countries active in                  2263         2.831             5.646
 Number of LCA applications                     2263         11.87             79.85

Summary Statistics of MNCs in 2013
                                              N                      Mean                Std. Dev
 Reporter employment                         2263                    6300.6              35868.7
 Number of countries active in               2263                    2.422                5.992

Summary Statistics of Existing Foreign Affiliates in 2001
                                              N                      Mean                Std. Dev
 FA Employment                               6407                    1151.0               3964.3
 FA R&D Expenditure                          6407                    2765.6              26276.7

Summary Statistics of Still-Existing Foreign Affiliates in 2013
                                              N                      Mean                Std. Dev
 FA Employment                               5482                    1559.4               8307.1
 FA R&D Expenditure                          5482                    5741.0              37289.6




                                                                                                                             39
Table 3: Effect on Foreign Affiliate Employment for All Firms, 1994-2014
                                        (1)               (2)              (3)                  (4)                  (5)
                                    ln(FA emp)        ln(FA emp)       ln(FA emp)        ln(FA R&D emp)          ln(FA R&D
                                                                                                                    emp)
 Continuous Treatment                0.0625***                                               0.0614***
                                     (0.0183)                                                (0.0184)
 Binary Treatment                                      0.274***                                                     0.283*
                                                       (0.0906)                                                    (0.155)
  year=2004 # Continuous                                                   0.0249
  Treatment                                                              (0.0164)
  year=2005 # Continuous                                                 0.0432**
  Treatment                                                              (0.0216)
  year=2006 # Continuous                                                  0.0408*
  Treatment                                                              (0.0230)
  year=2007 # Continuous                                                  0.0477*
  Treatment                                                              (0.0245)
  year=2008 # Continuous                                                 0.0562***
  Treatment                                                              (0.0171)
  year=2009 # Continuous                                                 0.0720***
  Treatment                                                              (0.0208)
  year=2010 # Continuous                                                 0.0522***
  Treatment                                                              (0.0192)
  year=2011 # Continuous                                                 0.0713***
  Treatment                                                              (0.0179)
  year=2012 # Continuous                                                 0.0848***
  Treatment                                                              (0.0172)
  year=2013 # Continuous                                                  0.103***
  Treatment                                                              (0.0179)
  year=2014 # Continuous                                                  0.132***
  Treatment                                                              (0.0222)
  Country FE                             Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes                  Yes
  Firm FE                                Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes                  Yes
  Year FE                                Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes                  Yes
  Observations                         137459            57984            137459               6542                 2293
  R2                                    0.429            0.429             0.429               0.408                0.410
  F                                     11.68            9.140             6.334               11.13                3.350
Firm-clustered standard errors in parentheses
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


Notes: This table shows the results of the baseline differences-in-differences approach. The timeframe is 1994-2014 and the
dependent variable is ln(foreign affiliate employment). I control for country, firm, and year fixed effects in all columns. All
columns utilize an independent variable constructed as the interaction between a dummy variable equal to one in 2004-onwards
and zero before, and a measure of H-1B dependency. In the continuous case, H-1B dependency is measured as the total number
of LCA applications for a given multinational divided by that multinational's US employment in 2001. In the binary case, it is a
new variable equal to one if the firm was in the top group of H-1B dependency in 2001, and zero if the firm had zero LCA
applications in 2001. Column 1 shows the results of the continuous version, while column 2 shows the results of the binary
version. Both are statistically and economically significant. The coefficient in the binary version tells us that the 2004 policy
change caused highly H-1B dependent firms to increase their foreign affiliate employment by 27% more than a non-H-1B
dependent firm. Column 3 includes time-varying effects, where the continuous treatment is interacted with the post-policy year.
The increasing coefficients over time suggest that the firm response to the cap change was not a one-off effect, and in fact
provide evidence that firms accelerated offshoring over time as constraints became tighter. Columns 4 and 5 measure the effect of
the 2004 H-1B policy on foreign affiliate R&D employment specifically. An important caveat is that the R&D employment
variable is only available in benchmark years, which in my sample includes 1994, 1999, 2004, 2009, and 2014.




                                                                                                                              40
Table 4: Effect on Growth in Foreign Affiliate Employment for All Firms, 2001 Base Year
                                (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)         (11)        (12)        (13)
                               2002        2003        2004        2005        2006       2007        2008        2009        2010        2011         2012        2013         2014
 Ratio of LCAs to US-         0.0113      0.0084      0.0140     0.0316*     0.0397**   0.0498*     0.0451**    0.0443*     0.0330*     0.0578***    0.0650***   0.0722***     0.0628
 based Employment in         (0.0103)    (0.0120)    (0.0148)    (0.0178)    (0.0186)   (0.0262)    (0.0201)    (0.0235)    (0.0195)    (0.0222)     (0.0252)    (0.0248)     (0.0434)
 2001 in percentage
 point units

  Industry FE                      Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
  Country FE                       Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
  Observations                    5619      5277      4657        4418        4343        4122        3798        4160        3687        3449        3237         3130        3277
  R2                              0.052     0.062     0.086       0.085       0.091       0.134       0.143       0.147       0.162       0.181       0.196        0.208       0.198
  Adjusted R2                     0.018     0.026     0.046       0.043       0.050       0.092       0.100       0.107       0.119       0.138       0.151        0.162       0.155
  F                               1.198     0.492     0.895       3.164       4.527       3.606       5.040       3.554       2.852       6.754       6.682        8.481       2.096
Standard errors in parentheses
Standard errors clustered at the firm level
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01



Notes: Each column represents a long difference in logged foreign affiliate employment between 2001 and a later year. We would expect null results in 2002-2003 (pre-policy
change), and positive results in 2005-2014 (post-policy change), and this is exactly what we see. The key independent variable is my measure of H-1B dependency, defined as the
total number of LCA applications for a given multinational divided by that multi national's US employment in 2001. The fixed effects account for industry (NAICS 4-digit level)
and country time trends. The results show that firms that were one percentage point more H-1B dependent than average saw a 3-8% larger increase in foreign affiliate employment
than average, as a result of increased immigration restrictions resulting from the 2004 cap drop. Note that the differences in observations in each year are driven by the fact that the
dependent variable is logged; hence any observations equal to zero are dropped. Thus this regression only measures the effect on the intensive margin.




                                                                                                                                                                                     41
Table 5: Effect on Growth in Foreign Affiliate Employment for All Firms, 2001-2013
                                                    (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
                                                  Baseline       Controlling        Base year        Most R&D-          Nonlinear
                                                                for Pre-trend     patent control      Intensive        Specification
 Ratio of LCAs to US Employment in 2001          0.0722***        0.0684**          0.0893***          0.126**
 in percentage point units                       (0.0248)         (0.0283)          (0.0282)          (0.0551)

 Change in ln(FA emp), 1994-1999                                 -0.0818**
                                                                 (0.0326)
 2nd Quantile of H-1B Dependency in 2001                                                                                  0.0509
                                                                                                                          (0.108)
 3rd Quantile of H-1B Dependency in 2001                                                                                 -0.00229
                                                                                                                          (0.118)
 4th Quantile of H-1B Dependency in 2001                                                                                 -0.0518
                                                                                                                         (0.0990)
 5th Quantile of H-1B Dependency in 2001                                                                                 -0.0792
                                                                                                                         (0.135)
 6th Quantile of H-1B Dependency in 2001                                                                                   -0.129
                                                                                                                          (0.154)
  Top Quantile of H-1B Dependency in                                                                                      0.462**
  2001                                                                                                                    (0.209)
  Industry FE                                       Yes             Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
  Country FE                                        Yes             Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
  Patent Group FE                                                                      Yes
  Observations                                     3130            1913               3130               488              3130
  R2                                               0.208           0.247              0.211             0.261             0.209
  F                                                8.481           6.108              2.636             5.250             1.550
Firm-clustered standard errors in parentheses
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


Notes: The dependent variable in every column is the long difference in logged foreign affiliate employment between 2001 and
2013. The key independent variable in columns 1-4 is my measure of H-1B dependency, defined as the total number of LCA
applications for a given MNC divided by that MNC's US employment in 2001. The first column duplicates Table 2, column 8,
and serves as a reference baseline. The second column includes a control for the 1994-1999 pre-trend as a robustness check.
Reassuringly, the coefficient of interest gets slightly smaller, but remains positive and statistically significant, further reassuring
endogeneity concerns. Column three addresses the concern that results may be driven by systematic growth rate differences
across firms of different size, internationalization, or innovativeness to begin with. If, for instance high-patenting firms naturally
expand their activity abroad more quickly than non-patenting firms, even within the same industry, then my results could reflect
that correlation rather than the effect of the policy change. I therefore tested whether the coefficient of interest changes when
including controls for the size or type of firm in terms of their 2001 employment quantile, in terms of their 2001 sales quantile, in
terms of their 2001 R&D spending quantile, in terms of their 2001 total patenting quantile, and in terms of the number of foreign
affiliates quantile in 2001. These controls are included as group fixed effects. The identification in these regressions, once various
controls are added, is now based on the comparison of trajectories within the same industry and same category ­ based on
employment size or sales size or R&D size or patenting amount or degree of internationalization, depending on the control.
Column 3 results of a specification that contains indicators for each firm's 2001 patenting quantile; the other results can b e
requested separately but show the same result, which is that the main results remain qualitatively unaffected. Column 4 shows the
results of the same baseline regression run on firms that were in the top 20% of R&D-intensive firms in 2001 and seem to suggest
that the results are driven by the firms conducting high-skilled activity, as expected. Finally, column 5 shows a non-linear
approach, whereby MNCs are divided into groups according to their 2001 H-1B dependence. I build 7 categories of
multinationals, where the base category is all multinationals with zero LCA applications, and the remainder are divided into five
quantiles, with the top category divided into two groups. The table shows large, positive, and statistically significant coefficients
for the top bracket (with LCA application-US employment ratio of at least 0.0158 in 2001). In other brackets, there is no
statistical significance. These estimates suggest that the positive effect of H-1B restrictions on foreign affiliate employment is
being driven by the heaviest users of H-1B visas. Results are robust to the choice of any post-2004 year, but I only show 2013
results here due to space constraints and constraints due to the confidentiality of the data.



                                                                                                                                    42
Table 6: Exploring Country-level Heterogeneity in Growth in Foreign Affiliate Employment for All Firms
                                        (1)                    (2)                    (3)                         (4)
                                     Baseline                Canada              China & India          Excluding CA CN & IN
 Continuous Treatment                0.0615***               0.105**               0.223***                    0.0422***
                                     (0.0176)               (0.0424)               (0.0319)                    (0.0153)

 Country FE                             Yes                    No                     No                           Yes

 Firm FE                                Yes                    Yes                    Yes                          Yes

  Year FE                                Yes                   Yes                    Yes                          Yes
  Observations                         137459                 12220                  5704                        119207
  R2                                    0.429                 0.840                  0.676                        0.315
  Adjusted R2                           0.420                 0.823                  0.643                        0.304
  F                                     12.14                 6.168                  49.14                        7.640
Standard errors in parentheses
Standard errors clustered at the firm level
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




Notes: This table explores heterogeneity in the location of expansion. The largest countries of origin for H-1B visa holders are
China and India while many of the prominent examples of companies opening foreign affiliates abroad in response to H-1B
restrictions are concentrated in Canada. Canada is a special case for US firms; cities like Vancouver and Toronto are
geographically close to Silicon Valley and other multinational headquarters, but Canada has much less restrictive high-skilled
immigration policies than the US. These characteristics mean that the fixed costs of offshoring are relatively low. To test whether
these are indeed the locations that see the most significant expansion, I construct two samples: one of foreign affiliates in China
and India, shown in column 2, and one of foreign affiliates in Canada, shown in column 3. All four columns show the same
regression as Column 1 of Table 3, but with different country subsamples, where as before, the dependent variable is logged
foreign affiliate employment and the independent variable of interest multiples H-1B dependency in 2001 by a post-2004
indicator variable. All specifications include firm and year fixed effects, but columns 2 and 3 do not include country fixed effects
since they are country subsamples. The effects are statistically significant, positive, and larger than the base sample in columns 2
and 3, suggesting that a lot of the expansion was concentrated in these three countries. However, a fourth regression ­ shown in
Column 4 ­ that excludes Canada, India, and China shows that these three countries are not the only ones impacted. The
coefficient is smaller when the three countries are excluded, but it is still economically and statistically significant. Hence, while
expansion in response to immigration restrictions was concentrated in Canada, China, and India, they were not the only countries
affected.




                                                                                                                                   43
Table 7: Effect of H-1B Policy Restriction on the Likelihood of a US MNC Entering a New Country
                               (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)              (6)               (7)               (8)              (9)
                              2006              2007             2008             2009              2010              2011             2012              2013             2014
 H-1B Dependency            0.00201**         0.00296**        0.00294**        0.00408**         0.00281**         0.00276*         0.00303**         0.00294**        0.00303**
 in 2001                   (0.000945)         (0.00123)        (0.00127)        (0.00162)         (0.00129)        (0.00142)         (0.00149)         (0.00149)        (0.00149)

  Industry FE                    Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
  Country FE                     Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes
  Observations                 108623          108623           108623           108623            108623            108623           108623            108623           108623
  R2                            0.014           0.023            0.024            0.029             0.026             0.028            0.031             0.032            0.041
  Adjusted R2                   0.012           0.021            0.022            0.027             0.023             0.026            0.028             0.029            0.038
  F                             4.507           5.799            5.391            6.344             4.706             3.757            4.128             3.881            4.152
Standard errors in parentheses
Standard errors clustered at the firm level
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




Notes: The dependent variable here is a binary variable equal to one if the firm had opened operations in a new country by a post-policy year (that they did not have in 2001) and
equal to zero otherwise. I use a linear probability model so that I can include time trends, but the results are robust to a logit model. The independent variable is my measure of H-
1B dependency, defined as the total number of LCA applications for a given multinational divided by that multinational's US employment in 20 01. Results show that that the 2004
cap decline made a one percentage point more H-1B dependent firm 0.2-0.4% more likely to open a foreign affiliate in a new country than the average firm. The results illustrate a
statistically significant and consistent response on the extensive margin ­ no matter the year ­ to the H-1B cap change in 2004. An important caveat to the results must be made
here: as noted in the data section, each firm may report on a consolidated basis for multiple affiliates in the same country under certain conditions, so I aggregate all foreign
affiliate activity up to the host country level for a given parent firm for a given year. This implies that effects on the extensive margin will only be observed when a firm enters a
new country; the extensive margin results will not, for example, reflect a firm opening a foreign affiliate in Vancouver if it already has a foreign affiliate in Toronto. Hence, the
results are likely smaller than the true effect.




                                                                                                                                                                                    44
Table 8: Effect on the Extensive Margin, Exploring Heterogeneity
                                             (1)                          (2)                               (3)
                                      DV: New FA by 2013          DV: New R&D by 2013              DV: New R&D by 2013
                                                                                                  Subsample of 25 countries
 Ratio of LCA Applications to                 0.00282*                    0.00317*
 US Employment in 2001 in                     (0.00151)                  (0.00172)
 percentage point units

 Binary form of H-1B                                                                                       0.0648**
 Dependency in 2001                                                                                        (0.0259)

  Industry FE                                    Yes                        Yes                               Yes
  Country FE                                     Yes                        Yes                               Yes
  Observations                                 108623                     108623                             8305
  R2                                            0.032                      0.025                             0.083
  Adjusted R2                                   0.029                      0.022                             0.060
  F                                             3.467                      3.411                             6.281
Standard errors in parentheses
Standard errors clustered at the firm level
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




Notes: The dependent variable here is a binary variable equal to one if the firm had opened new operations in a given country by
2013 (that they did not have in 2001) and equal to zero otherwise. I use a linear probability model so that I can include time
trends, but the results are robust to a logit model. The independent variable in the first two columns is my measure of H-1B
dependency, defined as the total number of LCA applications for a given multinational divided by that multinational's US
employment in 2001. In the third column, the independent variable is the binary version of H-1B dependency in 2001, comparing
the top quantile to the bottom quantile. Column 1 shows that that the 2004 cap decline made a one percentage point more H-1B
dependent firm 0.2% more likely to open a foreign affiliate in a new country than the average firm by 2013. Column 2 shows the
same regression specification, but with a look at the start of R&D. Here, the coefficient is even higher, suggesting that
immigration restrictions caused US multinationals to both start conducting R&D in more existing foreign affiliates, but also to
open more R&D-performing foreign affiliates. The effect is slightly larger on existing foreign affiliates starting to conduct R&D
than on new R&D-performing foreign affiliates, but it is positive and statistically significant in both cases. Column 3 shows that
the effect is even larger among highly H-1B dependent firms in a subset of 25 countries. The sample of countries in Columns 1
and 2 is fifty. Results are robust to the choice of any post-2004 year, but I only show 2013 results here due to space constraints
and constraints due to the confidentiality of the data.




                                                                                                                               45
Table 9: Effect on Foreign Affiliate Employment Share of Firm Employment, 1994-2014
                                               (1)                   (2)                       (3)                    (4)
                                          Emp Share,            Emp Share,                Emp Share,             Emp Share,
                                          All firms &        China, Canada, and           All firms &         China, Canada, and
                                           countries                India                  countries                 India
 Continuous Treatment                     -0.0000789             0.00487***
                                          (0.000270)             (0.00116)

 Binary Treatment                                                                          -0.00207                 0.0130**
                                                                                           (0.00167)               (0.00588)

 Firm FE                                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes

 Year FE                                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes

  Country FE                                  Yes                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes
  Observations                              296002                  32899                   134598                   16773
  R2                                         0.380                  0.709                    0.420                   0.752
  Adjusted R2                                0.375                  0.695                    0.413                   0.735
  F                                         0.0855                  17.52                    1.545                   4.906
Standard errors in parentheses
Standard errors clustered at the firm level
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


Notes: This table reflects a differences-in-differences approach that utilizes the panel dataset all at once, rather than a series of
long-differenced cross-sectional regressions. The timeframe is 1994-2014 and the dependent variable is the share of firm i's
foreign affiliate employment in country c in time t. I control for country, firm, and year fixed effects in all columns. All columns
utilize an independent variable constructed as the interaction between a dummy variable equal to one in 2004-onwards and zero
before, and a measure of H-1B dependency. In the continuous case, H-1B dependency is measured as the total number of LCA
applications for a given multinational divided by that multinational's US employment in 2001. In the binary case, it is a new
variable equal to one if the firm was in the top group of H-1B dependency in 2001, and zero if the firm had zero LCA
applications in 2001. Columns 1 and 2 show the results of the continuous version, while columns 3 and 4 show the results of the
binary version. The sample in columns 1 and 3 is all firms in all years, while in columns 2 and 4, it is constrained to the three
countries most impacted by foreign affiliate expansion in response to skilled immigration restrictions. On average (in the full
sample), there is no clear evidence of any shift in the share of employment. However, when the sample is constrained to those
countries where the expansion of activity as a direct response to skilled immigration restrictions was concentrated (Canada, India,
and China), there was a clear shift of firm employment share towards those countries.




                                                                                                                                  46
Table 10: Effect on Growth in Foreign Affiliate Employment for All Firms, 2005 Base Year
                                      (1)               (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)
                                     2010              2011                 2012                2013                 2014
 Adjusted Excess Demand in          0.0484           0.137***              0.121**             0.161**              0.142*
 2007-8                            (0.0334)          (0.0496)             (0.0499)            (0.0681)             (0.0836)

 Number of LCAs in 2007-8         -0.0000989       -0.000342**          -0.000205            -0.000358*            -0.000295
                                  (0.000113)        (0.000139)          (0.000157)           (0.000185)           (0.000216)

 Industry FE                          Yes              Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes

  Country FE                           Yes             Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes
  Observations                        4308            4029                 3776                 3685                3834
  R2                                  0.140           0.162                0.172                0.190               0.179
  Adjusted R2                         0.101           0.121                0.131                0.149               0.138
  F                                   1.093           3.891                3.192                2.840               1.493
Standard errors in parentheses
Standard errors clustered at the firm level
* p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


Notes: Each column represents a long difference in logged foreign affiliate employment between 2005 and a post-lottery year
(2010-2014). The key independent variable is my measure of adjusted excess demand, defined as the total number of cap-subject
LCA applications minus cap-subject H-1B petitions issued for a given multinational in 2007 and 2008, divided by that
multinational's US employment in 2007. This number is multiplied by 100 for purposes of interpretation. The regression also
includes a control for the number of LCA applications, since lottery randomization is at the petition, not firm, level. The fixed
effects account for industry (NAICS 4-digit level) and country time trends. The results show that a random negative shock to H-
1B supply equal to one percentage point of initial employment caused an increase in the foreign affiliate growth rate of between
12 and 16%.




                                                                                                                               47
