                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        RELABELING, RETIREMENT AND REGRET

                                         Jonathan Gruber
                                          Ohto Kanninen
                                          Terhi Ravaska

                                       Working Paper 27534
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27534


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




The research reported herein was performed pursuant to grant RDR18000003 from the US Social
Security Administration (SSA) funded as part of the Retirement and Disability Research
Consortium. The opinions and conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not
represent the opinions or policy of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or NBER.
Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes
any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy,
completeness, or usefulness of the contents of this report. Reference herein to any specific
commercial product, process or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise
does not necessarily constitute or imply endorsement, recommendation or favoring by the United
States Government or any agency thereof. We also thank The Finnish Centre for Pensions for
financial support and support in acquiring the data. We wish to thank various participants in
seminars and conferences who have commented on the paper. In particular, we thank Roope
Uusitalo and Satu Nivalainen. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jonathan Gruber, Ohto Kanninen, and Terhi Ravaska. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Relabeling, Retirement and Regret
Jonathan Gruber, Ohto Kanninen, and Terhi Ravaska
NBER Working Paper No. 27534
July 2020
JEL No. H55,J26

                                          ABSTRACT

Focal retirement ages are a central feature of Social Security programs around the world, and
provide a potentially powerful tool for policy makers who are interested in reforming retirement
systems to address the growing funding shortfalls. But these tools often come hand in hand with
significant changes in the financial structure of Social Security that can have independent, and
potentially deleterious, impacts on retirees. In this paper, we use a major reformulation of the
retirement system in Finland, featuring a relabeling of retirement ages with modest and
continuous changes in financial incentives allows us to separately estimate the impact of
relabeling from financial incentives in driving retirement decisions. We find that relabeling is
particularly powerful as a determinant of date of retirement. Both graphical evidence and
estimated hazard models reveal an enormous change in retirement when individuals face a newly
defined "normal retirement" age. We also present a new approach to assessing the welfare
implications of induced earlier retirement: looking at the impact on return to work. We show that
the marginal workers induced to retire by relabeling are much more likely to return to work over
the next three years than is the typical worker. This suggests that there is a marginal increase in
regret among those who respond to this change in retirement ages.

Jonathan Gruber                                  Terhi Ravaska
Department of Economics, E52-434 MIT             VATT Institute for Economic
50 Memorial Drive                                Research
Cambridge, MA 02142                              Arkadiankatu 7
and NBER                                         P.O.Box 1279
gruberj@mit.edu                                  00101, Helsinki
                                                 Finland
Ohto Kanninen                                    Terhi.ravaska@vatt.fi
VATT Institute for Economic Research
Pitkänsillanranta 3 A (6th floor) FIN-00530
Helsinki
Finland
ohto.kanninen@gmail.com
        Developed countries around the world face enormous long run deficits with respect to their

public pension systems. As a result, pension reform is a constant source of public policy debate. A wide

variety of reform strategies have been contemplated and/or implemented around the world. A

common approach to addressing such fiscal deficits is to reform the underlying structure of pension

plans ­ most notably by changing either the "early retirement age" at which individuals can first qualify

for benefits or the "normal retirement age" around which benefit determination is centered.

        The focus on changing these ages as a tool of pension reform is natural given results such as

those in Figure 1, created using data from Gruber and Wise (1999a). Figure 1 shows the conditional

retirement rate at early retirement and normal retirement across a sample of developed countries, as a

multiple of the average of the retirement rate in the year before and after (a summary measure of the

retirement "spike").1 In every case but one, the spike is positive, and it is generally large. On average

across these countries, "excess retirement" at the early retirement age is 156% higher than the

retirement rates on either side, and "excess retirement" at the normal retirement age is 238% higher

than the retirement rates on either side. A large literature confirms that this relationship is causal and

not just correlational, using reforms in retirement ages (Gruber and Wise, 1999a; Börsch-Supan and

Coile, 2019; Manoli and Weber, 2016b).

        What is less well understood, however, is the reason for such spikes in retirement hazards. In a

standard model of optimizing retirement behavior, what should matter is the financial incentives to

retire at a particular age. However, existing evidence suggests that financial incentives alone cannot

explain these spikes; the "excess" retirement at legislated ages suggests that there are other behavioral

mechanisms at play in driving retirement. At the same time, contemporaneous changes in retirement




1
 In particular, for each of these nations, we find the age of early and normal retirement eligibility, then compare
the conditional retirement rate at that age with the average of the conditional retirement rate in the year before
and after. In some nations, there is no distinct early or normal retirement age, so we only present one bar in those
cases.

                                                         2
ages and changes in financial incentives make it difficult to measure convincingly the impact of the

retirement age norm itself. For example, the move to a new "normal" retirement age of 67 in the U.S.

was accompanied by a change in both Social Security wealth and the marginal incentive to retire at

different ages. As a result, while quasi-experimental studies can clearly establish that changing

retirement ages has a transformational impact on retirement decisions, they cannot definitively speak to

the role of financial versus behavioral incentives. What is needed to do so is a change in the labeling of

retirement ages without an associated change in financial incentives.

        This is a critical issue because nations would like to assess ways to reduce pension liabilities

without burdening vulnerable retirees. Given the actuarially unfair structure of pensions in most

nations, inducing longer working careers improves fiscal balances. But the typical approach to inducing

longer working careers is through increasing financial penalties on those retiring earlier, which penalizes

those who have a particularly high disutility of continued work at older ages. If it is possible to change

retirement behavior through extreme "nudges" like retirement age relabeling, it offers the possibility of

extending working lives without hurting those who need to retire earlier.

        In this paper, we study a reform in Finland that allows us to separate financial incentives and

norms associated with retirement age. Before 2005, retirees in Finland faced an "early" retirement

regime which ran from age 60 to age 65, with "normal" retirement at age 65. In 2005, the system was

reformed so that a new "flexible" retirement age was introduced at age 63 ­ opening up a new and

unanticipated retirement possibility at ages 63 and 64. Yet while the reform also included changes in

financial incentives, these changes were both modest and more continuous across cohorts than was this

"relabeling" ­ allowing us to separate the two.

        We analyze the impact of this reform using data on 100% of the workers in Finland, which allows

us to include large samples of workers at and around the key retirement ages at the time of reform.




                                                     3
These data include a rich set of covariates which allows us as well to explore the heterogeneity in the

response to relabeling.

        The longitudinal nature of our data also allows us to extend the retirement literature in a new

direction: modeling the impact of relabeling and financial incentives on return to work. If the response

to reforms is driven by behavioral considerations rather than pure financial optimization, it raises the

possibility that individuals may regret their decisions ex-post. A potential measure of regret is reversal

of the retirement decision. By examining the marginal impact of retirement changes on the return to

work among those retired, we can assess whether the individuals who retire in response to these

changes "regret" their retirement more than the typical retiree. If so, this heightens concerns about

optimization failures in these behavioral responses.

        Our results from this analysis are quite striking. We find that there is an enormous and

immediate response to the relabeling of retirement in 2005. We estimate that for the cohorts of

individuals who were suddenly made eligible for retirement, there was around a 40 percentage point

rise in retirement rates at age 63. These changes arise despite very modest changes in financial

incentives, and respond to a sharp age discontinuity that is not present in financial incentive changes.

At the same time, we find that there is significant evidence of excess regret among those who

responded to the relabeling; the return to work rates are much higher among this population than

among the average retiree.

        Our paper proceeds as follows. Part I discusses the existing literature on retirement decisions

and the lack of evidence on retirement labels versus financial incentives in determining retirement. Part

II introduces the Finnish context and the reform that we study. Part III discusses the data that we use

and our empirical strategy. Part IV presents our results, and Part V concludes.




                                                       4
                            Part I: Retirement Systems and Retirement Decisions

        There is an enormous and rich literature on how the structure of retirement systems impacts

retirement decisions. This literature was summarized and extended to an international framework in

Gruber and Wise (1999b). A recent follow on volume by Börsch-Supan and Coile (2018) updates the

results, providing both updated literature reviews and new evidence based on two decades of new data.

        The conclusions of both volumes, and the retirement literature in general, are threefold. First,

financial incentives matter both in within nation studies, and when comparing across nations. These

financial incentives are generally summarized through a wealth measure and a dynamic incentive

measure. The wealth measure captures the entitlement at a point in time of individuals to their

expected net present value of pension wealth under the system. The incentive measure captures the

marginal change in pension wealth from additional work effort, either in terms of the marginal change

for the additional year of work (accrual rate) or the change relative to the optimal date of retirement

(option value).

        This is illustrated vividly in Figure 2, from Gruber and Wise (1999a). This figure shows the cross-

country correlation between a measure of the implicit tax burden and the rate of labor force non-

participation across a cross-section of countries. Countries with higher implicit taxes around retirement

age have a much higher non-participation rate.2 Börsch-Supan and Coile (2019) extend this analysis to

within country-analysis for a comparable sample of nations, and find that this relationship holds within

countries over time.

        Second, key retirement ages are primary determinants of retirement decisions. The age at

which pensions become available (the "early retirement age," or ERA), as well as the age at which full

benefits are achieved (often called the "normal retirement age," or NRA) are magnets for retirement, as



2
 In particular, the X axis measures the logarithm of the sum of the implicit taxes on work from the age of early
pension entitlement to age 69, while the Y axis measures the share of those age 55 to 65 who are not working.

                                                         5
shown in Figure 1 from the introduction. Third, it is impossible to explain these retirement age "spikes"

with financial incentives. Including rich functions of financial incentives does not remove the

fundamental explanatory power of retirement age spikes.

        Both the first and third of these conclusions are subject to important statistical identification

concerns. The financial incentives facing potential retirees are a function of past earnings and labor

force attachment, which may in turn have direct impacts on retirement. For example, in the U.S.,

pension entitlements are a complicated and non-linear function of past earnings and length of working

life. Typically, the literature has attempted to address this through rich controls for these outside

factors, fundamentally identifying the effect of financial incentives through functional form (e.g. Coile

and Gruber, 2004). More satisfactory is work that uses changes in entitlement ages to show that these

changes fundamentally alter retirement patterns (e.g. Manoli and Weber, 2016b).

        Recent literature has used quasi-experimental evidence to study the effect of incentives on

retirement (Brown, 2013; Manoli and Weber, 2016a; Furgeson et al., 2006) and also the effect of a

change in statutory retirement age and found that labels affect behavior in a manner which cannot be

rationalized by standard preferences (Behaghel and Blau, 2012; Cribb et al., 2016; Manoli and Weber,

2016b; Seibold, 2019; Staubli and Zweimüller, 2013).

        Most quasi-experimental approaches, however, do not satisfactorily address the third question,

whether financial incentives can truly explain retirement spikes. This is because changes in retirement

ages are accompanied by major changes in financial incentives. Consider the shift in the normal

retirement age from age 65 to age 67 in the U.S. This shift was accompanied by significant changes in

pension entitlements; for example, at any given retirement age, benefits fell, and the marginal returns

to additional work changed. What is required to separate these is a change in labeling that is not

accompanied by changes in financial incentives. That is what is provided by the Finnish reform, which

affected three cohorts contemporaneously and unexpectedly.


                                                     6
        Perhaps most closely related to our paper is a recent paper by Seibold (2019). Seibold uses rich

variation across a large number of discontinuities in the German retirement system to study retirement

effects using bunching methodology. As part of his analysis he compares purely financial discontinuities

to those associated as well with changes in retirement ages, and highlights that the responses are larger

when the financial changes are associated with retirement age changes. This is consistent with our view

that labeling matters above and beyond financial incentives, but it still requires strong structural

assumptions to separate out the pure labeling effect. Without a sharp and unexpected change in

relabeling that is not itself associated with specific financial changes, it is impossible to cleanly identify

the impact of the relabeling alone.

        Various alternative hypotheses have been offered and some explicitly tested to explain the

importance of labels. A statutory retirement age conveys information to individuals about the optimal

retirement ages and could offer one possible mechanism to explain the observed bunching. Since the

information is always attached to the statutory age itself, it is difficult to disentangle this effect

empirically.

        Social norms would also be a mechanism consistent with bunching, although the immediate

response to changes in statutory ages suggests this is unlikely (Behaghel and Blau, 2012). Asch et al.

(2005) study the retirement behavior of federal civil service workers employed by the US Department of

Defense, who face a different retirement scheme from the general population. They find no evidence of

bunching at the statutory ages of the Social Security system, suggesting that society-wide norms are not

the main drivers of the relabeling effect. A reference-dependent utility function with a kink the

reference point set by the statutory ages (see Behaghel and Blau, 2012 and Seibold, 2019) is consistent

with bunching at said statutory ages but remains to be confirmed.

        One fundamental limitation of the previous literature extends to our work as well: it is possible

that some of the increased retirement that we attribute to worker decisions may be reflecting employer


                                                       7
behavior as well. For example, when retirement ages change, employers may find ways to change

incentives for work at different ages to accompany this. As we note below, in our sample, there is very

little enrollment in supplemental private pensions. But we can't rule out other employer tools such as

age-specific wage changes. Seibold (2019) shows that bunching in Germany takes place also in small

firms, which are exempt from employment protection.



                                   Part II: The Finnish Pension Reform

        The Finnish statutory pension system is a combination of earnings-related pension and

residence-based national pension. The earnings-related pension system is mandatory for the workers

and self-employed and cover virtually all earnings. It is a defined benefit system where the pension level

is determined by the length of work history and by the amount of past earnings. The average gross

replacement rate is 56.5% (OECD 2019).

        The national pension (and a complementary guarantee pension starting 2011) is a demogrant to

the entire population that is clawed back in proportion to the earnings-related pension. The grant is

around 500 euros per month, and it is reduced by 50 cents for each additional earnings-related euro

below around 1000 euros per month. As a result, only individuals with very short careers or low earnings

history are granted the full national pension; before the reform in 2004, around 45 percent of

pensioners had only earnings-related pension and only 6% of pensioners received no earnings-related

pension3. The national pension and the guarantee pension are administered by the Social Insurance

Institution of Finland while the earnings-related pensions are administered by several earnings-related

pension providers.




3
  Finnish Centre for Pensions, Statistical Database, retrieved from
https://tilastot.etk.fi/pxweb/en/ETK/ETK__110kaikki_elakkeensaajat__10elakkeensaajien_lkm/elsa_k04_rak.px/?r
xid=32650b38-9599-4d41-8122-0ccd565648a0 on May 6, 2020.

                                                     8
         There are also voluntary pension plans in Finland but these are in a minor role. In 2004, 12% of

households had private pension savings and these constituted 6 percent of the gross wealth of these

households. In our target population of those above 60, only 4% of households had private pension

savings (Ahonen and Moilanen, 2007).

        Under both the earnings-related and national pensions, before the reform, the early retirement

age at which benefits could first be claimed was 60, with a full benefits (normal) retirement age of 65.

There were additional early retirement pathways as well. Partial or full disability pension was claimable

if working capability has decreased by 40 % (for partial) or 60 % (for full) from the previous levels; for

those with at least a 10-calendar-year career, the pension level was defined as a sum of accrued pension

rights until the moment of disability and the projected pension benefits. An individual early retirement

pension scheme was also granted based on health conditions, except that the criteria were somewhat

more lenient than for the disability pension and the eligible workers needed to be over 58 years of age.

And an unemployment pension was granted for those workers who had been long-term unemployed

and over the age of 60.

        The pension system was reformed substantially in 2005. One of the reasons for a need to reform

the system was that the proportion of working-age population was forecast to start decreasing in the

near future. Also, a major economic downturn in the 1990's and the resulting rise in public debt had

increased awareness for the need for fiscal balancing. The goal of this reform was "to increase the

employment rate in the long term and to increase the effective retirement age by 2 to 3 years in order

to alleviate the pressure to raise the pension contributions".4 The tradition of pension reforms in Finland

is that the employer and employee unions negotiate an agreement for the reform and the government

converts the agreement into a government proposal which is presented to the parliament. The



4
 The government program was retrieved from https://valtioneuvosto.fi/hallitusohjelmat/-/asset_publisher/67-
paaministeri-paavo-lipposen-ii-hallituksen-ohjelma on Oct 3, 2019.

                                                      9
government proposal of the 2005 reform was presented to the parliament in November 2002 and the

bill was passed in June 2003 (Government proposal, 242/2002). The reform itself caused very little

debate even with a parliamentary election in the spring 2003. In fact, none of the major parties even

mentioned the pension reform in their election programs.5

           Information letters regarding the reform were sent in January 2004 by most earnings-related

pension providers. However, we do not know, what exact proportion of the relevant population was

sent such letters.

           A number of restrictions on early retirement were also put in place. The early retirement age

was raised from age 60 to age 62, and both the individual early retirement pension scheme and the

unemployment pension scheme were abolished. At the same time, the reform introduced a new

"flexible" retirement age that would allow the individual to "retire flexibly between the ages 63 to 68".

Arguably, the reform did not increase actual flexibility, since retiring before and after the full retirement

age of 65 was fully possible before the reform in the private sector. In the public sector, the reform

increased flexibility by allowing work until age 68 instead of the old upper limit of 65. Retiring at ages 63

to 68 is called retiring at the full retirement age (FRA), whereas retiring at 62 is called retiring at the

early retirement age (ERA) and is associated with an early retirement penalty (described below).

           This reform also included a series of changes in financial incentives for retirement. Before 2005,

the pension was calculated based on the earnings from the last 10 years of each employment contract

prior to retirement. Accrual rates were 1.5% below the age of 59 and 2.5% between ages 60­65. There

was also a pension cap at 60% of the highest annual salary during the period where pension was

calculated. Early old-age retirement (possible from the age of 60 onwards) reduced pension

permanently by 0.4 percent of accrued pension for each month before the age 65. If retiring was

postponed after the age of 65, each month increased the pension by 0.6 percent.


5
    The election programs were retrieved from https://www.fsd.uta.fi/pohtiva/ on Oct 2, 2019.

                                                         10
           From 2005 onwards, the whole working history is considered when calculating the pension. For

individuals who work past the new flexible retirement age of 63, there is a pension accrual of 4.5% per

year. This high accrual rate was popularly dubbed the 'super accrual'. The rationale for the move was to

"encourage the prolonging of careers also by making old-age retirement flexible and by incentivizing the

prolonging of careers after the age 63 with a markedly higher accrual" (Government proposal

242/2002). The accrual rate was set to 1.9% for ages 53­62 and to 1.5% for work done before the age of

53. The early old-age minimum age was increased to 62 and the penalty for claiming pension early was

0.6% per month. The increase in pension for delaying retirement after the age 68 was 0.4% per month.

           For each month of work, the incremental change in pension is based on the accrual rate (which

is a function of earnings) in addition to one less month of early retirement penalty (which is a function of

accrued penalty). The penalty and the accrual rate together define the effective accrual rate, which we

calculate as a proportion of accrued pensions, making the results comparable to estimated wealth

effects.

           The important point for our analysis is that there was not a meaningful change in the effective

accrual rate at age 63 because the new "super accrual" was replacing an existing penalty for early

retirement. The change in effective accrual rates was on average -0.7% (SD: 1.96%) of accrued pension

wealth, compared to a mean of 8.9%. Thus, despite the intended effect of the reform, the financial

incentive for continued work actually declined slightly.

           The reform only made one meaningful change to the national pension, abolishing the implicit

tax on earnings-related pension between ages 63 and 65. There are some differences in the pension

rules between public and private sector workers; we only study the private sector, since the rule for the

public sector are more complex and the data less coherent.

           The overall change in pension wealth and accrual rates due to the reform are shown in Figure 3.

The figure shows age at the time of the reform on the X-axis, and percentage changes on the Y-axis. We


                                                      11
demarcate three areas through vertical dashed lines: those who were too young to be relabeled; those

relabeled at some point over the next twelve months (to allow a focus on annual retirement); and those

who were already too old to be relabeled.

        The upper line shows the change in pension wealth due to the reform. There is a large jump in

pension wealth at age 62 that stems from a reduction in early retirement penalty. For example, at age

63, the reform reduced the penalty from 9.6% (24 times 0.4%) to zero (0 times 0.6%) for a total of 9.6%

overnight increase in pension wealth. Note that the change in pension wealth is strictly a function of

age, first rising to a peak for those at their 63rd birthday at the time of reform, and then declining

steadily through age 64.

        The lower dashed line, and the associated shaded confidence interval, shows the percentage

change in the effective pension accrual rate. The rate is more rapid until age 62, since the early

retirement penalty went from 0.4% to 0.6% per month between ages 62 to 63. At the annual level, the

difference gives 2.4% more accrual as a proportion of accrued pension. This more than compensates the

lower accrual rate (1.9% vs 2.5% of earnings). Then at age 62 it starts to decline because early

retirement penalty was abolished in the reform after age 63, more than negating the increase in accrual

from 2.5% to 4.5%. It the flattens out after age 63, then begins to increase after age 64, since before the

reform, accrual rate goes to zero at age 65 and early retirement penalty of 0.4% per month changes to

an increase of 0.6% per month of postponed retirement. Together the changes after age 65 decrease

the pre-reform effective accrual rate such that by age 65, the difference between the old and the new

rate is on average zero. There is some modest within age variation, but it is small relative to the time

patterns. Most importantly for our purposes, both the change in pension wealth and accrual rates are

continuous at age 64.




                                                     12
                                      Part III: Data and Empirical Strategy

Data

         We use administrative data from Finnish Centre for Pensions, as well as from Statistics Finland

for years 2000­2015. The main data from Finnish Centre for Pensions include individuals' earnings for

those years, and pension claiming including the exact day of the start (and end) of specific pension spell

for everybody who was insured in Finland. Beside earnings, the data include the official calculation for

accrued pension at the end of 2004, based on which we calculate accrued pensions for earlier periods,

using their earnings information. Thus, the measure we have for the reform year is the administrative

number that actually defines the pension. For earlier years, the measure is our calculation, tracking back

from end of 2004. Our calculation is based on the same administrative data used for official calculations.

         The supplementary data from Statistics Finland include a wide set of labor market

characteristics and individual characteristics for all Finnish individuals between the ages 40 and 75. This

includes sickness absences of more than nine days, non-pension net wealth (collected for wealth tax

purposes), spouse, highest educational achievement and sex.

          Our main sample is individuals who still are not working in the public sector and are still in the

labor market, i.e., are not claiming any of the early exit pension programs. A provision in the reform

allowed individuals whose pension was lower under the new regime to continue under the old system ­

given the general rise in pension wealth under this reform this impacted only 0.5% of the sample, and

we drop them for the analysis.6

         As reviewed here, the 2005 reform had a variety of elements that impacted workers throughout

the age distribution, from abolishing early retirement at age 60 to introducing new work incentives at




6
 The pension was calculated with the old and the new formula and the more favorable for the retiree would be
applied. This rule was relevant mostly a couple of years after the reform for individuals with high earnings relative
to accrued pensions, since accrual rates relative to earnings increased and early retirement penalties and increases
due to postponed retirement, which are relative to accrued pensions, were abolished for age brackets 63 to 68.

                                                         13
age 68. The goal in our analysis is not to provide an overall analysis of this reform, but to instead focus

on the effect of relabeling. To do so, we impose a number of sample restrictions.

           Our main sample includes those who are employed and had an accrued pension income high

enough that their national pension had phased out, so that they were claiming only earnings-related

pension (11,000 euros or higher, depending on marital status and municipality). We focus on this

subset, since they faced the full impact of the relabeling. We also study a control group of those with

very low accrued pension, who rely primarily on the national pensions. The national pension was not

relabeled and thus those who have low accrued pension act as a control group.

           We also limit our sample is to individuals aged 62 to 65 at the start of the year, for two years

pre-reform (2003 and 2004) and one year post-reform (2005).7 This sample excludes anyone who is

impacted by the other changes in the law, such as changes in early retirement provisions. Thus, this

restriction allows us to focus exclusively on the impact of the relabeling and other financial changes

occurring in this limited age range. As noted earlier, the reform was announced well before

implementation; below we test for anticipation effects that might bias our analysis.

           Our definition of retirement is based on claiming old-age pension; we define retirement date as

the day before the start of the pension spell. The timing of the retirement is registered at the monthly

level such that virtually all claims are timed on the first day of the following month.



Empirical Strategy

           Our goal is to understand how relabeling of retirement in Finland impacted retirement, distinct

from changes in financial incentives. Our primary empirical strategy is a difference-in-difference

comparison of the cohorts that were immediately impacted by the change in retirement to those born

immediately before who were not impacted. For those in 2005, there was suddenly a new retirement



7
    We add another year post-reform when we examine return to work, as described below.

                                                       14
option available between ages 63 and 65; since we define retirement over an annual period, this

impacts those between ages 62 and 64 (birth cohorts 1941 and 1942). For individuals at those ages in

2004, however, there was no such retirement option available. By comparing how retirement changes in

the former group relative to the latter, we can assess the impact of relabeling.

        This empirical strategy is illustrated in Figure 3. The x-axis on this figure is age at the date of

reform. Those over 62 and under 64 were suddenly given the new retirement option, so we use the

vertical dashed lines to demark the "relabeling" region. The solid line shows the change in pension

wealth. There is a discrete jump in pension wealth at age 62 due to the reform-induced reductions in

early retirement penalties (see Part II for details). The accrual rate falls at that age, albeit more

smoothly, and the magnitude of the change is quite small, since the increase in nominal accrual rates

was more than offset by the reductions in early retirement penalties, as explained in more detail in Part

II. At age 62, therefore, we cannot separate the change in financial incentives from the relabeling.

        This is not the case at age 64. Individuals in the treatment cohort born on Jan 1, 1941 have a

new retirement option under relabeling; for those born one day earlier, there is no relabeling, since they

would have reached eligibility in the counterfactual case of no reform. Yet, there is a continuous change

in both pension wealth and accrual at that age. Therefore, the change in retirement behavior around

that date provides a test of the relabeling effect.

        We will begin by illustrating this graphically to gauge the magnitude of the response. We then

turn to a retirement hazard model that embeds the relabeling effect along with financial incentives. The

advantage of such a model is that it allows us to provide well-identified estimates of the impact of

financial incentives that come from reform-induced changes in these incentives. We can then use these

to compare the size of the relabeling effect to the size of financial incentive effects.

        To be more precise, we estimate Cox proportional hazard models of the form:

                                (| ) = 0 ()exp(0 0 , ... ,   ).                                           (1)


                                                      15
This expression gives the retirement hazard function at time t for person i with a covariate vector  .

The dependent variable is retirement over the next year. Retirement is defined as starting to claim old-

age pension. Our main specification is a regression with cohorts which were aged 62 to 65 at the start of

the year for years 2003­2005 in the pure earnings-related pension sample. We use two control years

(2003 and 2004) to better pin down the covariates.

         As noted earlier, we focus on two financial measures, pension wealth and accrual. In the model,

we include the traditionally computed measures, which are identified from cross-sectional comparisons

of individuals with different earnings histories. We also control for monthly age, year, pension wealth,

non-pension wealth decile, spouse, pre-reform marginal accrual rate, sex, a dummy for sickness absence

longer than nine days in the three preceding years and tertiary education.

         We are also able, however, to include in the model measures of financial incentives which are

exogenously varied by the reform and we consider as continuous treatments. The change in pension

wealth is a direct function of age due to the changes in retirement penalties.8 The change in accrual

rates is a more complicated function of age, accrued pension and earnings, since the accrual rates were

affected by the changes in early retirement penalties and accrual rates and these varied by age. See Part

II for more details. The change in incentives was largely exogenous. The only thing that could

endogenously be adjusted in the short window of the reform, would be earnings levels, but we use pre-

reform earnings to remove this potential source of endogeneity. The income effect is identified by

comparing individuals at each age in 2005 vs. 2004 and controlling for age. The substitution effect is

identified by the changes in accrual rates due to the reform across individuals in different cohorts and

different ratios of earnings to accrued pensions.




8
 Pension wealth is calculated as the net present value of all future pension income assuming immediate
retirement, discounted by survival probabilities using Finnish mortality tables in addition to a 2% discount rate.

                                                         16
        The regression model also includes the relabeling effect, which is just a dummy variable for

reaching full retirement age in 12 months due to the reform. This variable is not just identified by the

discontinuity at age 64, but by the general difference-in-difference comparison across cohorts and the

timing of reform, controlling for the associated changes in financial differences.

        The sample size of the main sample is 25,088. The descriptive statistics are presented in Table

1. One-quarter of our sample is female, since this is an older cohort as of the early 2000s so female

labor market attachment was low and women were more likely to work in the public sector which is

excluded in the analysis. Three-quarters of our sample is married, and 32% have tertiary educational

attainment. We measure health by the presence of a sickness absence from work of nine days of longer

during the three preceding years (2000­2002 for 2003 data, etc.); only absences longer than nine days

get registered in the data. One third of our sample has a sickness absence. The increase in pension

wealth averages 6% of baseline, while the change in accrual is much smaller at only -0.7 on average. In

our sample, 80% are subject to relabeling. The control birth cohort 1940 is smaller than the treatment

cohorts 1941 and 1942 due to Second World War, pushing the proportion subject to relabeling above

the two thirds, which would occur with equally sized birth cohorts.



                                              Part IV: Results

Graphical Illustration

        The graphical illustration of our key result is presented in Figures 4 and 5. Figure 4 replicates

Figure 3 but adds the empirical retirement rates in 2004 and 2005. Before age 62, retirement behavior

is quite similar for those in both cohorts. Then, at age 62, the retirement rate jumps for the 2005 cohort

but not the 2004 cohort. After age 64, the two series converge again.

        Figure 5 summarizes this by plotting instead the difference in retirement rates across cohorts at

each age. The impact of relabeling is now obvious. There is little pre-existing difference in retirement


                                                     17
rates before age 62. There is then an enormous jump in the retirement rate difference, from close to

zero to 40%. The differential retirement rate remains escalated in the entire relabeling range, with no

clear pattern. It then immediately jumps down once the relabeling regime is over (once the retirement

age labels are the same in both years). After age 64, the retirement rate remains somewhat lower, as

those who remain in the labor force in the relabeled cohort are less likely to retire at each age.

        The implied effect of relabeling can be computed most cleanly by comparing the red and green

dots, right before and after the discontinuity at age 64. Doing so, we estimate that relabeling led to a

40pp change in the retirement hazard.

        This effect is directly visible in the overall retirement hazard in Finland. Figure 6 shows the

retirement hazard in 2004, 2005, and 2015 (in steady state). Several immediate changes are noticeable

between 2004 and 2005. First, there is a reduction in the hazard rate at the pre-reform early retirement

age of 60. Given that the early retirement age has been moved to age 62, this is not surprising. What is

more notable is that there is no corresponding spike at the new early retirement age of 62. It appears

that the ability to have "normal" retirement one year later makes this early retirement option less

attractive. Second, there is a large new spike at age 63, the relabeled normal retirement age. Third,

there is a corresponding reduction in the hazard rate at age 65, the previous normal retirement age.

        Ten years later, in 2015, 65 is practically irrelevant as a retirement age. Only 9% of all old-age

retirement takes place at that age as opposed to 73% in 2004. A small spike has by then emerged at age

68, which was one of the original aims of the reform.

        We can also confirm the importance of rebelling, relative to financial incentives, by examining

within-year changes at each age. Figure 7 shows the timing of retirement within the year in before (blue

line) and after the reform (red line) across the three relevant age groups. Each line shows the monthly

survival rate in the labor force for those who are in the labor force at the start of the calendar year in

which they are 62, 63, or 64. More specifically, those who turn age 63 in the first month of 2004 (pre-


                                                     18
reform) are represented by the first step of the blue line in the first panel; those who turn 63 in the first

month of 2005 (post-reform) are represented by the first step in the red line in the first panel.

        The first panel shows the results for those who are age 62. For these individuals, the law change

relabels them as they turn 63, which happens equally throughout the year. Before the reform, there

was some retirement through the year under early retirement provisions. After the reform, there is a

much larger share retiring in the month that they turn 63, so that there is a growing gap between the

lines over time.

        The second panel shows the results for those who are age 63. For these individuals, relabeled

retirement is available for them at the start of the year, regardless of their birthday. And, in fact, we see

a large increase in retirement (reduction in survival) in January. This is followed by a slow pattern

throughout the year that largely mimics the pattern that we saw before reform. This is consistent once

again with the effect being through relabeling and not financial incentives, which operate more

smoothly throughout the year.

        The third panel shows those who are age 64 when relabeling occurs. For this group, there is a

high retirement rate as each cohort turns 65 in the baseline, due to reaching normal retirement age.

After reform, as in the second panel, everyone was relabeled at the start of the year, showing an

increase in retirement in January. There is also a change in financial incentives. Together these changes

result in a slightly larger retirement rate that disappears by the end of the year.



Regression Results

        Table 2 shows the estimates from equation (1). The first panel shows the coefficients on the

change in financial incentives from reform, as well as on the relabeling dummy. We find highly

significant coefficients on both the financial variables and the relabeling dummy. We estimate that each




                                                     19
reform-induced 1% rise in pension wealth multiplies the retirement hazard by 1.11 and each 1% rise in

accrual rates by 0.94.

        We also find a huge coefficient on the relabeling indicator, showing that cohorts subject to

relabeling were 678% more likely to retire. This is equivalent to a change in pension wealth of around

20% or in accrual rates of 32%.

        Our other covariates show that prior sickness absences are associated with a 12% higher

retirement hazard and having a spouse 7% higher. Those with tertiary education have a retirement

hazard that is similar to the rest of the sample and females have a 13% higher hazard.

        The model also includes the cross-sectionally identified coefficients on pension wealth and

accrual. These effects are much more modest than what the exogenous changes imply. A change of 1%

in pension wealth is associated with a multiplier on the retirement hazard of 1.037 (compared to 1.11

for the exogenous change in wealth); for the effective accrual rate, the multiplier is 0.984 (compared to

0.94 for the exogenous change in accrual).

        This may reflect the fact that there is a stronger short run reaction to changes in incentives, so

that the lower cross-sectional estimates are proper long-run response estimates. But it is also possible

that these estimates are simply poorly estimated since they are largely based on cross-sectional factors

which are also correlated with retirement.

        How robust is our main result to the omission of some control variables? In table 1, columns 2

and 3, we show our main results with less controls. Column 2 leaves out individual controls other than

age, year and cross-sectional financial variables. The results on our variables of interest stay essentially

the same as our main results.

        The cross-sectional financial variables, however, are more strongly affected by the omission of

control variables. Both estimates are lower. In particular, the estimate for pension wealth is reduced by




                                                     20
about a third. In column 3, we only leave age and year dummies in addition to our variables of interest.

Again, the result is mostly in line with our main result. Now, the accrual rate grows in absolute value.

           Previously, Gruber and Wise (2004) have estimated income and accrual effects for several

countries. Of these, Sweden is the most comparable to Finland. Palme and Svensson (2004) have

estimated the income and accrual effects for Sweden, using cross-sectional variation.9 They find that a 1

million kronor increase in accrual rates decreases retirement by a percentage point compared to a

baseline of 5.5%, or around 18%. A change equivalent to 1% of median pension wealth (~15,000 kronor)

would only decrease retirement by around 0.3%. Using the same logic, a 1% increase in pension wealth

relative to the median would increase retirement by 0.5% to 1%, depending on the specification.

           Their estimate for the substitution effect of 0.3% decrease in retirement rates for a 1% change

in accrual, is one order of magnitude below our quasi-experimental estimate of 6%. It is also lower than

our cross-sectional estimate of 1.5%. For pension wealth, their estimates (0.5% to 1%) are around one

tenth of the magnitude we estimate quasi-experimentally (11%), and below but closer to the 3.5% we

estimate in the cross-section. Thus, our results suggest that cross-sectionally estimated retirement

incentive coefficients are both less robust to controls and much smaller than those exogenously

identified by pension reforms.



Specification Check: National Pensioners

           As noted above, our sample consists of individuals whose full retirement income comes from

the earnings-related pension. But for other workers, where most of their retirement income comes

from the national pension, the relabeling effect should be much weaker, since the eligibility age for the

national pension was not reformed, but rather stayed at 65. This sample therefore serves as a control

group for our identification of the relabeling effect.


9
    Their Table 10.18 second column is the most comparable to our main specification. It is estimated for males only.

                                                          21
         In the last column of Table 2, we show the results for this control group sample. The control

group earns on average one quarter of their retirement income from earnings-related pensions. The

estimate for the relabeling effect is low and insignificant, although positive. The estimate is consistent

with this sample being only slightly affected by relabeling. However, incentive effects are still relevant

for this sample, since they are computed on an individual basis using the actual magnitude of earnings

related pension for that worker.10 The estimated incentive effects are close to what we observe with the

main sample, giving support to our primary estimates.

         At the same time, cross-sectional wealth and accrual estimates give the reverse sign compared

to our main sample ­ further confirming the identification problems plaguing these measures. In this

lower income sample, the crucial omitted variable is other means tested social insurance benefits such

as housing and income support. The main sample, however, doesn't suffer from such measurement

errors, since the cutoff point for national pension is above the income levels at which individuals qualify

for these benefits.



Regret: Impacts on Return to Work

         As discussed earlier, there is the possibility that individuals reacting to the relabeling in Finland

may be departing from the standard life cycle model. As such, it is possible that there are welfare losses

from this policy change that go beyond the standard model. For example, Diamond and Koszegi (2003)

develop a model of retirement for individuals with quasi-hyperbolic discounting. In such a model,

individuals excessively retire relative to their own long run preferences. As a result, they have demand

for commitment devices that limit their retirement probabilities. Relabeling can be viewed as loosening




10
  That is, the incentive effects are computed to be small for these workers, so the coefficients can be interpreted
as parallel to what we observe for the main sample.

                                                         22
this commitment, leading to excessive retirement and ex-post welfare loss. Other models of self-control

limitations could yield similar "regret" among early retirees.

        Measuring such regret quantitatively is difficult in most settings, but in our setting we have an

excellent revealed preference measure of regret: return to work. In the standard life cycle model,

individuals optimize their retirement date given their available information about wages, the value of

leisure, and retirement incentives. Some of those who retire will subsequently return to work. This

doesn't necessarily reflect any failure of optimization over retirement, but rather could indicate the

arrival of new information such as realized preferences for leisure or the realization of income supports

that were uncertain at the time of retirement.

        As a result, the level of return to work doesn't allow us to separate regret from preference

variation. But so long as the policy change doesn't itself change preferences for retirement, any change

in return to work due to this policy change could indicate regret. Of course, the policy change may

change preferences for retirement to the extent that it changes social norms. But such changes to social

norms would make retirement more acceptable at earlier ages, not less, so it should lead to less return

to work, not more. If we see an increase in return to work due to relabeling, it is more consistent with

regret over retirement for the incremental workers who are induced to retire by relabeling.

        To understand our empirical strategy, consider a randomized trial of retirement incentives. The

treatment group t includes  individuals, while the control group c includes  individuals. Before the

trial, out of each group 0 and 0 workers retire, respectively. In addition, before the intervention, 0


    0
and   workers return to work within three years of retiring. By randomization pre-treatment

                                                  0    0
retirement rates are equal across the groups ( =  ), and pre-treatment return to work rates among
                                                          

                                                 0        0
                                                          
those who retire are equal among the groups (    0    =   0 ).
                                                          




                                                      23
        The experiment randomly provides large new retirement incentives to the treatment group.

After the experiment, there are 1 and 1 retired workers, respectively, and of those workers 1
                                                                                              and 1


return to work. If randomization is appropriate, we can measure the impact of the intervention simply
                                                                                 1       1
                                                                                         
by measuring the ex-post difference in retirement probabilities across groups (      -     ).   And as long as
                                                                                         


the experiment changes nothing else about participant preferences, and randomization holds, we can

                              1    1
measure marginal regret as 1 -  1 . That is, any differences in return to work as a result of this
                                   


experiment are driven by the marginal regret among those retiring due to the experiment.

        In our implementation, we follow this same strategy using our quasi-experimental variation.

The treatment is being relabeled. As before, the treatment group is those who were between 62 and 64

in 2005, and controls are those who were older. In our case, we don't have randomization, so instead of

assuming randomization we use a difference-in-difference strategy, comparing to those same age

groups pre-reform. So we can measure marginal regret as:

                                           1   1       0   0
                                                          
                                         ( 1 - 1 ) - ( 0 - 0 ).
                                                          

Where period 1 is 2005 and period 0 is the pre-reform period.

        To implement this test, we focus on the sample of individuals who retire. We then use as a

dependent variable return to work over the next three years. Return to work is defined as earning at

least 25% of their highest earnings over the past three years.

        The correspondence between retirement incentives and age is the same as before: for those

who are age 63 in 2005, we include their financial incentives to retire in 2005. We then keep all

independent variables and financial/relabeling measures at those same values for 63-year-olds, but now

we change the dependent variable to be returning to work over the next three calendar years.

Therefore, this regression is assessing whether financial incentives or relabeling have a different effect

on those who retired under different regimes.

                                                    24
        Return to work is rare, with only 17% of those who retire return at baseline. In order to ensure

a large enough sample to statistically identify the impact of relabeling on return to work, we therefore

expand our observation window to a period of two years. We now compare the 24-month pre-reform

period of 2003­2004 to the post-reform period of 2005­2006. When we extend the window, 68% of the

sample retire compared to the 35% in the 12-month setup, giving us more statistical power. Figure A1

shows that relabeling produces a sharp increase in retirement over this two-year window as well. But

the relabeling effect is limited to those age 62­63, since anyone above age 63 would have reached full

old-age retirement eligibility in the counterfactual case of no reform.

        Table 3 shows the results for return to work. The impact of the financial incentive variables is

small and insignificant, suggesting that those induced to retire by financial incentives are not

differentially likely to return to work. In contrast, relabeling increases return to the labor market at a

hazard ratio of 1.48, meaning that they were 50% likelier to return to the labor market relative to the

baseline. Such a pattern is consistent with individuals regretting their decision to respond to the

rebelling of retirement dates.

        As our randomized trial example makes clear, however, there is a major empirical concern with

this approach: while the overall sample is balanced across treatment and control, the additional

individuals who retire due to the financial incentive may not be identical. For example, suppose that the

individuals who retire more in response to relabeling are particularly healthy, and suppose that healthy

individuals are in general more likely to return to work. In that case, if we find higher rates of return to

work among those retiring due to relabeling it could simply reflect this heterogeneity and not true

differences in regret.

        To address this concern, we directly examine heterogeneity in the larger pool of retirees that

results from relabeling. In particular, we re-estimate the regression shown in the first column of Table 3,

but replace the dependent variable with various characteristics of the pool of retirees. If there is


                                                     25
differential selection into retirement as a result of relabeling, and it is demonstrated along observable

dimensions, then it will be reflected in these regressions.

        Table 4 shows these regressions. First example, the first column uses as a dependent variable

our health measure, whether the individual has a sickness absence of 9 or more days in the preceding

three years. We find that there is no significant effect of relabeling on the odds that retired workers

have sickness absences. This indicates that there is no selection along this dimension in response to

relabeling.

        The next six columns repeat this exercise for the other measures of observables that are

available in our data: having only primary education; having tertiary education; being in the first or third

wealth tercile; gender; and marital status. We find that there are significant coefficients on three of

these six indicators. Those who are most highly educated are less likely to be selected into retirement

by relabeling. This is consistent with the notion that individuals who are more educated are able to

assess the fact that relabeling is just nominal and not meaningful in terms of retirement income.

Perhaps due the same logic, we find those with higher wealth are also less likely to be selected into

retirement by relabeling. Finally, we find that women are less likely to be selected into retirement by

relabeling. This may reflect the fact that women's retirement decisions are driven primarily by spousal

concerns and not by own retirement preferences.

        Most importantly for us, these results indicate that the response to relabeling should lead to

less return to work, not more. Appendix Table A1 shows results from a regression for a dummy for

returning to work before the reform in 2003. The dependent variable is whether individuals returned to

work over the next three years. We find that sicker individuals are less likely to return to work, more

educated people are more likely to return to work, and those in both the first and third wealth terciles

are more likely to return to work. As we show in Table 4, there is no association of relabeling with

selection along the dimension of illness, but it is more educated and wealthier individuals who are less


                                                     26
likely to respond to relabeling. But these groups are inherently more likely to return to work, not less.

So, this cannot explain our return to work finding.

        We illustrate this point in the second column of Table 3. This is identical to the first column

described earlier, except that actual return to work is replaced with predicted return to work, using the

prediction model estimated in Table A1; the dependent variable splits predicted work at the median of

the distribution. We find that in fact relabeling is associated with a decrease in predicted return to

work, which is unsurprising given the results in Table 4, while in fact there is a positive impact on actual

return to work. This strongly suggests that selection isn't driving our finding.



Anticipation

        One possible issue with our identification strategy is that the individuals might have anticipated

the reform and thus changed their behavior already before the changes in incentives and labels. This

would cause a twofold issue for us: the behavior in the baseline years would be mismeasured, and there

could be selection bias due to the attrition caused by anticipation of the reform.

        To assess the role of anticipation, in Figure 8, we replicate Figure 5. However, in Figure 8 we

show the change in retirement rates between 2003 and 2004, before the reform, compared to the

incentive and relabeling changes that each age group will face in 2005. The figure shows that there is

hardly any systematic change in retirement behavior in anticipation of the reform.



                                             Part V: Conclusion

        Focal retirement ages are a central feature of Social Security programs around the world. These

focal ages can play an important role in setting retirement expectations and norms. As such, they

provide a powerful tool for policy makers who are interested in reforming retirement systems to

address the growing funding shortfalls facing these systems around the world. But these tools often


                                                      27
come hand in hand with significant changes in the financial structure of Social Security that can have

independent, and potentially deleterious, impacts on retirees. A natural question is whether simply

relabeling key retirement ages, holding financial incentives constant, can drive retirement behavior.

        In this paper, we use a major reformulation of the retirement system in Finland to investigate

the independent effects of retirement age labeling on behavior. A relabeling of retirement ages with

modest and continuous changes in financial incentives allows us to separately estimate the impact of

relabeling from financial incentives in driving retirement decisions.

        We find that relabeling is particularly powerful as a determinant of date of retirement. Both

graphical evidence and estimated hazard models reveal an enormous change in retirement when

individuals face a newly defined "normal retirement" age. Our findings suggest that such relabeling is as

powerful as enormous changes in pension wealth or dynamic pension retirement incentives.

        We also present a new approach to assessing the welfare implications of induced earlier

retirement: looking at the impact on return to work. We show that the marginal workers induced to

retire by relabeling are much more likely to return to work over the next three years than is the typical

worker. This suggests that there is a marginal increase in regret among those who respond to this

change in retirement ages ­ suggesting a potential source of welfare loss from inducing excess

retirement.

        While more work needs to be done to assess the importance of worker regret, there is clear

revealed preference evidence of policy maker regret in Finland, as this policy was repealed in steps. The

stated reason for the reform, as with the 2005 reform, was to increase effective retirement ages

(Government proposal, 2015). Starting from cohort 1955, each new cohort will have their full retirement

age raised by 3 months until the new retirement age of 65 is reached by cohort 1962. Cohorts 1965 and

after will have their retirement age based of life expectancy. Also, the higher accrual rate of 4.5% will be




                                                     28
repealed and the monthly increase of 0.4% per month for delaying retirement beyond the full

retirement age will be brought back.

        Finally, a limitation of the analysis in this paper is that we cannot separate changes in worker

retirement choices due to this policy change from potential employer responses to the law change that

might independently impact retirement. A priority for future work in this area is to assess employer

responses to this dramatic change in order to incorporate into a fuller analysis of the overall effects of

relabeling.




                                                     29
                                                References

Ahonen, K. and Moilanen, L. (2007). Kotitalouksien eläkesäästäminen, tulot ja varallisuus [Households'
pension savings, income and wealth]. Eläketurvakeskuksen keskustelualoitteita, 1.

Asch, B., Haider, J.S, Zissimopoulos, J. (2005). Financial incentives and retirement: evidence from federal
civil service workers. Journal of Public Economics, 89, 427-440.

Behaghel, L. and Blau, D. M. (2012). Framing social security reform: Behavioral responses to changes in
the full retirement age. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(4), 41­67.

Börsch-Supan, A. and Courtney C. (2019). Introduction to `Social Security Programs and
Retirement around the World: Reforms and Retirement Incentives.' in Börsch-Supan, A. and Courtney C.,
eds., Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Reforms and Retirement Incentives.
University of Chicago Press. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c14190.

Börsch-Supan, A. and Courtney C., eds. (2018). Social Security Programs and Retirement around the
World: Reforms and Retirement Incentives. University of Chicago Press.

Brown, K. M. (2013). The link between pensions and retirement timing: Lessons from California
teachers. Journal of Public Economics, 98, 1-14.

Coile, C. and Gruber, J. (2004). The Effect of Social Security on Retirement in the United States in Gruber,
J. and Wise, D., eds, Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Micro Estimation.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Cribb, J., Emmerson, C., and Tetlow, G. (2016). Signals matter? Large retirement responses to limited
financial incentives. Labour Economics, 42, 203-212.

Diamond, P., and Koszegi, B. (2003). Quasi-Hyperbolic Discounting and Retirement. Journal of Public
Economics, 87, 1839-1872.

Furgeson, J., Strauss, R. P., and Vogt, W. B. (2006). The effects of defined benefit pension incentives and
working conditions on teacher retirement decisions. Education Finance and Policy, 1(3), 316-348.

Government proposal (2002). Government proposal for the parliament on changing the pension laws.
Adopted in Helsinki on 05 November 2002. 242/2002.

Government proposal (2015). Government proposal for the parliament on changing the pension laws.
Adopted in Helsinki on 03 September 2005. 16/2015.

Gruber, J. (2019). Public Finance and Public Policy (6th ed.). New York: Worth Publishers.

Gruber, J. and Wise, D. (1999a). Social Security and Retirement Around the World: Introduction and
Summary, in Gruber, J. and Wise, D., eds., Social Security and Retirement Around the World. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.



                                                    30
Gruber, J. and Wise, D., eds. (1999b). Social Security and Retirement Around the World. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Gruber, J. and Wise, D. eds. (2004). Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Micro-
Estimation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Manoli, D., and Weber, A. (2016a). Nonparametric evidence on the effects of financial incentives on
retirement decisions. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8(4), 160- 82.

Manoli, D. S. and Weber, A. (2016). The Effects of the Early Retirement Age on Retirement
Decisions. Working Paper 22561. National Bureau of Economic Research.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w22561.

OECD (2019), Pensions at a Glance 2019: OECD and G20 Indicators, OECD Publishing,
Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/b6d3dcfc-en.

Palme, M., and Svensson, I. (2004). Income security programs and retirement in Sweden. In Gruber J.
and Wise D., eds., Social security programs and retirement around the world: Micro-estimation.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Seibold, A. (2019). Reference Dependence in Retirement Behavior: Evidence from German Pension
Discontinuities, CESifo Working Papers, 7799.

Staubli, S. and Zweimüller, J. (2013), Does Raising the Early Retirement Age Increase Employment of
Older Workers?, Journal of Public Economics 108, 17­32.




                                                  31
                                              Figures and Tables

Table 1: Descriptive statistics

 Variable                             Mean         SD

 Female                               0.27         0.44
 Spouse                               0.77         0.42
 Tertiary education                   0.32         0.47
 Net wealth (excl. pension            62,378       420,132
 wealth)
 Maximum annual earnings in           34,438       77,807
 past 3 years
 Sickness absence in past 3 years     0.32         0.46

 For 2005 (the reform year):

 Immediate increase in pension        6.63         2.58
 wealth, %
 Increase in marginal accrual         -0.71        1.96
 rate, % of pension wealth
 Reach full retirement age in 12      0.79         0.41
 months
Notes. Descriptive statistics for the sample in the main specification (col (1) of Table 2).




                                                      32
Table 2: Cox proportional hazard model regressions.

 Dependent                  Treatment:           Robustness 1:        Robustness 2:         Control: Mostly
 variable:               Earnings-related      only financial, age   only age and year      national pension
 Old-age retirement        pension only        and year controls          controls
                                (1)                    (2)                  (3)                    (4)
 Immediate increase          0.104***              0.107***               0.104***              0.129***
 in pension wealth,          (0.0195)              (0.0194)               (0.0154)              (0.0236)
 %
 Increase in                -0.0648***            -0.0603***             -0.0813***            -0.1023***
 marginal accrual             (0.0109)              (0.0107)               (0.0074)              (0.0080)
 rate, % of pension
 wealth
 Reach full                  2.052***              2.047***               2.057***               0.1828
 retirement age in            (0.122)               (0.122)                (0.098)               (0.112)
 12 months
 Sickness in past 3          0.121***                                                           0.195***
 years                        (0.023)                                                           (0.0414)

 Has spouse                  0.070***                                                             0.0594
                              (0.027)                                                            (0.0423)
 Tertiary education            -0.002                                                              -0.052
                              (0.031)                                                            (0.0452)
 Female                      0.126***                                                           -0.239***
                              (0.027)                                                            (0.0427)
 Log pension wealth          0.572***               0.369***                                    -1.143***
                              (0.098)                (0.093)                                      (0.107)
 Log accrual rate           -0.409***              -0.338***                                    0.592***
 (prop. to pension            (0.092)                (0.062)                                      (0.049)
 wealth)

 Year and monthly               Yes                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes
 age controls

 N                            25,088                  25,088               25,088                 8,201

Notes. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Years covered: 2003­2004
(control) 2005 (treatment). The estimated model is the Cox proportional hazard model regression
(Equation 1). The dependent variable is the time (0 to 1) of old-age retirement within one-year period.
The threshold refers to the limit when individuals have only earnings-related pension. Control variables
are monthly age, non-pension wealth decile, having been on sick leave in past three years, having a
spouse, tertiary education, female, pension wealth at the beginning of the year in logs, marginal accrual
rate assuming no reform in logs and year dummies.



                                                   33
Table 3: Cox proportional hazard model regressions for returning to work, within the sample of retirees.

                              Main specification          Specification Check
 Dependent variable          Returning in 3 years        Predicted Returning:
                                                         Binarized at median
                                      (1)                          (2)
 Immediate increase in             -0.0222                      -0.0064
 pension wealth, %                 (0.0202)                    (0.0109)

 Increase in marginal               0.0005                     -0.0061
 accrual rate, % of                (0.0213)                   (0.0119)
 pension wealth

 Reach full retirement             0.3902**                    -0.0876
 age in 12 months                   (0.183)                    (0.105)


 N                                  11,092                     11,092

Notes. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Years covered: 2003­2004
(control) 2005­2006 (treatment). The estimated model is the Cox proportional hazard model regression
(Equation 1). The sample is those who retired in control or treatment years. The dependent variable in
column (1) is an indicator of whether the individual returned to the labor market in the following three
years earning at least 25% of their maximum earnings of past three years. The dependent variable in
columns (2) and (3) is the predicted return to labor market using the prediction model estimated in Table
A1. Control variables are monthly age, non-pension wealth decile, having been on sick leave in the three
prior years, having a spouse, tertiary education, female, pension wealth at the beginning of the year in
logs, marginal accrual rate assuming no reform in logs and year dummies.




                                                    34
Table 4: Cox proportional hazard model regressions with covariates as dependent variable, within the

sample of retirees.


                                                 Covariates as dependent variable
 Dependent       Sickness    Primary     Tertiary     First         Third         Female    Having a   Spouse
 variable        absences   education   education    wealth        wealth                    spouse    working
                                                     tercile       tercile
                    (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)            (9)       (10)       (11)
 Immediate        0.0018    -0.0009     -0.0132     -0.0095       -0.0075        -0.0211    -0.0098    -0.0005
 increase in     (0.0146)   (0.0118)    (0.0159)   (0.0140)       (0.0147)       (0.0159)   (0.0094)   (0.0094)
 pension
 wealth, %

 Increase in      0.0014    -0.0070     -0.0059      0.0015       -0.0158        -0.0027     0.0028     0.0166
 marginal        (0.0077)   (0.0094)    (0.0144)    (0.0123)      (0.0146)       (0.0094)   (0.0071)   (0.0123)
 accrual rate,
 % of
 pension
 wealth

 Reach full      0.0693      -0.1462    -0.2159**    0.1337     -0.2591***     -0.3110***   0.0181     0.0442
 retirement      (0.128)     (0.111)      (0.105)    (0.124)      (0.111)        (0.113)    (0.076)    (0.153)
 age in 12
 months


      N          11,092      11,092      11,092      11,092       11,092         11,092     11,092     11,092

Notes. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Years covered: 2003­2004
(control) 2005­2006 (treatment). The estimated model is the Cox proportional hazard model regression
(Equation 1). The sample is those who retired in control or treatment years. The dependent variable is
the named covariate. Control variables are monthly age, non-pension wealth decile, having been on sick
leave in the three prior years, having a spouse, tertiary education, female, pension wealth at the
beginning of the year in logs, marginal accrual rate assuming no reform in logs and year dummies. In
each regression, the other covariates of the same category are not controlled, e.g., for primary
education, tertiary education is not controlled.




                                                           35
Figure 1: Excess labor force exit at retirement ages.




                                 9
  Excess labor force exit rate




                                 7

                                 5

                                 3

                                 1

                                 -1




                                      Early Retirement   Normal Retirement


Notes. The y-axis depicts the conditional labor force exit rate at early retirement and normal retirement
as a multiple of the average of the retirement rate in the year before and after. Data source: Gruber, J.
and David W. (1999).




                                                                  36
Figure 2. Nonworking elderly and disincentives to work by country.




Notes. Nonworking elderly (vertical axis) is measured as the percentage of the population that is not
working from ages 55 to 65, on average. The disincentive to work (horizontal axis) is measured as the
natural logarithm of the sum of implicit taxes on work at all ages from the early retirement age to age
69. Source. Gruber, J. and David W. (1999); Gruber (2019).




                                                   37
Figure 3: The effect of the reform on pension incentives and labeling




Notes. Pension wealth, if retired immediately, increased on January 1, 2005 due to the reform as a
function of age. Marginal accrual rate as a proportion of accrued pension calculated for a 12-month
period changed due to the reform as a function of age, earnings and accrued pension. Relabeling is
defined as reaching full retirement age due to the 2005 reform in 12 months. The means are estimated
for bimonthly birth bins. The 95% confidence intervals are shown in the shaded area. The cohorts
represented in the x-axis are 1940­1943.




                                                   38
Figure 4: Retirement rates by bimonthly birth bins in 2004 (pre-reform) and 2005 (post-reform).




Notes. Retirement is measured as claiming old-age pension. Relabeling is defined as reaching full
retirement age due to the 2005 reform in 12 months. The means are estimated for bimonthly birth bins.
The 95% confidence intervals are shown by the vertical bars. The grey dots depict retirement rates for the
cohorts 1940­1943 (in 2005), black dots for the cohorts 1939­1942 (in 2004).




                                                   39
Figure 5: Pension incentives, labeling and retirement rates in 2005 vs 2004.




Notes. Pension wealth increased on January 1, 2005 due to the reform as a function of age. Marginal
accrual rate as a proportion of accrued pension calculated for a 12-month period changed due to the
reform as a function of age, earnings and accrued pension. Relabeling is defined as reaching full
retirement age due to the 2005 reform in 12 months. The means are estimated for bimonthly age bins.
Retirement is measured as claiming old-age pension and estimated as a t-test of the difference in 2005
and 2004 for monthly birth bins. The 95% confidence intervals are shown by the error bars.




                                                    40
Figure 6: Retirement fractions at different ages.




Notes. Fraction of those who retired (claimed old-age pension) during each year by monthly age bins in
2004, 2005 (the year of the reform) and 2015. The reform in 2005 raised early retirement age (ERA) from
60 to 62 and lowered full retirement age (FRA) from 65 to 63. Delayed retirement age (DRA) was raised
from 65 years and one month to 68 years and one month. No significant reforms for old-age pension
took place between 2005 and 2015.




                                                    41
Figure 7: Kaplan-Maier survival estimates by relabeling status and year.




Notes. The sample is working population at each age. Survival is measured as not retiring (claiming old-
age pension) during the calendar year. The reform came into effect in 2005, lowering full retirement age
(FRA) from 65 to 63. First panel: In 2005, the depicted age bracket reached FRA as they turned 63.
Second panel: In 2005, the depicted age bracket reached FRA in January. Third panel: In 2005, the
depicted age bracket would have reached FRA even without the reform. However, the reform affected
the timing of reaching FRA. In 2004, they reached FRA as they turned 65. In 2005, they reached FRA in
January.




                                                   42
Figure 8. The anticipation effect ­ Pension incentives, labeling and retirement rates in 2004 vs 2003.




Notes. The figure depicts changes in retirement patterns one year before the reform (2004) and changes
in incentives and labeling in the reform (2005). Pension wealth increased on January 1, 2005 due to the
reform as a function of age. Marginal accrual rate as a proportion of accrued pension calculated for a
12-month period changed due to the reform as a function of age, earnings and accrued pension.
Relabeling is defined as reaching full retirement age due to the 2005 reform in 12 months. The means
are estimated for bimonthly age bins. Retirement is measured as claiming old-age pension and
estimated as a t-test of the difference in 2004 and 2003 for monthly birth bins. The 95% confidence
intervals are shown by the error bars.




                                                    43
Appendix Tables and Figures

Figure A1: The effect of the reform on pension incentives, labeling and retirement rates by monthly birth

bins in 2005­2006 vs 2003­2004.




Notes. Pension wealth increased on January 1, 2005 due to the reform as a function of age. Marginal
accrual rate as a proportion of accrued pension calculated for a 24-month period changed due to the
reform as a function of age, earnings and accrued pension. The means are estimated for monthly age
bins. The 95% confidence intervals are shown in the shaded area. Retirement is estimated as a t-test of
the difference in 2005­2006 and 2003­2004 for monthly birth bins. The 95% confidence intervals are
shown by the error bars.




                                                   44
Table A1: Pre-reform regression for selection correction prediction.

 Dependent             Only year 2003
 variable:
 Returning to labor
 market
                       (1)
 Sickness absences     -0.380***
 in past 3 years       (0.109)
 Primary education     -0.056
                       (0.115)
 Tertiary education    0.361***
                       (0.124)
 First net wealth      0.289***
 tercile               (0.109)
 Third net wealth      0.355***
 tercile               (0.110)
 Female                -0.052
                       (0.110)
 Has spouse            0.071
                       (0.109)
 Spouse not retired    0.011
                       (0.109)

 Monthly age           Yes
 controls
 N                     3,573
Notes. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Years covered: 2003. The
estimated model is the Cox proportional hazard model regression (Equation 1). The dependent variable is
returning to labor market in the next 3 years at 25% of maximum earnings of the past three years.
Control variables are monthly age, non-pension wealth tercile, having been on sick leave in the three
prior years, having a spouse, having a non-retired spouse, primary and tertiary education and female.




                                                   45
