                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       STRATEGIC INTERACTIONS IN U.S. MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES

                                         Xiaoshan Chen
                                         Eric M. Leeper
                                        Campbell B. Leith

                                       Working Paper 27540
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27540


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




Previously circulated as "U.S. Monetary and Fiscal Policy - Conflict of Cooperation?'" We thank
Chris Sims, Harald Uhlig, Todd Walker, Tack Yun, Tao Zha and participants at the Tsinghua-
CAEPR conference on monetary and fiscal policy in Beijing, the Next Steps for the Fiscal Theory
in Chicago and seminars at ESRI, Dublin and the Universities of Birbeck, Birmingham, Cardiff,
Nottingham and Sheffield for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Xiaoshan Chen, Eric M. Leeper, and Campbell B. Leith. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Strategic Interactions in U.S. Monetary and Fiscal Policies
Xiaoshan Chen, Eric M. Leeper, and Campbell B. Leith
NBER Working Paper No. 27540
July 2020
JEL No. E31,E32,E52,E61,E62,E63

                                          ABSTRACT

We estimate a model in which fiscal and monetary policy behavior arise from the optimizing
behavior of distinct policy authorities, with potentially different welfare functions. Optimal time-
consistent policy behavior fits U.S. time series at least as well as rules-based behavior. American
policies often do not conform to the conventional mix of conservative monetary policy and debt-
stabilizing fiscal policy. Even after the Volcker disinflation, policies did not achieve that
conventional mix, as fiscal policy did not act to stabilize debt until the mid 1990s. A credible
conservative central bank that follows a time-consistent fiscal policy leader would come close to
mimicking the cooperative Ramsey policy. Had that strategic policy mix been in place, American
might have avoided the Great Inflation. Enhancing cooperation between policy makers without an
ability to commit may be detrimental to welfare.

Xiaoshan Chen                                    Campbell B. Leith
Durham University Business School                Department of Economics
Mill Hill Lane                                   University of Glasgow
Durham DH1 3LB                                   Glasgow, G12 8QQ, Scotland
United Kingdom                                   campbell.leith@glasgow.ac.uk
xiaoshan.chen@durham.ac.uk

Eric M. Leeper
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
248 McCormick Rd
Charlottesville, VA 22903
and NBER
eml3jf@virginia.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27540
 Strategic Interactions in U.S. Monetary and Fiscal
                                                                 *
                                                Policies


                                                                                               
                  Xiaoshan Chen               Eric M. Leeper             Campbell Leith




1 Introduction
A large literature analyzes shifts in monetary policy regime. One important branch assesses
how much of the Great Moderation in output and ination volatility was simply good
lucka favorable shift in shock volatilitiesor good policya desirable change in mone-
tary policy rule parameters [Sims and Zha (2006)]. Many researchers date the improvement
in policy making to the Volcker disination in 1979 or shortly after.                   Very little work ex-
amines the role scal policy played in altering ination trends.                  This neglect is surprising
in light of the co-movements in ination, real interest rates, and scal variables including
the government debt. The upward trend in ination before the 1980s is associated with a
downward trend in the debt-GDP ratio, while the moderation in ination coincided with a
step increase in the real interest rate and a rising debt-GDP ratio, at least until 1995 [gure
1].
      Bianchi (2012) and Bianchi and Ilut (2017) are notable exceptions. They build on the
policy interactions in Leeper (1991) to allow for switches in the combinations of monetary
                                  1,2
and scal policy rules over time.      Bianchi and Ilut nd that a combination of passive
monetary policy and active scal policy produced higher ination and lower debt during the
Great Ination from 1965 to 1982. A period of policy conicts follows with both monetary

      * July 8, 2020. Previously circulated as U.S. Monetary and Fiscal Policy - Conict of Cooperation? We
thank Chris Sims, Harald Uhlig, Todd Walker, Tack Yun, Tao Zha and participants at the Tsinghua-CAEPR
conference on monetary and scal policy in Beijing, the Next Steps for the Fiscal Theory in Chicago and
seminars at ESRI, Dublin and the Universities of Birbeck, Birmingham, Cardi, Nottingham and Sheeld
for helpful comments.
       University of Durham; xiaoshan.chen@durham.ac.uk.
       University of Virginia, and NBER; eleeper@virginia.edu.
       University of Glasgow; campbell.leith@glasgow.ac.uk.
      1 Leeper (1991) characterizes monetary policy as active (AM) or passive (PM) depending on whether or
not it satises the Taylor principle. A scal policy that adjusts taxes to ensure scal sustainability is passive
(PF), while failing to do is an active policy (AF).
      2 Related papers include Davig (2004) and Davig and Leeper (2006, 2011), which allow for regime switching
in estimated scal policy. Traum and Yang (2011) and Leeper, Traum, and Walker (2017) implicitly consider
switches in monetary and scal policy by estimating a DSGE model with xed policy rules over sub-samples.



                                                        1
          Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies
and scal policy following active rules.   Eventually, scal policy turns passive to stabilize
debt in the face of the Fed's anti-inationary actions. This conventional policy mixactive
money/passive scalexplains the steady decline in ination and rise in debt in the 1980s.
   This paper builds on that analysis in several ways. First, we consider other types of policy
making in addition to simple policy rules. Monetary policy is conducted optimally, but under
time-consistent policy with uctuations in the degree of ination conservatism, as in Chen,
Kirsanova, and Leith (2017). We permit scal policy to choose among active, passive, and
optimal time-consistent scal rules, where the scal authority acts as a Stackelberg leader in
a game with the optimizing monetary authority. This strategic policy specication, which
resembles actual policy arrangements, t data surprisingly well, yielding a t comparable to
the usual rules-based menu. To solve the strategic policy game between the monetary and
scal policy makers in the face of regime switching, the paper develops a new algorithm.
   Second, optimal policy's t to data introduces a fresh narrative of how policies have
evolved in the post-war period. Under time-consistent optimal policy the movement between
regimes is more nuanced and it is rare that policy combinations conform to something akin
to the theoretical active/passive pairings. We do not nd that the Volcker disination was
followed by a permanent shift to a debt-stabilizing scal policy, as conventional rules-based
estimates do. We reconcile these ndings with narrative evidence on the evolution of policy
making.
   Third, a counterfactual exercise points to     joint   monetary-scal behavior as the source
of the Great Ination. Optimal scal policy with conservative monetary policy, even when
behavior is strategic and time-consistent, could have avoided the Great Ination. This new
result carries important practical implications. First, estimates nd at least some periods
when the policy mix prevailed, making the result non-vacuous.         Second, the specication
is a natural description of optimal policy behavior, as it requires neither cooperation nor
commitment. Third, it points to the potency of good scal choices in ination outcomes,
something largely neglected in studies of ination dynamics.
   Finally, we assess the welfare implications of alternative policy regimes. The mix of a
conservative central bank that follows an optimizing scal authority who acts as Stackelberg
leader comes close to mimicking cooperative Ramsey policies.          It turns out that merely
enhancing cooperation between policy makers without also inducing commitment can reduce
welfare relative to the estimated strategic interactions equilibrium.      But the Stackelberg
leadership regime must be credible, and not expected to shift to another potential policy
regime. Credibility is important because there can be substantial spillovers across regimes,
with a scal authority behaving optimally, taking into account possible future switches to a
passive scal rule. And the inationary impacts of an active scal regime are aected by the
possibility of switching to a passive scal policy that raises distorting tax rates to stabilize
debt. This latter phenomenon arises from the inationary impacts of alternative distorting
tax policies, a scal consideration missing in Bianchi (2012) and Bianchi and Ilut (2017).


2 The Model
Households, a monopolistically competitive production sector, and the government populate
the economy. A continuum of goods enters the households' consumption basket. Households
form external consumption habits at the level of the consumption basket as a whole, what



                                              2
         Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies
                                                                                         3
Ravn, Schmitt-Gróhe, and Uribe (2006) call supercial habits.                                 The economy is subject to
both price and ination inertia, which help to capture the hump-shaped responses of output
and ination to shocks evident in VAR-based studies, and are often employed in empiri-
cal applications of the New Keynesian model [Smets and Wouters (2003) and Christiano,
Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005)].
   On the scal side, the government levies a tax on rms' sales revenue, which is equivalent
to a tax on all labor and prot income in this model. These revenues nance government
consumption, pay for transfers to households, and service the outstanding stock of gov-
ernment debt. Government issues a portfolio of bonds of dierent maturities subject to a
geometrically declining maturity structure.


2.1 Households
A continuum of households indexed by                   k and of measure one derive utility from consumption
                                                        -1          -1
                                            1
of a composite good,     Ctk =             0
                                                  k
                                                 Cit    
                                                             di          , where      is the elasticity of substitution

between the goods in this basket. Households suer disutility from hours spent working,
Ntk . Habits are formed at the level of the aggregate consumption good and households
fail to take account of the impact of their consumption decisions on the utility of others.
To facilitate data-consistent detrending around a balanced growth path without restricting
preferences to be logarithmic, we assume that consumption enters the utility function scaled
by the economy-wide technology trend [Lubik and Schorfheide (2006) and An and Schorfheide
(2007)]. This implies that the household's consumption norms rise with technology and are
aected by habits externalities. Households maximize

                                                       1-                          1+
                                       t         Xtk     (t )-   Ntk   (t )-
                         E0                                    -                                                      (1)
                              t=0
                                                       1-            1+
             k
            Ct   Ct-1
where   Xtk At
               - A t-1
                       is the habit-adjusted consumption aggregate,  is the habit persistence
                                       1 k
parameter (0 <  < 1), and Ct-1          Ct-1 dk is the cross-sectional average of consumption.
                                      0
Households gain utility from consuming more than other households and are disappointed
if their consumption doesn't grow in line with technical progress. Preferences are subject
to a taste shock,   ln t =  ln t-1 +  ,t .                        is the discount factor      (0 <  < 1) ,   and      and
 are the inverses   of the intertemporal elasticities of habit-adjusted consumption and work
(,  > 0;  = 1).
   The process for technology is non-stationary

                                    ln At = ln  + ln At-1 + ln qt
                                     ln qt = q ln qt-1 + q q,t
   Households choose the composition of the consumption basket to minimize expenditure,
so demand for individual good          i    is
                                                                         -
                                                   k              Pit
                                                  Cit   =                    Ctk
                                                                  Pt
  3 For a comparison of the implications for optimal policy of alternative forms of habits see Amato and
Laubach (2004) and Leith, Moldovan, and Rossi (2012).



                                                                  3
                Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies
                                                                                          1-
                                                                     1
where       Pit   is the price of good   i,   and   Pt =            0
                                                                         (Pit )1- di           is the CES aggregate price

index associated with the composite good consumed by households.                                      Aggregating across
households, we obtain the overall demand for good                           i   as

                                                        1                            -
                                                             k             Pit
                                         Cit =              Cit dk =                     Ct                           (2)
                                                    0                      Pt
                                                                     k                   k
   Households choose the habit-adjusted consumption aggregate, Xt , hours worked, Nt , and
                           S,k      M,k
the portfolio allocation, Bt   and Bt   , to maximize expected lifetime utility (1), subject to
the budget constraint

            1
                     k            S,k        M,k    S,k             M,k
                Pit Cit di + PtS Bt   + PtM Bt   = Bt            M            k
                                                     -1 + (1 + Pt )Bt-1 + Wt Nt + t + Pt Zt                           (3)
        0

and a no-Ponzi scheme condition. Period          t income includes: wage income from providing
labor services to goods producing rms,        Wt Ntk , a lump-sum transfer from the government,
Zt , dividends from the monopolistically competitive rms, t , and payos from the portfolio
             S,k       M,k
of assets, Bt     and Bt   . Households hold two forms of government bonds. The rst is the
                                S
familiar one-period debt, Bt , whose price equals the inverse of the gross nominal interest
         S     - 1
rate, Pt = Rt . The second type of bond is actually a portfolio of many bonds, which pays
                             j -1                                                 -1
a declining premium of            , j periods after being issued where 0 <  <         [Woodford
                                              1
(2001)]. The duration of the bond is             , which means that  can be varied to capture
                                            1-
changes in the maturity structure of debt. By using this simple structure we need to price
                                                                           j -1
only a single bond, since any existing bond issued j periods ago is worth       new bonds.
When    =1          these bonds become innitely lived consols.
   Household optimization yields the optimal allocation of consumption across time, based
on the pricing of one-period bonds

                                                                          -
                                                        Xtk+1 t+1                A t Pt
                                1 = Et                                                    Rt
                                                         Xtk t                  At+1 Pt+1
                                   = Et Qt,t+1 Rt
where we have dened the stochastic discount factor as
                                                                           -
                                                            Xtk+s t+s             At Pt
                                   Qt,t+s  
                                                             Xtk t               At+s Pt+s
and the geometrically declining consols

                                                                    -
                                               Xtk+1 t+1                   At Pt
                          PtM   = Et                                                (1 + PtM
                                                                                           +1 )
                                                Xtk t                     At+1 Pt+1
                                = Et Qt,t+1 (1 + PtM
                                                   +1 )
                                                                                                                    -1
When all bonds have one-period duration,                        = 0,        the price of these bonds is      PtM = Rt  .
Outside of this special case, the longer term bonds introduce a term structure of interest
rates. The rst-order condition for labor is

                                                     Wt
                                                           = Ntk Xtk
                                                    Pt A t

                                                                4
             Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

   There is an associated transversality condition.                                Dene household nancial wealth in
period   t   as
                                                      k             M,k    S,k
                                                     Dt  (1 + PtM )Bt-1 + Bt-1

and impose the no-arbitrage conditions to rewrite the budget constraint as

                                     1
                                              k                  k      k       k
                                         Pit Cit di + Et Qt,t+1 Dt+1 = Dt + Wt Nt + t + Pt Zt
                                 0

Household optimization implies a transversality condition that combined with the no-Ponzi
condition yields
                                                                          k
                                                             lim Et Qt,T DT =0
                                                            T 


2.2 Firms
Individual goods producers are subject to the constraints of Calvo (1983) contracts. Each
period a rm can reset its price with probability                              1 - ,   while it retains the previous period
price with probability                   .   That previous price is indexed to the steady-state rate of ination,
following Yun (1996). When a rm can choose a new price, it can do so either to maximize the
                                                      s
present discounted value of after-tax prots, Et  s=0  Qt,t+s it+s , or to follow a simple rule
of thumb as in Galí and Gertler (1999). Prots are discounted by the s-step ahead stochastic
discount factor        Qt,t+s        and by the probability of not being able to set prices in future periods.
The rm's revenues are taxed at rate,                           t ,   which in aggregate, is equivalent to the ratio of
taxes to GDP, which can be easily mapped to the data. This, obviously, greatly simplies
the complexities of the tax system which features of myriad of allowances and marginal tax
rates, but allows us to adopt a simple measure of distortionary taxation rather than the
common assumption in rule-based estimations that taxes are lump-sum [Bianchi (2012) and
Bianchi and Ilut (2017)]. Forward-looking prot maximizers are constrained by the demand
for their good, condition (2), and the condition that all demand must be satised at the
chosen price. An autocorrelated shock aects the desired markup,                                     ln µt = µ ln µt-1 + µ µ,t .
Firm   i's   optimization problem is

                                               
                             max Et                 s Qt,t+s [((1 - t+s )Pit  s - µt+s M Ct+s ) Yit+s ]
                           {Pit , Yit }
                                              s=0

subject to the demand curve
                                                                               -
                                                                     Pit  s
                                                        Yit+s =                    Yt+s
                                                                     Pt+s
   Optimizing rms that are able to reset price choose                                 Ptf ,   whose relative price satises

                                                                                                                
                                                                                                    Pt+s  -s
              Ptf                             Et      s=0   ( )s (Xt+s t+s )- µt+s mct+s               Pt
                                                                                                                   Yt+s
                                                                                                                   At+s
                       =                                                                                        -1
                  Pt          -1                                                                   Pt+s  -s
                                              Et     s=0   ( )s (Xt+s t+s )- (1 - t+s )               Pt
                                                                                                                     Yt+s
                                                                                                                     At+s


where  mct = M    Ct
                 Pt
                     = PW t
                        t At
                             is the real marginal cost,                            given the linear production function,

Yit = At Nit . Under exible prices, mct = (1 - t ) -
                                                     1
                                                       .


                                                                       5
           Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

   Ination is inertial. Some rms use rules of thumb. When those rms are permitted to
                                b
post a new price, they choose Pt to obey

                                             Ptb = Pt-1 t-1

so they update their price using last period's rate of ination rather than steady-state ina-
        
tion. Pt-1 denotes an index of the reset prices, dened by

                                                           f
                                    ln Pt                         b
                                         -1 = (1 -  ) ln Pt-1 + Pt-1

where      is the proportion of rms that adopt rule-of-thumb pricing. With                  share of rms
keeping last period's price (but indexed to steady-state ination) and                1-     share of rms
setting a new price, the law of motion of the aggregate price index is

                              (Pt )1- =  (Pt-1  )1- + (1 - ) (Pt )1-
    The setup delivers a hybrid New Keynesian Phillips curve, as Leith and Malley (2005)
detail. Combine the rule-of-thumb pricing with the optimal price setting to produce

                                                                      
                         t = f Et t+1 + b t-1 + c mct +                  t + µt
                                                                     1-
t = ln(Pt ) - ln(Pt-1 ) - ln( ) is the deviation of ination from its steady-state value, mct +
                               
   = ln(Wt /Pt ) - ln At + 1-
1- t
                                   - ln(( - 1)/ ) + ln(1 -  ), are log-linearized real marginal
                                  t
costs adjusted for the impact of the sales revenue tax, and the reduced-form parameters are
                                  (1-)(1- )(1- )
dened as f         , b     , c                   , with   (1 +  ) + (1 - ) .
                                         

2.3 The Government
Government choices satisfy the ow budget identity

                  PtM Bt
                       M
                         = (1 + PtM )Bt
                                      M
                                       -1 - Pt Yt t + Pt Gt + Pt Zt + Pt Yt tp,t
                                                     S
We assume short bonds are in zero net supply, so   Bt   0. PtM Bt  M
                                                                      is the market value of
debt, Pt Gt and Pt Zt are government spending and transfers and Pt Yt tp,t is an i.i.d. shock to
                                                                                                         4
the budget constraint that arises from random uctuations in the debt maturity structure.
Government can use distorting taxes to service government debt and to stabilize the economy.
We deliberately reduce the complexity of the tax system to a single measure of distortionary
taxation. With a suciently wide array of scal instruments the policy maker could address
the limited set of distortions that the model contains, in a manner that policy cannot achieve
                     5
in the real world.  Divide through by nominal GDP,            Pt Y t ,   to rewrite the budget identity in
                    M    P M Bt  M
terms of the ratio bt = t
                           P t Yt

                                    (1 + PtM ) Yt-1 M
                             bM
                              t =                  b - t + gt + zt + tp,t
                                       PtM
                                         -1    t Yt t-1
   4 This shock breaks a singularity that arises when all the other elements of the budget constraint are
observables in estimation.
   5 For example, in a simple New Keynesian model optimal use of multiple tax instruments can replicate
the rst best allocation in the same way lump-sum taxes and a production subsidy can [Correia, Nicolini
and Teles (2008)]. This would render our policy problem trivial.



                                                    6
           Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

where   tp,t = tp tp,t    and we assume that the government spending-GDP ratio,                             gt ,   evolves
according to
                                    ln gt = (1 - g ) ln g + g ln gt-1 + g g,t
and the transfers-GDP ratio,           zt ,   follows a similar process


                                    ln zt = (1 - z ) ln z + z ln zt-1 + z z,t

The scal shocks,       tp,t , g,t   and   z,t   are all standard normally distributed.


2.4 The Complete Model
The complete system of non-linear equations that describe the equilibrium appear in ap-
pendix A. After log-linearizing around the deterministic steady state, the model is summa-
           6
rized by
                                       Labor Supply:       Xt + Nt = wt                                                (4)

                                              1
               Euler equation:      Xt = Et Xt+1 -Rt - Et t+1 - Et qt+1 - t + Et t+1                                   (5)
                                              
                                                M    
                                 Bond Prices: Pt =      Et PtM
                                                             +1 - Rt                                                   (6)
                                                     
                                                                   1
                             Resource Constraint: yt = Nt = ct +       gt                                              (7)
                                                                 1-g
                           Consumption Habits:           Xt = (1 - )-1 (ct - ct-1 )                                    (8)

                                                                                     1
                 Phillips curve:     t = f Et t+1 + b t-1 + c wt +                     t + µt                          (9)
                                                                                    1-

                                           1 M     bM  M
           Govt Budget:      bM
                              t =           bt-1 +        P - PtM -1 + yt-1 - yt - t - qt                            (10)
                                                      t
                                           -t + gt + zt + tp tp,t

                                     Govt Spending:       gt = g gt-1 + g g,t                                        (11)

                                          Transfers:   zt = z zt-1 + z z,t                                           (12)

                                       Technology:      qt = q qt-1 + q q,t                                          (13)

                               Cost-Push/Markup:           µt = µ µt-1 + µ µ,t                                       (14)

                                        Preference:    t =  t-1 +  ,t                                                (15)

To close the model we specify policy behavior.

   6 The scal variables are normalized with respect to GDP, so            bM
                                                                           t , t , gt ,   and   zt   are dened as linear
deviations from their steady states. Other variables are expressed as percentage deviations from steady state.
Before linearizing, output, consumption and real wages are rendered stationary by scaling by technology,               At .




                                                          7
         Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

3 Policy Making
Policy makers behave both optimally and strategically. We contrast the t to data of this
description of policy to a version of the model in which policy obeys the kinds of simple rules
in existing literature. That rules-based benchmark appears in appendix C.


3.1 Optimal Policy
Now we describe our optimal policy specications. Chen, Kirsanova, and Leith (2017) es-
timate monetary policy models of the U.S. economy to nd that monetary policy is best
described as optimal but time-consistent. The t of that description dominates both rules-
based and commitment Ramsey monetary policy.                 Extending this analysis to scal policy
raises several considerations.      First, the monetary and scal authorities are independent
policy makers with potentially dierent policy objectives. This leads us to model strategic
interactions between the two policy makers: they play a game where either authority may be
the Stackelberg leadermaking policy decisions anticipating the reaction of the otheror a
Nash equilibrium where each policy maker takes the other's policies as given when formu-
lating their own plans. Beetsma and Debrun (2004) argue that scal leadership is the best
description of the interactions between monetary and scal authorities because in practice
the monetary authority's response to shocks is well articulated and can be anticipated by the
                    7
scal authorities.       Monetary policy is more nimble, able to react swiftly to news about eco-
nomic conditions, including scal actions. We adopt this timing assumption in what follows.
But we also estimated our model under the alternative assumptions of monetary leadership
and the Nash solution. Changing the nature of the strategic interaction can have a material
impact in simple models. This is not the case in our model, which features habits, ination
                                                   8
inertia and a desire to smooth instruments.
    Second, while Chen, Kirsanova, and Leith (2017) nd strong evidence that monetary
policy has been conducted optimally, albeit with switches in the degree of conservatism over
time, it is not obvious that scal policy has been similarly optimal. This leads us to posit
that monetary policy behaves optimallywith changes in degree of conservatismwhile
scal policy switches between rules-based and optimal time-consistent policy, as t to data
dictates.
    An obvious approach to policy objectives would be to use the micro-founded welfare
                                                                                        9
function based on the utility of the households that populate the economy.                  But estimation
with micro-founded weights is problematic. Because the micro-founded weights are functions
of structural parameters, they place very tight cross-equation restrictions on the model,
which are likely to deteriorate t to data. With standard estimates of the degree of price
stickiness, for example, the micro-founded weight attached to ination can be over 100 times
that attached to output [Woodford (2003, chapter 6)].               Optimal policy based on such a

   7 Fiscal leadership is not scal dominance and does not imply that the scal authority forces the central
bank to accommodate its actions. Leadership means that the central bank takes scal policy as given and
it has a well-known reaction to the state of the economy, which the scal authority takes into account when
setting policy. For example, the scal authority might anticipate that the central bank will act to stabilize
ination in the face of a scal stimulus.
   8 Results from alternative leadership assumptions are available upon request.
   9 See appendix B for the micro-founded welfare function.



                                                       8
         Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

strong anti-ination objective would be wildly inconsistent with observed ination volatility.
Instead, we follow Chen, Kirsanova, and Leith (2017) and adopt a form of the objective
function for each policy maker which is consistent with the representative agents' utility, but
we freely estimate the weights within that objective function. The objective function for the
monetary authority is

                                                             2                 2
                                                                          
                                                  1 Xt + t       + 2 yt -  t
                  M
                  0   = E0            t
                                                                                                  (16)
                             t=0              +3 (t - t-1 )2 + ,S
                                                               M
                                                                   2 + R (Rt )2
                                                                 t t


Under the optimal monetary policy specication, we consider potential switches in the
                                          M
weight attached to ination stabilization, ,S . That normalized weight can switch be-
                                            t
        M                                                          M
tween ,S =1 = 1 in the More-Conservative (MC) regime and 0 < ,S =2 < 1 in the
           t                                                                          t
Less-Conservative (LC) regime.                We also allow monetary policy to value smooth interest
rates.
   Optimal scal policy minimizes

                                                             2                 2
                                                                          
                                                 1 Xt + t        + 2 yt -  t
                   F
                   0   = E0               t
                                                                                                  (17)
                              t=0              +3 (t - t-1 )2 + F 2
                                                                 t +  (t )2
The objective of the scal authority can dier from that of the monetary authority only
                                      F
in the weight attached to ination,  , the presence of a tax rate-smoothing term, and
the absence of interest-rate smoothing. In essence, the two policy makers share the same
conception of social welfare, but the government may appoint a monetary authority with an
aversion to ination that diers from that of society, to reect Rogo 's (1985) arguments.

   Habits externalities introduce the preference shock,              t , into the objective functions.
Habits confront policy makers with a trade o.                When    t is high, utility of consumption
and disutility of work are low. Policy makers will want to induce more labor, but any higher
consumption from that labor produces a lower utility gain.


3.2 Policy Rules
We adopt an agnostic view of scal behavior by not forcing it to be optimal at all times.
When scal policy is not optimal and time-consistentwhen it is not minimizing (17)it
obeys the tax rule


                       t = ,st t-1 + (1 - ,st ) ,st bM
                                                     t-1 + y yt +  ,t                             (18)


The coecient on debt,      ,st ,    and the persistence of the tax rate,    ,st are subject to regime
switching with    st = 2   the Passive Fiscal (PF) regime          and st = 3 the Active Fiscal (AF)
                                                                                              1
regime. The value of the coecient on debt determines               scal regime, with ,st =2 >
                                                                                              
                                                                                                - 1 in
the PF regime and     ,st =3 = 0      in the AF regime.
   Transition matrices for monetary and scal policy regimes are
                                                                              
                                              11      1 - 22 - 23     31
                 11   1 - 22
     =                                , =     12          22      1 - 13 - 33 
               1 - 11   22
                                          1 - 11 - 12     23          33

                                                        9
         Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

where ii = Pr [St = i|St-1 = i]         and   ii = Pr [st = i|st-1 = i] .   The Optimal Fiscal (OF)
regime corresponds to st = 1.
   We also permit fundamental shock volatilities to change, a feature of existing explanations
of the Great Moderation. Failure to do so can bias the identication of shifts in policy [Sims
and Zha (2006)]. Standard deviations of technology (q,kt ), preference (,kt ) and cost-push
(µ,kt ) shocks may switch independently, with            kt = 1   the low volatility regime and    kt = 2
the high volatility regime. The transition matrix for the shock volatilities is


                                                  h11   1 - h22
                                        H=
                                                1 - h11   h22

where   hii = Pr [kt = i|kt-1 = i].10
   To solve the optimal policy problem, we develop a new algorithm that appendices D and
E describe, with two policy makers under dierent structures of strategic interaction: when
one policy maker can act as a Stackelberg leader in the policy game and when they move
simultaneously as part of a Nash equilibrium. Our algorithm incorporates potential changes
in policy makers' preferences over time.


3.3 Understanding Optimal Policy Behavior
To understand our results, it is helpful to review the Ramsey policy in which the two policy
makers share a common objective and are able to credibly commit to future policy actions [see
Leeper and Leith (2017) for an extensive discussion]. That policy setting delivers a variant
of tax smoothing: the policy maker smooths the distortions associated with satisfying its
budget constraint, using government debt as a shock absorber to do so. This doesn't mean
that taxes themselves are smoothed, since tax rates will adjust to oset cost-push shocks;
rather, policy smooths the distortions that would arise from not moving tax rates perfectly in
line with cost-push shocks. This policy generates a random walk in debt: the short-run costs
of reducing debt, once a given shock has dissipated, are exactly balanced by the long-run
benets of lower debt. In our model, the desire to reduce variations in the tax rate ensures
that government debt is eventually retired back to its steady state even under commitment,
                                  11
but this is extremely gradual.         Another notable feature of outcomes under commitment is
that although policy makers do utilize ination surprises to help stabilize debt, reliance on
such measures is limited.
   When we relax the assumption that the policy maker can commit, outcomes change rad-
ically [Leeper and Leith (2017) and Leeper, Leith, and Liu (2020)]. Our economy possesses
an ecient steady state in which the distortions that make output suboptimally low (monop-
olistic competition and distortionary taxation) balance the impact of the habits externality
that makes output too high. This eliminates the inationary bias problem in steady state.
But any level of debt outside of this steady-state value creates an incentive for the policy
maker to use ination surprises. Those surprises would bring the decentralized equilibrium
closer to the ecient allocation, both by inuencing output in the sticky-price economy and

  10 The joint transition matrix governing the monetary-scal-shock regime is       H , to yield 12 regimes
under optimal policy.
  11 Counterfactual outcomes under commitment and other forms of benchmark optimal policy are presented
in gure 4 and described in subsection 5.1.



                                                    10
         Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

by reducing debt.      The incentive to inate generates an inationary bias problem outside
of the steady state because economic agents understand the policy maker's incentives. The
policy maker can eliminate this bias by returning debt to steady state. But the rapid return
of debt to steady state produces a debt stabilization bias, as Leeper, Leith, and Liu (2020)
label it, so policy makers stabilize debt more rapidly than they would under commitment.
This explains why welfare outcomes under discretion are so much worse than commitment:
the policy makers return debt to steady state far too rapidly, failing to use debt as a shock
absorber, a phenomenon frequently observed in actual economies.
    Optimal policy in our model also deviates from the Ramsey outcome by assuming that
policy makers do not cooperate: they control their respective policy instruments and have
dierent objectives. As discussed above, our policy makers act strategically with the scal
                                                                                       12
authority the Stackelberg leader and the monetary authority the follower.                   The separation
of policy makers is actually benecial from a societal perspective. The scal authority knows
that if they aggressively try to reduce debt through taxation, the ination-averse monetary
authority will tighten monetary policy to reduce ination. This moderates the use of taxes
to stabilize debt, reducing the inationary consequences of such a policy.                   Lower ination
prompts the monetary authority to refrain from tightening monetary policy. Looser monetary
policy feeds back to encourage the scal authority to further delay scal stabilization because
debt service costs are not as high. The net outcome from a lack of cooperation is that ination
is closer to target and debt gets stabilized more gradually.
    The nal complication in our description of optimal policy relative to the Ramsey is that
economic agents in our model expect there to be switches in policy regimes. This is reasonable
given the frequency of observed policy switches within our sample and the evolution of policy
that Romer and Romer (2002b, 2010) describe. The main channel through which these eects
manifest themselves is the impact of a potential switch to passive scal behavior on the
optimizing regime. In the passive regime, distortionary taxes adjust to return debt to steady
state. The more that debt deviates from target, the more strongly taxes adjust. Suppose
debt is above target and scal policy is being conducted by an optimizing Stackelberg leader.
Since policy can potentially switch to a passive regime, debt growth creates the expectation
that a future change to passive behavior will raise the tax rate substantially, which drives up
ination. The optimizing scal authority responds to higher expected and current ination
                             13
by cutting current taxes.         This worsens debt dynamics, raising ination expectations still
more to encourage further tax cuts, and so on. If the economy stayed permanently in the
non-cooperative optimal regime, while economic agents continue to expect a switch to one of
passive scal policy regimes, this would ultimately be destabilizing. During specic sample
periods, though, this policy behavior can describe data.



  12 We considered alternative timing assumptionssimultaneous moves and the monetary authority acting
as leader. This does not materially aect outcomes and there is no clear preference for one approach over
another in terms of the marginal data density.
  13 The policy maker is not playing a game against future policy makers. But economic agents factor possible
changes in policy regime into their expectations and the current policy maker responds to that behavior.




                                                     11
          Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

4 Estimation
The empirical analysis uses seven U.S. time series on real output growth (GDPt ), annu-
alized domestic ination (IN Ft ), the federal funds rate (F F Rt ), the annualized debt-GDP
ratio (Bt /GDPt ), government spending ratio (Gt /GDPt ), transfers ratio (Zt /GDPt ) and fed-
eral tax revenue ratio (Tt /GDPt ) from 1955Q1 to 2008Q3. All data are seasonally adjusted
and at quarterly frequencies. Output growth is the log dierence of real GDP, multiplied
by 100. Ination is the log dierence of the GDP deator, scaled by 400. The four scal
variablesdebt, government spending, transfers and taxesare normalized with respect to
GDP and multiplied by 100. Appendix F describes the dataset in detail.
   The data are linked to the law of motion of states through the measurement equation


                                                             Q + yt + qt
                                                                                 
                                     GDPt
                                       IN Ft                     A + 4 t         
                                                                                 
                                  
                                      F F Rt     
                                                         rA +  A + 4 Q + 4Rt     
                                                                                 
                                  
                                     Gt /GDPt   =
                                                               100g + gt         
                                                                                 
                                  
                                     Tt /GDPt    
                                                               100 + t           
                                                                                 
                                     Zt /GDPt                  100z + zt         
                                                             100 M
                                     Bt /GDPt                 4
                                                                b +1    bM
                                                                       4 t

where parameters,        Q ,  A , rA , g, , z      and   bM   represent the steady-state values of output
growth, ination, real interest rates the government spending-GDP ratio, transfers-GDP
ratio, the tax rate, and debt-GDP on a quarterly basis.
   Steady-state values of scal variables and output growth are xed at their means over the
sample period. The government spending-GDP ratio (g ) is 8%, transfers (z ) is 9.19%, the
federal tax revenues to GDP ratio ( ) is 17.5%, the federal debt to annualized output ratio
  M                                          Q
(b ) is 31%, and quarterly output growth ( ) is 0.46%. The steady-state real interest rate
  A                                   A                                         A
(r ) is 1.8% and the ination target ( ) is 2%. The average real interest rate, r , is linked
                                  A       -1
to the discount factor,  = 1 + r /400        . Average maturity of outstanding government
debt is 5 years [Leeper and Zhou (2020, table 1)]. The inverse of Frisch elasticity of labor
                             14
supply,   ,   is set to 2.
   We approximate the likelihood function using Kim's (1994) lter, and then combine it
with the prior distribution to obtain the posterior distribution. A random walk Metropolis-
Hastings algorithm generates four chains of 540,000 draws each, after discarding the rst
240000 draws, and saving 1 in every 100 draws. Brooks-Gelman-Rubin potential reduction
scale factors, reported in appendix G, are all below the 1.1 upper bound for convergence.


4.1 Prior Distributions
Table 1 reports the priors of the optimal policy model, which consists of priors that are
common to the rules-based estimation in appendix C, as well as those for parameters spe-
cic to the optimal policy estimation, such as the weights on the objective function. Priors

  14 It can be dicult to estimate the inverse of Frisch elasticity without using labor market data. The value
 = 2 is consistent with the estimate of Smets and Wouters (2007).      This value is in line with microeconomic
estimates using household level data as in MaCurdy (1981).




                                                         12
          Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

for most of the parameters are relatively loose and broadly consistent with the literature
that estimates New Keynesian models. We choose the normal distribution for the inverse of
the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,   ,    with a prior mean of 2.5. Habits formation,
indexation and the AR(1) parameters of the technology, cost-push, taste, transfers, govern-
ment spending shocks follow a beta distribution with a mean of 0.5 and a standard deviation
of 0.15. The Calvo parameter for the probability of no price change,        ,   is set so that the
average length of the contract is around one year with a fairly tight prior around that value.
Allowing a looser prior on this parameter tends to result in implausibly high estimates of
the degree of price stickiness.
   The parameters specic to optimal policy include the relative weights (1 , 2,       3, and R )
attached to the output, changes in ination, and interest rate smoothing terms in the mon-
etary policy objective function. Those follow beta distributions. The normalized weight on
           M
ination, ,S , is unity in the More Conservative (MC) regime and obeys a beta distribution
              t
in the Less Conservative (LC) regime. For the scal policy objective function, we restrict
the relative weights attached to the output terms to be the same as those on the monetary
policy objective function, while we estimate the weight on the ination stabilization term,
 F                                    F
   , placed by the scal authority.       follows a Gamma distribution with prior mean of
1 and a standard deviation of 0.3, so we do not presume that the scal authority will be
either more or less ination conservative than the central bank. We assume that the scal
authority wants to avoid large variations in tax rates and a beta distribution is used for     .

4.2 Posterior Estimates
Table 1 presents the posterior parameter estimates. These include when the monetary au-
thority conducts optimal policy taking the policies of the scal authority as given, and
where the monetary authority's objective function may switch in its degree of ination con-
servatism over timebetween More or Less Conservative.             The scal authority acts as a
Stackelberg leader in the game with the monetary authority, so the scal authority conducts
policy anticipating the response of the Fed. Fiscal policy may switch between this leadership
roleOptimal Fiscal (OF)and simple passive or active scal rules, labeled PF and AF.
Six alternative policy regimes may arise in the optimal policy model: MC/OF, MC/PF,
MC/AF, LC/OF, LC/PF and LC/AF.
   Monetary policy is always optimal, but time-consistent. The weight attached to ination
               M
stabilization, ,S , is 0.61 in the LC regime, relative to the normalized value of one in
                 t
                                             F
the MC regime. Despite a prior mean of  = 1, the posterior estimate under OF is
0.32,   implying that the scal policy maker is substantially less averse to ination than is
the central bank, even when monetary policy is Less Conservative.           These estimates are
consistent with Rogo 's (1985) idea that the government should appoint a conservative
central banker with a stronger dislike of ination than the government, as measured by the
scal authority's estimated objective function.         When we compute the optimal degree of
ination conservatism for a delegated central bank given the estimated parameters, we nd
that the optimized weight of 1.4 lies above the normalized weight of one under the MC
regime.    These additional gains from conservatism, however, come from reducing ination
volatility below levels observed in data.
   Estimates of the deep model parameters are similar to those under rules-based policy



                                                13
            Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

see appendix Cwith a modest rise in the intertemporal elasticity of substitution,                 , to 3.2,
indexation,    , to 0.37, and the degree of habits, , to 0.81.       The other signicant dierence is
that the estimated degree of persistence of the cost-push shock process,               µ ,   rises from 0.21
to 0.93 as we move from the rules-based estimation to the optimal policy estimation, while
the variance of    i.i.d.   innovations to the cost-push shock fall dramatically.            The combined
eect of these dierences is that the standard deviation of the cost-push shock process is
                                                            15
actually lower under the optimal policy estimation.              Although cost-push shocks generate a
meaningful trade o for policy makers by raising ination and reducing output, they do not
rise to implausible levels in explaining the data when policy behaves optimally. Appendix H
reports results from the Komunjer and Ng (2011) identication test, along with plots of the
prior and posterior densities.


4.3 Model Comparison
Does modeling strategic interactions between optimizing policy makers deliver a reasonable
statistical t to data? Table 2 reports the log marginal likelihood values for models with
rules-based and optimal strategic policies to provide a basis for comparison. We compute
Geweke's (1999) modied harmonic mean estimator and the statistic that Sims, Waggoner,
and Zha (2008) propose to draw similar conclusions.                The latter method is designed for
models with time-varying parameters, where the posterior density may be non-Gaussian.
The two models t data equally well.
    We also present the marginal likelihood associated with an intermediate case in which
we allow monetary policy to be time-consistent with switches in the degree of conservatism,
while scal policy switches between active and passive rules, without the possibility of the
                                          16
scal authority behaving optimally.             The optimal policy model's t is also comparable to
the intermediate model's: episodes of scal Stackelberg leadership can help explain the data,
even when those episodes occur relatively infrequently. Fiscal leadership is consistent with
specic policy episodes.        Fiscal leadership also aects t because of the impact it has on
other policy regimes through expectations. We discuss this issue below.
    Model comparisons lead to a key nding that speaks to the bulk of the literature that
estimates policy rules. Optimal policy ts data at least as well as policy rules or a combina-
tion of optimal monetary policy and scal rules. This is a surprising outcome in light of the
additional restrictions that policy optimization imposes.


4.4 Regime Switching
We model monetary policy as optimal and uctuating between the more (MC) and less (LC)
conservative regimes.        Fiscal policy can move among optimal policy (OF), a passive rule
(PF), and an active rule (AF). Figure 2 reports probabilities of each policyvolatility regime
over the sample. This section connects estimated policy shifts to narrative descriptions of
the evolution of monetary and scal policies.

  15 The unconditional standard deviation of the cost-push shock process under the rules-based estimation is
4.9% (13%) in the low (high) volatility regimes, but is only 1.5% (4.2%) under the optimal policy estimation.
This compares to an unconditional standard deviation of the cost-push process in Smets and Wouters (2007)
of 14.7%.
  16 Parameter estimates of this intermediate model are available upon request.



                                                     14
         Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

4.4.1 Monetary Policy Regimes                 Looking at monetary policy alone, periods of the LC
regime capture those identied as passive in the rules-based estimation [appendix C]. There
are other periods in which monetary policy is less conservative. The late 1950s gave way to
uctuations in conservatism throughout the rst half of the 1960s.                  Debate surrounds the
anti-ination stance of monetary policy in the 1950s: Romer and Romer (2002a) argue that
policy makers appeared to recognize the need to ght ination with monetary tightening,
while Friedman (1960) was concerned that the policy of targeting free reserves implied a less
conservative regime.     Our switches in monetary policy regime in the late 1950s and early
1960s mirror this debate in the sense that relatively benign macroeconomic outcomes can be
described as a mixture of more or less conservative monetary policy in this period.
   By the mid 1960s, Romer and Romer (2002b) nd that monetary policy makers seemed
to believe that while rising ination was driven by buoyant levels of output, ination itself
would soon stabilize without requiring a signicant recession.              This is consistent with the
switch to the less conservative regime we see in the mid 1960s.
   The Romers suggest that policy makers internalized the Friedman-Phelps accelerationist
Phillips curve in the 1970s, but with an initially overoptimistic assessment of the natural
rate of unemployment. That assessment evolved to a pessimistic view of the output costs of
ghting ination. This explains the loss of ination conservatism throughout the 1970s.
   The Volcker disination didn't really take hold until 1982 [Chen, Kirsanova, and Leith
(2017)]. The switch to high conservatism in 1982 corresponds with an increasing acknowl-
edgement of the costs of ination on the part of monetary policy makers [Romer and Romer
                                                                                                         17
(2002b)] and Volcker's own assessment of when his deation had nally achieved credibility.
Finally, the temporary loss of conservatism in 1987 reects the operation of the Greenspan
put as monetary policy responded to the Black Monday stock market crash of that year
[Bornstein and Lorenzoni (2018)].


4.4.2 Fiscal Policy Regimes              Romer and Romer (2009, 2010) extensively analyze post-
war tax changes. They distinguish among tax policies designed to reduce the budget decit,
attempts to aect aggregate demand, actions intended to pay for specic spending initiatives,
and tax reforms aimed at enhancing long-run growth.
   Throughout the 1950s and 1960s scal authorities ran either scal surpluses or small
decits, so the debt-GDP ratio gradually declined [gure 1]. In the brief period in the 1950s,
which our estimates identify as optimal, Romer and Romer (2010) do not nd any signicant
tax changes other than as a response to changes in spending. The stability of taxes, falling
debt levels, and low and stable ination observed in this period are all consistent with optimal
scal policy.    In the next decade, there are some limited tax measures designed to match
additional spending commitments like the expansion of highways and social security, but
without signicant tax changes. The slower pace of debt reduction and rising ination imply
that policy is no longer optimal, switching to passive.
   By the end of 1960s, the debt-GDP ratio has fallen below the implicit steady state and
the Romers do not nd instances of tax cuts designed to return debt back to steady state.
Tax cuts at the time aimed to boost aggregate demand and reduce unemployment. Those

  17 Silber (2012, chapters 1113) details Volcker's belief that scal policy appeared to be beginning to pull
in the same direction as monetary policy when the Reagan administration partially reversed their tax cuts
in 1982 prompting him to write to the President suggesting that we are turning the corner.



                                                    15
        Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

cuts were relatively small and were unable to overcome the scal drag generated by high
ination and a progressive tax system with non-indexed tax brackets. The upward trend in
the tax burden, at a time of high ination and low debt, explains why the estimates nd
that scal policy is predominantly active in the 1970s. Instances of non-active scal policy
in this period are associated with the more sizeable tax cuts. The Nixon administration's
tax reforms of 1970 appear as a passive policy, which then turned optimal as scal policy
was further loosened before the 1972 election. Policy was optimal in the sense that reducing
tax revenues as a share of GDP reduced the inationary impact of distortionary taxation at
a time when ination was rising sharply, but debt levels were low. Ford's tax rebate in 1975
appears as a eetingly passive scal policy when the debt-GDP ratio had fallen below its
steady-state value.
   The reason scal policy is identied as active in the 1970s diers from the reason in the
1980s to the mid-1990s. The former was a decade when scal authorities failed to cut taxes
despite debt falling below steady state; in the latter period government did not generate
sucient tax revenues to prevent debt from rising rapidly.            President Reagan introduced
measures to mitigate the increase in the decit in 1982 and enhance the sustainability of
                           18
Social Security in 1983.        But these were dominated by the tax cuts contained in the earlier
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which was phased in over three steps between 1982
and 1984. The Reagan administration also signicantly reduced the progressivity of the tax
system by eliminating tax brackets and indexing remaining brackets to ination. The tax
burden fell signicantly and the debt-GDP ratio rose. There was no attempt to reduce the
decit under President George H. W. Bush either, until he broke his no new taxes pledge
in budget negotiations with Congress in 1991. Dominance of large exogenous tax cuts over
decit targeting in the 1980s is consistent with nding that policy was active in this period.
   Only with the passing of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 under President
Clinton does scal policy emerge from the active regime to enter a sustained period of optimal
or passive policy regimes. As in the 1950s, which our estimates label optimal, the second half
of the 1990s is also marked by low and stable ination and debt returning to steady state.
These are the main features identied by our model as constituting optimal scal policy.
Optimal scal behavior gives scal policy a prominent role in producing the observed stable
ination. Rules-based studies credit monetary policy fully with delivering those favorable
ination outcomes. In those studies, scal policy passively adjusts taxes to stabilize debt,
playing no role in determining ination.
   The active scal regime re-emerges around President G. W. Bush's cuts taxes in 2001
and 2003, partly to promote long-term growth and partly to oset the macroeconomic shock
associated with the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Finally, the switch to passive policy after 2005 is
not obviously due to any observed discrete policy changes, but likely reects the increase in
revenues generated by the booming economy leading up to the nancial crisis that began in
2007.


4.4.3 Welfare Gaps              To gain further insight into which features of the data drive the
identication of the various policy regimes, we examine the welfare-relevant gaps policy
makers aim to close.       We consider four gaps:      ination, output, taxes, and debt, where

 18 The Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 and Social Security Amendments of 1983.




                                                  16
        Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

ination and debt gaps measure the deviation of the variable from its steady state or target
                             
value. The output gap, yt - yt , computes the deviation of output from the level of output
                                             
that would be chosen by the social planner, yt [appendix I]. This output gap captures the
extent to which the policy maker is unable to achieve the desired level of output due to
nominal inertia, the habits externality, scal constraints, and time-consistency problems.
It reects the welfare trade os between ination and the real economy embedded in the
                                                                                        
estimated objective function, but reduces those to a single measure. The tax gap, t - t , is
the dierence between the actual tax rate, t , and the rate that a policy maker could choose
                                 
to eliminate cost-push shocks, t = -(1 -  )µt . This reects the fact that distortionary
taxation acts as a form a cost-push shock in the NKPC, so that tax cuts can, potentially, be
used to oset realized cost push shocks driven by variations in the desired markup. For this
reason, the ination and tax gaps are often, to some extent, the mirror image of each other,
as both are inuenced by the estimated cost-push shocks.
   The top two panels of gure 3 plot the ination and output gaps alongside the probability
that monetary policy is in the LC regime. This shows that the LC regime arises from periods
of higher ination for a given output gap. Although there is a sizeable negative output gap
in the early 1970s, this was not as large relative to the levels of excess ination found during
the Volcker disination.    This is why the Volcker period shows up as a switch to more
conservative monetary policy. Similarly, a more conservative policy maker would not have
suered the modest rise in ination which was associated with the loosening of monetary
policy after the stock market crash of 1987.
   The bottom two panels of gure 3 plot the tax and debt gaps, alongside the probabilities
of being in the OF and PF scal regimes. The relatively rare optimal scal regime in the
1950s and in 1995 corresponds to periods when the tax, output, and ination gaps are
modest, with debt returning to steady state. Passive scal policy is associated with debt-
stabilizing movements in taxation predominantly in the 1960s. Exit from the passive scal
regime in the late 1960s corresponds to a period of rising tax gap that was not consistent
with the negative debt gap in the 1970s; these gaps are then reversed from the 1980s to the
mid 1990s. Seen in this way, the prolonged periods of active scal behaviorthroughout the
1970s and then the 1980s until 1995are due to tax policies that fail to stabilize debt in
both directions.


5 Welfare
This section explores how dierent permutations of policies are ranked in terms of welfare,
before turning to describe what drives these welfare dierences. Table 3 reports the uncon-
ditional variances of key variables as well as the implied welfare cost of shocks under various
policy regimes. To measure welfare, we use the scal authority's objective function, exclud-
ing the tax-rate smoothing term. This is a more natural measure of social welfare than is
the monetary authority's objective function because central bank objectives reect Rogo 's
(1985) suggestion to appoint monetary policy makers with stronger aversion to ination
than society at large. The scal authority's dislike of ination, by contrast, reects society's.
From this social welfare measure, we report the welfare cost as how much steady-state
ination the policy maker would be willing to accept to achieve the Ramsey allocations.
   We collect results in two groupsno credibility and full credibilityand order equilibria



                                               17
          Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

by their welfare implications within each group; the far right column of the table reports the
overall ranking across the two credibility groups. A credible regime is a once-for-all switch
in policy, so economic agents do not anticipate any movement away from that regime. A
non-credible regime is one where economic agents anticipate uctuations in regime in line
with the estimated transition probabilities.
   The benchmark equilibriumCommitment/Ramseyappears in the rst row of the
Full Credibility panel of table 3.   That policy regime uses tax rates extensively to almost
completely stabilize ination: scal actions are integral to ination control.
   Turn to the table's No Credibility group. The Estimated case ranks 8th overall, with
an equivalent ination cost of 1.17% relative to Ramsey. This case reects an environment
where policy regimes switch in line with the estimated transition probabilities. Any regime
ranked higher than 8th improves on historical policies. The other two non-credible regimes
combine a passive scal policy with either a more or less conservative monetary policy;
regimes remain in place indenitely, even though economic agents anticipate switches to other
policy regimes according to the estimated transition probabilities. Adopting a passive scal
rule, even if it lacks credibility, would lead to a marginal improvement over the estimated mix
of regimes. Remaining permutations of policies create unstable debt dynamics if followed
indenitely, as the counterfactual assumes; a welfare ranking cannot be obtained for these
regimes.
   Results dier sharply when the policy regime is fully credible. A credible combination of
a conservative central bank following a Stackelberg leading scal authority comes closest to
achieving the Ramsey outcome. Its ination-equivalent cost is only 0.6%. This is striking
because without credibility the same regime cannot stabilize debt. There is a slight deteri-
oration in welfare if the monetary authority is less conservative, but still combined with an
optimal scal policy. Otherwise, the credible regimes that improve upon historical policies
require that the monetary authority be more conservative. Any other credible regime with
a less conservative monetary policy and either a passive or active scal rule deteriorates in
welfare relative to the estimated policy mix. A mix of LC/AF produces the largest welfare
losses.
   The credible and cooperative, but time-consistent policy, labeled Discretion, also per-
forms poorly. With a rank of #10, it comes in below the estimated mix. Poor outcomes occur
because the discretionary policy suers from a debt stabilization bias, which we discuss
below.


5.1 Avoiding the Great Inflation with Optimal Fiscal Leadership
Figure 4 reports a set of counterfactuals that highlight the features of the best performing
policy regimes. The left column plots equilibrium time paths from the #2 ranked regime
in table 3credible MC/OFalong with the same regime without credibility and actual
data. The right column repeats the data beside paths under credible cooperative policies
Commitment and Discretion, ranked #1 and #10 in the table and discussed in section
3.3. Comparing outcomes within and across columns reveals how a credible policy of scal
leadership comes close to achieving the welfare levels observed under a cooperative Ramsey
policy.
   Optimal scal policy improves welfare only under full credibility. When a regime is not



                                               18
            Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

credible, agents expect it will change eventually. That expectation creates spillovers across
regimes that show up in the dotted lines in the rst column of gure 4. When regime change
is possible, even if current scal is optimal, economic agents anticipate the rise in taxes and,
therefore, ination that would occur whenever the economy switches to a passive scal rule
in the future. Through the New Keynesian Phillips curve, the rise in expected ination raises
ination today, inducing the scal authority to cut taxes today to oset those contemporary
inationary eects. This reduces ination today, but raises debt accumulation and ination
volatility. If not credible, this regime would ultimately be unstable as progressively higher
debt levels fuel ination.
   Credible optimal scal leadershipdashed lines in the left columnproduces large sus-
tained movements in debt that are ultimately stabilized. Ination does not deviate signi-
cantly from target. Comparing dashed lines for ination across the two columns reveals that
credible strategic policies deliver nearly identical ination outcomes as cooperative Ramsey
policies.
   Ination outcomes in the left column point to a key nding in the paper. Optimal scal
leadership could have avoided the Great Ination.             Actual ination averaged 5.80% from
1965 to 1982. A credible mix of MC/OF would have reduced that average to 3.30%; if the
                                                                      19
mix were not credible, ination would have averaged 3.48%.
   This is a new nding that places scal behavior at the center of understanding sources
of the Great Ination. Although the consensus view places the Great Ination squarely at
the feet of the Fed, this nding reveals optimal scal leadership to be a potentially powerful
source of ination stabilization, particularly when coupled with more conservative monetary
       20
policy.


5.2 Is Cooperation Welfare Enhancing?
The second column of the gure plots outcomes under cooperative policies with and without
commitment. Cooperative policies emerge when monetary and scal authorities share the
same objectivethe estimated objective function of the scal authority, which is assumed to
represent social welfare. The Ramsey/Commitment policy dramatically stabilizes ination,
using substantial movements in debt to smooth tax distortions. Deviations from pure tax
smoothing reect the desire to oset cost-push shocks through variations in distortionary
taxation. Substantial tax cuts in the 1970s largely oset the big cost-push shocks estimated
to have hit the economy during that period.             The increase in the tax rate in the mid-
1980s reects a reversal in persistent cost-push shocks from positive to negative, inducing a
desirable osetting rise in taxation.
   Time-consistent discretionary policy, in contrast, poses very dierent incentives for coop-
erative policy makers. Consider a shock that raises government debt above target. Govern-
ments face a temptation to reduce the debt burden through ination surprises. This temp-
tation grows with the level of debt to create a state-dependent inationary bias problem.
Private agents understand those incentives, raising ination and inationary expectations
until the government no longer wishes to generate such surprises.              By raising taxes more

  19 These compare to the commitment average of 2.02%. Steady-state ination is 2% in the model.
  20 Bianchi and Ilut (2017) also give scal policy a prominent role in the Great Ination, but they do not
credit optimal scal behavior with the ability to avoid the ination.



                                                   19
           Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

than tax-smoothing considerations alone would dictate, the government can return debt to
steady state to mitigate the associated inationary bias. This aggressive reduction in debt
is called the debt stabilization bias [Leeper and Leith (2017) and Leeper, Leith, and Liu
           21
(2020)].
    The top right panel of gure 4 underscores that the debt stabilization bias can be sizable.
In place of a Ramsey policy that would have allowed debt to reach 130% or more of GDP
in the 1990s and 2000s, time-consistent discretionary policy and its associated stabilization
bias would have kept debt well below 50%.
    Contrasting the outcomes under cooperative policyright columnwith those under
strategic interactionsleft columnthe credible regime of scal leadership combined with
a conservative monetary follower closely mimics outcomes under commitment. Both would
have oset ination by reducing taxes and permitted a sustained increase in debt to support
that scal policy.
    The welfare rankings highlight the importance of credibility: a scal authority credibly
acting as a Stackelberg leader in a game with the monetary authority results in outcomes clos-
est to those achieved under a cooperative Ramsey policy. Without credibility, such a policy
mix would lead to an unstable debt path if pursued indenitely when economic agents expect
the policy regime to switch. Finally, strategic interaction between the monetary and scal
authorities is generally benecial when the policy makers are unable to commit. Cooperative
time-consistent policies, on the other hand, suer from a debilitating debt stabilization bias.
Cooperation can be detrimental for welfare.


6 Conclusions
The evolution of ination dynamics in the United States, as seen through the lens of a
conventional New Keynesian model, cannot be understood without explicitly modeling the
stance of scal policy. A model that allows monetary policy to be optimal, but with potential
switches between more- or less-conservative ination aversion, and scal policy to switch
among a passive and an active scal rule and time-consistent Stackelberg leadership ts
post-war American data at least as well as purely rules-based policies.
    This environment oers fresh interpretations of monetary and scal policy interactions
than the rules-based model. The narrative that the switch in monetary policy at the time
of the Volcker disination was associated with a similar switch in scal policy making from
a regime where the scal authorities did not act to stabilize debt to one where they did,
does not t time series data. Instead, we nd that the Volcker disination occurred around
1982, but wasn't supported by a debt stabilizing scal policy until 1995 and even then this
policy was subject to further revisions. There are numerous switches between the various
permutations of policies, with a passive scal policy still not clearly supporting the post-
Volcker monetary conservatism observed in the data. The implicit assumption that allows
scal policy to be safely ignored in monetary policy models is inconsistent with U.S. data.
    Counterfactuals suggest that adopting an optimal scal policy can be welfare improving,
but only if it is credible. The ideal time-consistent policy regime would couple Stackelberg

  21 Under commitment the temptation remains, but governments are able to resist the temptation. Un-
der discretion rational agents anticipate the temptation and inationary expectations rise to eliminate the
temptation. The debt stabilization bias reduces debt rather than letting it follow a random walk.




                                                    20
        Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

leader scal authority with a conservative monetary authority. That regime comes close to
mimicking the outcomes that would have been observed under a cooperative Ramsey policy.
This regime must be fully credible in the sense that there is no expectation that policy will
switch to any alternative policy combination. Enhancing cooperation can actually reduce
welfare relative to the case of strategic interactions between distinct monetary and scal
authorities.




                                             21
       Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

50

                                     Debt to GDP
40

30

20

10
1955    1960   1965    1970        1975         1980   1985      1990        1995        2000   2005


10                                                               Inflation


 5



 0
1955    1960    1965   1970        1975         1980   1985      1990        1995        2000   2005
10
                                                                        Ex Post Real Rate
5


0


-5
1955    1960   1965    1970        1975         1980   1985      1990        1995        2000   2005
25
                              Transfer to GDP          Spending to GDP              Tax Rate
20

15

10

5

 0
1955    1960   1965    1970        1975         1980   1985      1990        1995        2000   2005

                         Figure 1: United States Data.




                                           22
        Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies




 1


                                                       Passive Fiscal Policy
0.5



  0
 1955     1960     1965   1970    1975     1980     1985       1990       1995        2000        2005
  1



0.5                                               Optimal Fiscal Policy


  0
 1955     1960     1965   1970    1975     1980     1985       1990       1995        2000        2005
  1



0.5                                                                              Active Fiscal Policy


  0
 1955     1960     1965   1970    1975     1980     1985       1990       1995        2000        2005
  1



0.5                                                                                Less Conservative



  0
 1955     1960     1965   1970    1975     1980     1985       1990       1995        2000        2005
  1

                                                                            High Volatility
0.5



  0
 1955     1960     1965   1970    1975     1980     1985       1990       1995        2000        2005

Figure 2: Markov Switching Probabilities: Policy and Volatility Switches under Optimal
Strategic Policy




                                         23
          Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies




                       output gap                                                       inflation gap
  1                                                    1         2.5                                            1

                                                       0.8         2                                            0.8
  0
                                                                 1.5
                                                       0.6                                                      0.6
 -1                                                                1
                                                       0.4                                                      0.4
                                                                 0.5
 -2
                                                       0.2         0                                            0.2

 -3                                                    0        -0.5                                            0
         1960   1970    1980      1990    2000                          1960     1970      1980   1990   2000

                                            output and inflation gaps          LC regime
                        tax gap                                                            debt gap
 15                                                    1         100                                            1

 10                                                    0.8                                                      0.8
                                                                  50
  5                                                    0.6                                                      0.6

  0                                                    0.4         0                                            0.4

 -5                                                    0.2                                                      0.2
                                                                 -50
-10                                                    0                                                        0
         1960   1970    1980      1990    2000                          1960     1970      1980   1990   2000

                                   tax and debt gaps         OF regime            PF regime


Figure 3: Output, Ination, Tax, Debt and Policy Regimes. The output gap measures the
dierence between output and what would be chosen by a social planner given the estimated
objective function as a percentage, as Appendix I describes. Ination and debt gaps measure
the deviation from steady state and the tax gap is the dierence between the percentage tax
rate and the tax rate that would perfectly oset the inationary impact of cost push shocks.
All gaps are measured on the left scale and the probability of policy regimes on the right
scale.




                                                       24
        Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies
                                  MC/OF                                         Commitment and Discretion
         150                                                       150
                Debt                 Not                                 Debt
                                     Credible
                                                                                                     Commitment
         100                                                       100
                                            Credible



         50                                                        50                         Discretion
                                                       Data
                                                                                                          Data


          0                                                         0
               1960        1970    1980   1990   2000                    1960        1970   1980   1990      2000

         22                                                        22
                Tax rate                                                 Tax rate
         20                                                        20

         18                                                        18

         16                                                        16

         14                                                        14

         12                                                        12

         10                                                        10
               1960    1970        1980   1990   2000                    1960     1970      1980   1990      2000
         12                                                        15
               Inflation                                                 Inflation
         10
                                                                   10
          8

          6                                                         5

          4
                                                                    0
          2

          0                                                        -5
               1960    1970       1980    1990   2000                    1960     1970      1980   1990      2000
         20                                                        20
               Interest rate                                             Interest rate

         15                                                        15



         10                                                        10



          5                                                         5



          0                                                         0
               1960    1970       1980    1990   2000                    1960     1970      1980   1990      2000


Figure 4: Best Policy Regimes: Optimal Strategic Policy and Cooperation. In the left col-
umn, policies interaction strategically; in the right column, policies cooperate by maximizing
a shared welfare function.


                                                              25
        Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies




                                          Posterior                         Prior
 Parameters                                Mode Mean 5%             95%     Type      Mean Std Dev
                                     Optimal policy parameters
 1 , gap term, X t - t ,
                 ^     ^                   0.221 0.208 0.135        0.280   B         0.50   0.10
 2 , gap term, y      ^
                 ^t -  t ,                 0.256 0.247 0.177        0.318   B         0.50   0.10
 3 , change in ination                     0.422 0.420 0.271        0.588   B         0.50   0.10
  M
 ,S  t =1
          , ination                        1.00     1.00     -      -       Fixed     -      -
 ,St =2 , ination
  M
                                           0.611 0.601 0.484        0.722   B         0.50   0.10
 R , change in interest                    0.739 0.724 0.568        0.882   B         0.50   0.15
  F
 ,s  t =1
          , ination                        0.298 0.316 0.193        0.433   G         1.00   0.30
 ,st =1 , change in tax                    0.699 0.659 0.491        0.812   B         0.50   0.15
 ,st =2 , lagged tax rate                  0.964 0.950 0.924        0.971   B         0.70   0.15
 ,st =3 , lagged tax rate                  0.932 0.935 0.914        0.960   B         0.50   0.15
 ,st =2 , tax rate resp. to debt           0.045 0.050 0.037        0.062   G         0.05   0.02
 ,st =3 , tax rate resp. to debt           0.00     0.00     -      -       Fixed     -      -
                                          Deep parameters
 , Inverse of intertemp. elas. of subst. 3.102 3.208 2.759          3.631   N         2.50   0.25
 , Calvo parameter                         0.780 0.774 0.751        0.797   B         0.75   0.02
 , ination inertia                         0.353 0.366 0.277        0.458   B         0.50   0.10
 , habit persistence                       0.802 0.810 0.736        0.885   B         0.50   0.10
 , Inverse of Frisch elasticity            2.00     2.00     -      -       Fixed     -      -
                                     Serial correlation of shocks
  , AR coe., taste shock                   0.938 0.942 0.931        0.953   B         0.50   0.15
 µ , AR coe., cost-push shock              0.938 0.931 0.912        0.949   B         0.50   0.15
 q , AR coe., productivity shock           0.274 0.280 0.211        0.350   B         0.50   0.15
 z , AR coe., transfers                    0.968 0.971 0.960        0.982   B         0.50   0.15
 g , AR coe., government spending          0.986 0.984 0.978        0.989   B         0.50   0.15


Table 1: Optimal Policy. Under optimal policy, we have six policy permutations: MC/OF,
MC/PF, MC/AF, LC/OF, LC/PF, LC/AF. For monetary policy switches,                    St = 1 is the MC
regime and    St = 2   is the LC regime. For scal policy, the OF policy regime corresponds to
st = 1, while the PF and AF regimes correspond to st = 2 and st = 3,        respectively. Weights
1 , 2 , 3 are constant across monetary and scal policy regimes.




                                                26
          Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies




                                          Posterior                        Prior
 Parameters                               Mode Mean 5%             95%     Type Mean Std Dev
                                    Standard deviation of shocks
 ,kt =1 , taste shock                     0.804 0.874 0.608        1.126   IG      0.50   2.00
 ,kt =2, taste shock                      2.318 2.309 1.539        3.075   IG      0.50   2.00
 µ,kt =1, cost-push shock                 0.545 0.617 0.487        0.740   IG      0.50   2.00
 µ,kt =2, cost-push shock                 1.660 2.001 1.401        2.580   IG      0.50   2.00
 q,kt =1, productivity shock              0.684 0.680 0.605        0.759   IG      0.50   2.00
 q,kt =2 , productivity shock             1.218 1.286 1.055        1.507   IG      0.50   2.00
 tp , term premium shock                  2.558 2.587 2.332        2.839   IG      2.00   2.00
 g , government shock                     0.161 0.163 0.150        0.176   IG      0.50   2.00
 z , transfer shock                       0.303 0.305 0.281        0.330   IG      0.50   2.00
  , tax rate shock                        0.234 0.243 0.217        0.268   IG      0.50   2.00
                                       Transition probabilities
 11 , monetary policy: remaining mc 0.962 0.962 0.942              0.983   B       0.95   0.05
 22 , monetary policy: remaining lc       0.956 0.889 0.859        0.922   B       0.95   0.05
 11 , scal policy: remaining optimal 0.875 0.873 0.844             0.902   D       0.90   0.05
 12 , optimal to passive scal policy 0.004 0.008 0.000             0.016   D       0.05   0.05
 22 , scal policy: remaining passive 0.966 0.949 0.920             0.978   D       0.90   0.05
 23 , passive to active scal policy       0.007 0.013 0.000        0.025   D       0.05   0.05
 33 , scal policy: remaining active       0.916 0.912 0.889        0.936   D       0.90   0.05
 31 , active to optimal scal policy       0.001 0.005 0.000        0.010   D       0.05   0.05
 h11 , volatility: remaining with lv      0.965 0.952 0.925        0.982   B       0.90   0.05
 h22 , volatility: remaining with hv      0.894 0.943 0.906        0.979   B       0.90   0.05


Table 1: Optimal Policy (continued). For volatility,     kt = 1    is the low volatility regime and
kt = 2   is the high volatility regime.




                                                27
       Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

                                              Log Marginal Data Density
                 Model                    Geweke          Sims, Waggoner, Zha


                 Optimal Policy         -1410.627               -1410.502

                 Intermediate Model     -1416.304               -1416.392

                 Rules-Based Policy     -1418.116               -1418.541


Table 2:   Model Comparison.      The intermediate model treats monetary policy as time-
consistent optimal policy with changes in the degree of ination conservatism, while scal
policy switches between the PF and AF regimes.            The optimal policy model adds to the
intermediate model the possibility that scal policy may switch to an additional OF regime.




 Regime                  Output     Ination       Interest      Tax         Welfare Cost        Ranking
                                       No Credibility
 MC/PF                    0.482       0.333           0.332     3.116              1.12               6
 LC/PF                    0.443       0.624           0.415     2.900              1.14               7
 Estimated                0.458       0.468           0.367    2.546               1.17               8
                                      Full Credibility
 Commitment/Ramsey        0.610       0.005           0.781   10.455               0.00               1
 MC/OF                    0.405       0.121           0.297     3.84               0.60               2
 LC/OF                    0.372       0.416           0.333     3.124              0.84               3
 MC/AF                    0.437       0.259           0.244     1.136              1.02               4
 MC/PF                    0.477       0.305           0.280     3.075              1.09               5
 LC/PF                    0.454       0.720           0.477     3.071              1.21               9
 Discretion               0.596       0.910           2.426   192.075              1.41               10
 LC/AF                    1.522      11.076           8.295     0.403              3.80               11


Table 3:   Unconditional Variances and Welfare With Regime Switching.                      Welfare cost is
measured as the amount of steady-state ination equivalent the policy maker would pay to
move to the Ramsey outcome. Output is     y
                                          ^t ,   ination is   ^t ,
                                                                     interest is   ^t,
                                                                                   R     and tax is   ~t .
                                                                                                      




                                                 28
         Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

References
Amato, J. D., and T. Laubach          (2004): Implications of Habit Formation for Optimal
 Monetary Policy,    Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(2), 305332.
An, S., and F. Schorfheide        (2007): Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,    Econometric
 Reviews, 26(24), 113172.
Beetsma, R. M. W. J., and X. Debrun         (2004): The Interaction Between Monetary and
 Fiscal Policies in a Monetary Union: A Review of Recent Literature, in    Fiscal Policies,
 Monetary Policies and Labour Markets. Key Aspects of European Macroeconomic Poli-
 cymaking After Monetary Unication, ed. by R. M. W. J. Beetsma, C. Favero, V. M.
 A. Missale, P. Natale, and P. Tirelli, pp. 91133. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.


Bianchi, F.   (2012): Evolving Monetary/Fiscal Policy Mix in the United States,   American
 Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, 101(3), 167172.
Bianchi, F., and C. Ilut (2017): Monetary/Fiscal          Policy Mix and Agents' Beliefs,
 Review of Economic Dynamics, 26(October), 113139.
Bornstein, G., and G. Lorenzoni         (2018): Moral Hazard Misconceptions: The Case of
 the Greenspan Put,        IMF Economic Review, 66(2), 251286.
Calvo, G. A.     (1983):    Staggered Prices in a Utility Maxmimizing Model,     Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 12(3), 383398.
Chen, X., T. Kirsanova, and C. Leith        (2017): How Optimal is U.S. Monetary Policy?,
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 92, 96111.
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans           (2005): Nominal Rigidities and
 the Dynamic Eects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,      Journal of Political Economy, 113(1),
 145.


Davig, T.   (2004): Regime-Switching Debt and Taxation,    Journal of Monetary Economics,
 51(4), 837859.


Davig, T., and E. M. Leeper       (2006): Fluctuating Macro Policies and the Fiscal Theory,
 in   NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, ed. by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogo, and M. Woodford,
 vol. 21, pp. 247298. MIT Press, Cambridge.


         (2011): Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and Fiscal Stimulus,    European Eco-
 nomic Review, 55(2), 211227.
Friedman, M.     (1960):   A Program for Monetary Stability. Fordham University Press, New
 York.


Galí, J., and M. Gertler        (1999): Ination Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Anal-
 ysis,   Journal of Monetary Economics, 44(2), 195222.


                                             29
          Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

Geweke, J.     (1999): Using Simulation Methods for Bayesian Econometric Models: Infer-
  ence, Development, and Communication,       Econometric Reviews, 18, 173.
Kim, C.-J.   (1994): Dynamic Linear Models with Markov-Switching,           Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 60(12), 122.
Komunjer, I., and S. Ng     (2011): Dynamic Identication of Dynamic Stochastic General
  Equilibrium Models,    Econometrica, 79(6), 19952032.
Leeper, E. M.    (1991): Equilibria Under `Active' and `Passive' Monetary and Fiscal Poli-
  cies,   Journal of Monetary Economics, 27(1), 129147.
Leeper, E. M., and C. Leith     (2017): Understanding Ination as a Joint Monetary-Fiscal
  Phenomenon, in    Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and H. Uhlig, vol. 2B,
  pp. 23052416. Elsevier Press, Amsterdam.


Leeper, E. M., C. Leith, and D. Liu      (2020): Optimal Time-Consistent Monetary, Fiscal
  and Debt Maturity Policy, forthcoming    Journal of Monetary Economics.
Leeper, E. M., N. Traum, and T. B. Walker           (2017): Clearing Up the Fiscal Multiplier
  Morass,    American Economic Review, 107(8), 24092454.
Leeper, E. M., and X. Zhou     (2020): Ination's Role in Optimal Monetary-Fiscal Policy,
  Manuscript, University of Virginia, June.


Leith, C., and J. Malley     (2005): Estimated General Equilibrium Models for the Eval-
  uation of Monetary Policy in the U.S. and Europe,        European Economic Review,       49(8),
  21372159.


Leith, C., I. Moldovan,      and   R. Rossi   (2012):    Optimal Monetary Policy in a New
  Keynesian Model with Habits in Consumption,           Review of Economic Dynamics,       15(3),
  416435.


Lubik, T., and F. Schorfheide       (2006): A Bayesian Look at the New Open Economy
  Macroeconomics, in     NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005,       ed. by M. Gertler,   and   K. S.
  Rogo, vol. 20, pp. 313379. MIT Press, Cambridge.


MaCurdy, T. E.      (1981): An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting,
  Journal of Political Economy, 89(6), 10591085.
Ravn, M., S. Schmitt-Gróhe, and M. Uribe           (2006): Deep Habits,   Review of Economic
  Studies, 73, 195218.
Rogoff, K.     (1985): The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary
  Target,   The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(4), 11691189.
Romer, C. D., and D. H. Romer        (2002a): The Evolution of Economic Understanding
  and Postwar Stabilization Policy, in   Rethinking Stabilization Policy,   pp. 1178. Federal
  Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City.



                                              30
         Chen, Leeper, & Leith: Strategic Interactions in U.S. Policies

          (2002b): A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in the 1950s,         American Economic
  Review, 92(2), 121127.
           (2009):    A Narrative Analysis of Postwar Tax Changes, Online Appendix to
  Romer and Romer (2010),        https://eml.berkeley.edu/~dromer/papers/nadraft609.
  pdf,   June.


          (2010): The Macroeconomic Eects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New
  Measure of Fiscal Shocks,      American Economic Review, 100(3), 763801.
Silber, W. L.       Volcker: The Triumph of Persistence
                    (2012):                                     . Bloomsbury Press, New York.


Sims, C. A., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha              (2008): Methods for Inference in Large
  Multiple-Equation Markov-Switching Models,         Journal of Econometrics, 146(2), 113144.
Sims, C. A., and T. Zha       (2006): Were There Regime Switches in US Monetary Policy?,
  American Economic Review, 96(1), 5481.
Smets, F., and R. Wouters           (2003): An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equi-
  librium Model of the Euro Area,        Journal of the European Economic Association,      1(5),
  11231175.


          (2007): Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,
  American Economic Review, 97(3), 586606.
Traum, N., and S.-C. S. Yang          (2011): Monetary and Fiscal Policy Interactions in the
  Post-War U.S.,       European Economic Review, 55(1), 140164.
Woodford, M.         (2001): Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability,   Journal of Money, Credit,
  and Banking, 33(3), 669728.
          (2003):   Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
  University Press, Princeton, NJ.


Yun, T.   (1996): Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business Cycles,
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 37(2), 345370.




                                                31
