                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     BANK COMPLEXITY, GOVERNANCE, AND RISK

                                         Ricardo Correa
                                        Linda S. Goldberg

                                       Working Paper 27547
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27547


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




We thank Inaki Aldasoro, Robert DeYoung, Krzysztof Gajewski, Lukasz Kamil Kurowski,
Katheryn Russ, and seminar participants at the European Central Bank, George Mason
University, the IBEFA Annual Meeting in San Diego, MoFiR, and workshop participants at the
4th Annual Chapman Conference on Money and Finance and the IBRN meeting hosted by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Mary Chen, Sarah Ngo Hamerling, and Kevin Lai provided
excellent research assistance. Scott Okrent provided invaluable help in computing the systemic
risk measures using the code facilitated by the VLab at New York University. The views in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the
views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, any other person associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

 2020 by Ricardo Correa and Linda S. Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 notice, is given to the source.
Bank Complexity, Governance, and Risk
Ricardo Correa and Linda S. Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 27547
July 2020
JEL No. G21,G28,G32

                                          ABSTRACT

Bank holding companies (BHCs) can be complex organizations, conducting multiple lines of
business through many distinct legal entities and across a range of geographies. While such
complexity raises the costs of bank resolution when organizations fail, the effect of complexity on
BHCs' broader risk profile is less well understood. Business, organizational, and geographic
complexity can engender explicit trade-offs between the agency problems that increase risk and
the diversification, liquidity management, and synergy improvements that reduce risk. The
outcomes of such trade-offs may depend on bank governance arrangements. We test these
conjectures using data on large U.S. BHCs for the 1996-2018 period. Organizational complexity
and geographic scope tend to provide diversification gains and reduce idiosyncratic and liquidity
risks while also increasing BHCs' exposure to systematic and systemic risks. Regulatory changes
focused on organizational complexity have significantly reduced this type of complexity, leading
to a decrease in systemic risk and an increase in liquidity risk among BHCs. While bank
governance structures have, in some cases, significantly affected the buildup of BHC complexity,
better governance arrangements have not moderated the effects of complexity on risk outcomes.


Ricardo Correa
Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System
Division of International Finance
Washington DC 20551
ricardo.correa@frb.gov

Linda S. Goldberg
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org
1        Introduction
Large and complex banking organizations in the United States have received considerable regula-
tory scrutiny after the global financial crisis (GFC), with a focus on improving their resilience and
reducing the costly externalities that could occur when these organizations fail. While bank size
and balance sheet structures have garnered extensive analytical attention in too-big-to-fail (TBTF)
discussions (Gandhi and Lustig, 2015), relatively little analytical work has focused on the implica-
tions of bank complexity. The main orientation has been on how complexity could impede orderly
resolution when an institution fails (Carmassi and Herring, 2016). Bank holding company (BHC)
complexity rose prior to the GFC and later declined, coinciding with new regulations aimed at
enhancing the resolvability of banks in periods of stress (Goldberg and Meehl, 2020). Our study
focuses on the important knowledge gap in the analysis of the relationship between complexity and
different types of bank risk. We also study how regulatory changes induce complexity changes and
alter the risks BHCs face.1
       Alternative conjectures underlie the potential competing risk effects of complexity. We posit
that, in theory, complexity should reduce the idiosyncratic risk profile of BHCs if it is accompanied
by an increase in diversification of the BHCs income streams and by more efficient internal liquidity
management. For instance, a broader business and geographic scope provides BHCs with a form of
insurance against default risks given some forms of shocks (Luciano and Wihlborg, 2018), and may
reduce their exposures to liquidity risk (Cetorelli and Goldberg, 2016) and sovereign stress (Bagga-
tini, Fecht and Weber, 2018). Alternatively, complexity may instead increase the idiosyncratic risk
profile if agency problems, internal to the organization, dominate the consequences of complexity.
Adverse effects can arise if managers pursuing an unchecked "empire building" strategy generate an
excessively complex structure, with resulting lapses in risk management. A weak corporate gover-
nance environment, incentivized by external factors such as implicit subsidies from the government
(as denoted in Freixas, Loranth and Morrison, 2007) could exacerbate this likelihood.
       We posit that the optimization problem of the BHC entails balancing the benefits of income
diversification through more complex structures with the costs associated with agency problems.
The net effect of these opposite forces is constructed to depend on the strength of monitoring and
corporate governance. We provide the econometric testing approaches that explore the average
association between BHC complexity, diversification and risk over time using panel techniques,
including a set of tests following an instrumental variables approach. We then focus more specifically
on the roles of regulation and corporate governance, as drivers of the development of banking
organization complexity. We test for the relation between complexity and bank risk by using the
1
    Our analysis is part of a coordinated cross-country research initiative of the International Banking Research Network
    (IBRN), with teams developing analytical tests and approaches to inform this complexity and risk topic.




                                                             1
change in the effective cost of complexity after the introduction of the living will provision of the
DFA. We also test how BHC size and governance strength alter outcomes for the different types of
risk metrics.
   Our analysis explores these hypotheses across all US BHCs larger than $25 billion (in 2012
prices) and using quarterly data that spans 1996 through 2018. We compute measures of three
types of complexity for these US BHCs: organizational, business, and geographic. BHCs have
expanded their scope into new areas and geographies in the financial intermediation spectrum in
the past 30 years, potentially yielding efficiencies in income diversification (Cetorelli, Jacobides and
Stern, 2017). As noted in Goldberg and Meehl (2020), these three areas of complexity decreased for
some of the largest BHCs after the GFC. We also construct a broad spectrum of BHC-specific risk
measures, covering idiosyncratic risk, systematic or market risk, liquidity risk, and systemic risks.
As we conjecture that both realizations and effects of complexity relate to BHC governance, we
construct measures of the institutional investor ownership shares, the duality of CEO and Board
of Director chair roles, and BHC board independence.
   We test our hypotheses on the complexity-risk-governance nexus using panel specifications,
which establish the average relations between complexity and risk over time, and using difference-
in-difference estimations around relevant regulatory changes, which have a more explicit causal
interpretation. We posit that bank complexity reduces the risk profile of banks if it is accompanied
by increased diversification of income streams and improved liquidity management. We further
conjecture that these outcomes are more likely for better governed organizations. In terms of reg-
ulatory drivers, our primary tests explore whether the introduction and accompanying regulations
of the 2010 Living Will (LW) guidance of the Dodd Frank Consumer Protection Act (DFA) altered
the relationship between bank risk and complexity. The DFA includes BHC resolution planning
and guidance on legal entity rationalization (in 2017), requiring organizationally complex banks
to simplify their structures to ease resolution. The DFA liquidity requirements raised the costs of
some forms of complexity by taking into account potential ring fencing, made capital requirements
more sensitive to the risks in off balance sheet accounts, and in some cases, directly addressed
banks' organizational structures by requiring a single point of entry for resolvability.
   Our first set of results shows that increases in BHC organizational and geographic complexity are
associated with better income diversification, and with lower BHC idiosyncratic and liquidity risks.
In contrast, BHCs with more organizational and geographic complexity have greater systematic and
systemic risks. These results are economically significant, especially for the largest BHCs (more than
$750 billion in assets). For example, a one standard deviation increase in organizational (equivalent
to adding 1,000 legal entities) and geographic complexity is associated with an almost four standard
deviation increase in income diversification and a reduction in idiosyncratic risks of roughly three
standard deviations. The changes in systematic and liquidity risks are of lesser magnitude, but still


                                                   2
economically significant. The results for smaller BHCs are still economically meaningful, but an
order of magnitude smaller than for the larger BHCs. These findings suggest that as BHCs increase
organizational and geographic complexity, they trade off the beneficial reductions in idiosyncratic
and liquidity risks for greater exposures to systematic or market risks and systemic risks.
   Another important finding is that BHC complexity increases with better governance, supporting
the hypothesis that better governed banks pursue more complex arrangements to achieve gains in
income and liquidity diversification. The alternative hypothesis, of agency problems dominating risk
outcomes due to complexity, is not empirically supported. While we also find some spillbacks from
BHC risk levels back to organizational and geographic complexity, these effects are economically
smaller.
   Our second set of results address the consequences of regulatory changes and show substantial
effects on both BHC complexity and risk. BHCs reduced organizational complexity after being
required to submit living wills. The risk profiles of US BHCs also changed. Banks' balance sheet
income diversification increased, on average, translating into a drop in idiosyncratic risks. An
interesting finding is that these gains were smaller for those banks that ex ante had more complex
organizational structures. The introduction of this resolution tool was associated with a decrease
in systemic risks for the largest and more complex banks, consistent with the objective of this
regulation. As in the first set of results, the decrease in organizational complexity was associated
with an increase in liquidity risk for the banks affected by the regulation. A consequence of
these findings, possibly not highly visible in prior literature, is that regulators can face trade-offs
when actions targeted at reducing complexity may increase some risks that are reduced from more
complex structures (e.g., liquidity risk), while reducing risks(e.g., systemic risk).
   This novel analysis contributes to three important literatures. First, we contribute to the
significant advances are being made in measuring BHC complexity (Cetorelli and Goldberg 2014,
Cetorelli and Goldberg 2016, Flood et al. 2020, Carmassi and Herring 2016, Barth and Wihlborg
2017, and Goldberg and Meehl 2020). Most of these studies utilize information on legal entities
within BHCs, working primarily with counts of entities and some information about industry
type and geographic location. Flood et al. (2020) use network concepts that group entities in
the BHC through which communication and coordination is relatively easy. Our contributions
toward measurement of complexity stem from also using principle component analysis to extract
key features from a range of distinct measures of business and geographic complexity. Included in
these components are balance sheet data for BHCs, alongside bank structure information.
   Second, our work adds a new set of insights to the rich literature on bank risk taking (Berger
et al., 2017; Cetorelli, Jacobides and Stern, 2017), too-big-to-fail and moral hazard for banking
organizations (Gandhi and Lustig, 2015; Cetorelli and Traina, 2018; Dam and Koetter, 2012),
market pricing of diversification or geographic expansion in financial conglomerates (Laeven and


                                                   3
Levine, 2007, Goetz, Laeven and Levine, 2013), and bank governance and risks (Laeven and Levine,
2009, Brewer and Jagtiani, 2013). Generally, size is viewed as generating the too-big-to-fail subsidies
that lower the cost of funding for the largest and systemically important institutions. Yet, increases
in business scope across banks have been found to be driven by leaders in the banking sector,
with associated changes in equity returns and funding costs. Geographic diversification within the
United States has been linked to lower BHC valuations (Goetz, Laeven and Levine, 2016), while
living will regulation increase banks' cost of capital, especially for banks that were systemically
important before the crisis (Cetorelli and Traina, 2018). Our work starts with the observation
that BHCs optimize over a set of different types of risks. We show that living will regulation
reduced organizational complexity, raised liquidity risks, and reduced systemic risks. This analysis is
consistent with the evolution of market's view of sources of systemic risk, from an exclusive focus on
size prior to the crisis, to post-crisis additional consideration of complexity and interconnectedness
(Antill and Sarkar, 2018).
   Third, and relatedly, we contribute to the literature on the consequences of post-global financial
crisis bank reforms. Regulations that cover bank liquidity, bank capital and bank resolution are
likely to influence the optimal degree of BHC complexity, altering the trade-offs among the risks
that BHCs internalize and the externalities associated with systemic risks. An extensive literature
addresses the consequences of liquidity and capital regulations. The literature directly related to
complexity includes documenting how the lengthy bankruptcy process and complexity of Lehman
Brothers slowed resolution and magnified costs (Fleming and Sarkar, 2014). Some banks may
have transformed their organizational structure to minimize the impact of regulatory costs (Flood
et al., 2020). However, BHCs also may have used a variety of legal entities, such as Asset Backed
Commercial Paper vehicles, to arbitrage regulations and increase risk-taking (Gong, Huizinga and
Laeven, 2018). Our contribution around U.S. BHCs is a systematic exploration of trade-offs among
types of risks that can be altered by complexity, and by related regulatory drivers. In our section of
discussion, for example, we argue liquidity regulations that reduce BHC exposure to liquidity risk
will have the unanticipated consequence of reducing the benefits to BHCs from pursuing geographic
and organizational complexity. Living wills and resolution planning push firms to better internalize
the costly contributions of complexity to systemic risk and generate lower organizational complexity.
Bank capital regulations can either raise or lower optimal complexity depending on the relative
effects on the costs of different types of BHC risks.
   The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. First, Section 2 presents the key hypotheses
on the relationships between complexity, governance, and risk. Section 3 introduces the concepts
for BHC complexity, governance, and risk, and presents key patterns in these metrics for large US
BHCs (in excess of $25 billion in total assets), for 1996Q1 through 2018Q2. Section 4 provides the
results of econometric tests of key hypotheses, starting with estimates of the average relationships


                                                  4
between complexity, risk, and governance. The tests respectively present the consequences for BHC
diversification gains, idiosyncratic risk, liquidity risk, market risk, and systemic risk using systems
of equations with and without instrumental variables. This section then tests for changes around
living will provisions of the DFA, and concludes with tests of robustness. Section 5 concludes with
a discussion of the ramifications of our results for regulatory frameworks, as organizational and
geographic complexity for better governed BHCs may lower the probability of an idiosyncratic or
liquidity BHC stress event while possibly increasing the severity of stress consequences of market
stresses when they occur. The trade-offs imply that BHC-specific reductions in idiosyncratic and
liquidity risks may come at the expense of an increase in systematic and systemic risks, reducing
the benefits of complexity from a societal perspective. The balance of risks, we argue, is relevant
for regulatory approaches - beyond just the systemic risk consequences. Moreover, different tools
used in regulation and supervision alter the individual BHC versus societal welfare disconnects.


2     Complexity Drivers, hypotheses and testing
This section overviews the regulatory developments in recent years that have directly shaped the
complexity of BHCs and then turns to hypotheses on how more complex organizations might
inherently take more risks. This section provides a set of tests to determine whether complexity
improves BHCs diversification or, in contrast, whether it increases the risk profile of the banking
organizations. Throughout, the hypotheses can generate different outcomes for the distinct forms
of complexity, or for alternative types of risks.


2.1   Determinants of bank complexity: regulations and governance

Banking organizations have evolved rapidly over the past 30 years, expanding size, corporate com-
plexity, and business scope that covers new areas of financial intermediation as well as nonfinancial
activities. Moreover, the international footprints of banking organizations have evolved, both with
branch and subsidiary networks expanding for banks (Claessens and Horen, 2014a; Claessens and
Horen, 2014b) and with notable increases in internationally-located nonbank entities (see Cetorelli,
McAndrews and Traina (2014) and Goldberg and Meehl (2020) for US evidence; Cetorelli and
Goldberg (2014) and Carmassi and Herring (2016) for international evidence).
    This evolution in the United States process has been influenced by changes in regulations,
financial innovation, and competitive pressures. The slow phase-out of restrictions on banks' non-
traditional activities, such as securities underwriting imposed by the Glass-Steagall Act (GSA),
began in the late 1980s and early 1990s (Chernobai, Ozdagli and Wang, 2020). This trend culmi-
nated with the passage of the GLBA in 1999, which repealed the GSA and allowed banks to engage



                                                    5
in investment banking activities and also to expand into the insurance business.2 Asset securitiza-
tion changed the technology of intermediation, while allowances in risk and liquidity management
and tax codes and financial secrecy changes also may have driven some dynamics. After the global
financial crisis, a different wave of regulatory changes focused on reducing financial institutions'
systemic risks by limiting their complexity. The Basel III regulatory framework directly takes into
account the complexity of banking organizations in the regulatory capital framework, with the
most visible tool being the global systemically important bank (GSIB) capital surcharge. Basel III
makes complexity more costly, as the externality generated by BHC complexity is internalized by
the new capital surcharges or additional capital regulations partially aimed at pricing the cost of
risks due to complex structures.3
       The 2010 DFA passed by the U.S. Congress directly addressed the theme of resolvability of
systemic financial institutions. As large size and complexity of some financial institutions makes
them especially difficult to resolve in periods of stress, some BHCs are viewed as having benefited
from too-big-to-fail (TBTF) or too-complex-to-fail firms' implicit government bailout subsidies.
New resolution rules codified in the DFA aimed at reducing the complexity of these institutions
to make them easier to resolve. In particular, DFA section 165(d) required banks with $50 billion
or more in assets to submit living will on an annual basis. These living wills should ultimately
reduce systemic risks from systemically important financial institutions by providing a road map
to liquidating these institutions in the event of their failure. Resolution rules also include guidance
for the simplification of banks' organizational structures, with the 2016 "Guidance for 2017 165(d)
Annual Resolution Plan Submission" including criteria for banks to rationalize their legal entities
and facilitate the banks' preferred resolution strategy.


2.2       Average relation between bank complexity, governance, and risk

The levels of complexity at banking conglomerates should be determined by regulation, corporate
governance, and business models. Some complexity may be beneficial to the organization as the
diversification of revenue streams can enhance the resilience of institutions to some configurations
of shocks. However, complexity may also increase risk at the BHC level, for example if the agency
problem related to empire building incentives of managers is exacerbated by a less transparent
organizational structure and poor corporate governance.
       Organizational and business structures reflect the trade-offs in manager optimization problems
(Ragu and Zingales 2001, Stein 2002). Within banking organizations, a higher degree of complexity
may take the form of more legal entities, broader spans of business activities, or wider geographic
2
    The GLBA amended the Bank Holding Company Act to allow permissible activities related to the insurance business
3
    Note that, even though the negotiations on Basel III were only finalized in 2017, many aspects of the framework
    that are relevant for our analysis are in the process of being fully implemented.



                                                          6
locations of BHC affiliates. The more complex banking organizations may have a higher share
of non-financial income and more diversified sources of income (Laeven and Levine, 2007). The
benefits of diversification arising from complexity should depend on the correlation of cash flows
across businesses and geographies, which the are traded off against the exposure to systemic risk
and the monitoring and operational costs of managing a complex organization. International struc-
tures could have added challenges due to the information costs related to operating in different
jurisdictions and cultures and with adhering to a fractured regulatory landscape (Buch, Koch and
Koetter, 2013). Some of this complexity may also arise from managers engaging in actions to reduce
taxation or increase opacity through affiliate placement (Goldberg and Meehl, 2020).
   Complexity choices could also facilitate the specialization of entities within the full organization
and change the pattern of exposures to risk. Luciano and Wihlborg (2018) analyze theoretically
how financial synergies through internal insurance arrangements can drive complexity, with inter-
nal capital markets allowing synergies in managing liquidity across the entities within a banking
organization. If liquidity holdings at the banking units are made available to meet the needs of the
nonbank affiliates, the banking unit might be more liquid than would otherwise be the case, and
the exposure of the rest of the organization to liquidity risk is reduced. Cetorelli and Goldberg
(2016) document such intra-organizational reallocations for the branches of foreign complex banks
operating in the United States. Synergies also arise if the banks are differentially able to manage
risk exposures because of the related nonbank entities in the organization. Baggatini, Fecht and
Weber (2018) show that German universal banks shifted risky sovereign holdings from banking
units to related mutual funds in the European sovereign debt crisis. Synergies from liquidity risk
sharing complemented diversification, and reduced the exposure of the full BHC to fire sale risk.
   Complex organizations are nonetheless more difficult to manage, with this problem exacerbated
by agency problems and moral hazard (Penas and Unal, 2004; Dam and Koetter, 2012; Duchin and
Sosyura, 2014). If monitoring and information costs are high, bank idiosyncratic risk may increase.
Berger et al. (2017) find that internationalization has been associated with higher idiosyncratic
bank risk in US commercial banks, but also with higher capitalization. Agency problems have been
typically associated with institutions that are considered TBTF, which may lead to risk-taking
behavior incentivized by the status of these banks. Given the difficulty of resolving these banks,
they may accumulate risks, grow beyond optimal scale, gamble on government support in times
of distress, and benefit from an implicit TBTF subsidy that lowers funding costs (Balasubram-
nian and Cyree, 2014; Acharya, Anginer and Warburton, 2016). Increased exposure to tail risk
(Arteta, Carey, Correa and Kotter, 2019; Berger et al., 2017), divisional rent seeking and inefficient
investment (Scharfstein and Stein, 2000) are possible "dark sides" of complexity. While more com-
plex organizational structures may lead to riskier banking organizations, riskier organizations also
may seek more complex organizational structures. Managers may be incentivized to pursue riskier


                                                  7
strategies and greater complexity through specific compensation arrangements (Coles, Daniel and
Naveen, 2006; DeYoung, Peng and Yan, 2013).
       These types of compensation arrangements may be most prevalent in less well-governed firms.
Our first set of hypotheses on complexity and organizational risk profile directly address these
trade-offs:

Hypothesis 1a: Bank complexity reduces the risk profile of banks if its accompanied by an increase
in the diversification of banks' income streams and improved liquidity management.
Hypothesis 1b: Increased bank complexity is more likely to reduce risks for banks with stronger
corporate governance.

       We test these hypotheses by estimating both single equations and also systems of equations
which relate respective measures of diversification or risk at the banking organization level with
respective measures of organizational, business, and geographical complexity. Formally, we estimate
the following system:

                     Yb,t = 1 + 1  Cb,t-1 +  1  Gb,t-1 +  1  Xt +  1  Wb,t-1 + b +               b,t   (1)

                     Cb,t = 2 + 2  Yb,t-1 +  2  Gb,t-1 +  2  Xt +  2  Zb,t-1 + b + b,t                 (2)

where b denotes the individual BHCs and t denotes time. Yb,t is either a proxy for Diversif icationb,t ,
such as the standard deviation of BHCs return on assets or of idiosyncratic stock returns, or for a
measure of Riskb,t . Analyses focus on four different types of risk: idiosyncratic (z-score, market z-
score), liquidity (betas on liquidity cost spreads), systematic (dynamic conditional betas per Engle,
2016), and systemic (SRISK per Brownlees and Engle, 2016). Cb,t reflects one of three alternative
measures of complexity: organizational, business, or geographic. BHC governance is introduced
as Gb,t . Tests control for other bank characteristics (Zb,t-1 ) that are viewed as determining the
risk profile of banks and macro environmental characteristics (Xt ). Standard corporate governance
measures, denoted by Gb,t , used in these specifications include the share of institutional ownership,
the share of independent directors, and the absence of CEO duality with the Board Chair role.
       We estimate this system of equations using 2SLS, with and without instrumenting for the re-
spective endogenous variables. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the BHC. Specifications
include either time fixed effects t or Xt to capture common factors that impact all BHCs at time
t.4 BHC fixed effects b and b account for unobserved heterogeneity. In system estimation, Zb,t-1
and Wb,t-1 are the instruments for Cb,t and Yb,t , respectively. The instrument for Yb,t is the market
to book ratio of the bank, which proxies for the BHC's charter value, and the VIXt , which captures
4
    If X is constructed as an end of period variable, it would enter specifications with a t - 1 value



                                                             8
general risk appetite in the economy. The instrument for Cb,t is BHC size. These explanatory
variables are lagged by one period in order to address issues of simultaneity.
       A positive estimate of 1 in equation (1) using diversification as a dependent variable signals
that more complex structures enhance diversification of revenue streams. A similar positive coef-
ficient for the estimation with a risk proxy as the dependent variable instead signals that greater
complexity is associated with higher BHC risk. In equation (2) we test the reciprocal argument,
whether the manager's appetite for risk produces different complexity outcomes. Time-varying
governance measures are taken as pre-determined. Other coefficients of interest,  , capture the
the effect of governance on both complexity and risk (diversification). A negative value for  1 in
risk specification with a positive for  2 would imply that better governance allow banks to increase
complexity without detrimental risk consequences. All of these specifications generate average
relationships between variables over time, which we interpret as strongly indicative.


2.3       Regulatory changes and the relation between bank complexity and risk

The second testing approach more explicitly considers direct causality between complexity and BHC
risk. Identifying a causal relation between complexity and risk-taking uses changes in the regulatory
environment, as demonstrated by Brandao-Marques, Correa and Sapriza (2018), DeYoung, Peng
and Yan (2013) and Laeven and Levine (2009). Our primary focus is on the new regulatory
frameworks for systemic banks proposed in the Dodd-Frank Act (DFA) of 2010, implemented
starting in July 2012, including the guidelines for resolution planning published in 2016.5
       Our second hypothesis addresses the direct link between regulatory changes in the post-crisis
period and complexity, focusing on the new regulatory frameworks that have targeted the resolution
of systemic financial institutions. Complexity may have allowed banks to take on more risk through
their involvement in low capital-cost riskier activities or by enhancing the public-sector subsidy
implicitly received by these institutions. Alternatively, per hypothesis 1, complexity also could
have had more nuanced consequences, depnding on the type of complexity considered and the type
of risk metrics. By targeting the organizational structure of banks to facilitate their resolvability,
new resolution frameworks may have reduced bank complexity, force banks to rationalize their
organizational structure, and ultimately altered risk taking.The following testable hypothesis sets
up the first part of our difference-in-difference estimation:

Hypothesis 2a: Tighter regulatory restrictions on participation in non-traditional banking activi-
ties and enhanced recovery and resolution regimes should decrease BHCs' complexity.

       However, as previously noted, complex corporate structures also may be driven by weak gover-
5
    We also explore results around the 1999 passage of the Graham-Leach-Bliley Act, which are available upon request.



                                                           9
nance arrangements. As noted in standard agency theories of the corporation (Jensen and Meckling,
1976; Shleifer and Vishny, 1989) under weak governance managers pursuing their self interest may
build empires focusing on investments that facilitates their entrenchment in the firm (Xuan, 2009).
Stronger corporate governance arrangements may push back against these incentives of managers,
limiting their "empire building" activities (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). Better corporate governance
arrangements may limit the increase in complex structures when these provide no tangible bene-
fits to the overall firm. If tangible benefits take in the form of income diversification or liquidity
risk reduction, organizations with stronger governance arrangement may reduce complexity to a
lesser degree with the more restrictive regulations. We formalize this argument in the following
hypothesis:

Hypothesis 2b: Under tighter regulations complexity should decrease less for banks with stronger
corporate governance.

       For our formal tests of these hypotheses, we test for the change in complexity after living
wills were enacted, comparing firms with weaker and stronger governance arrangements.6 For each
estimation, we focus on the three years before and after the passage of the regulatory requirements.
We expect the coefficient  to be negative, and thus  to have a positive sign if BHCs with better
governance have a less pronounced decline in complexity after the regulatory tightening.
       We estimate the following equation with and without corporate governance terms:

                    i
                   Cb,t =  +   db,t +   Gb, +   (db,t  Gb, ) +   Xt +   Zb,t-1 +           b,t            (3)

       In equation (3), with db,t representing the date of implementing more restrictive policies around
complexity for affected banks,  is expected to be negative. Equation (3) includes macroeconomic-
level controls (Xt ) and time-varying bank controls (Zb,t ) intended to capture aggregate or bank level
characteristics that may affect banks' decision to change its complexity level. The indicator for the
date of implementation of living wills, db,t , varies by the size of the bank, as these requirements
were phased in over a period of about two years. Banks with more than $250 billion in assets
complied with this requirement starting in July 2012, while those with assets above $100 billion
had to comply with this rule in July 2013. Other banks with assets above $50 billion were required
to comply as of end-2013. Governance measures enter our specifications with a lag  . The corporate
governance measures are dated to 2009.7
       Finally, the counterpart on risk outcomes is that, ceteris paribus, the BHCs faced with the most
6
    We take corporate governance measures as given because they are slow moving.
7
    For the GLBA period, the governance proxies are measures as of 1996, when scope regulations under the Glass-
    Steagall Act (GSA) were still binding (Chernobai, Ozdagli and Wang, 2020). The variable dt is an indicator equal
    to 1 after 1999Q4, and zero otherwise, for the GLBA. These results are available upon request.



                                                          10
extensive tightening and ex ante with the most dominant moral hazard outcomes should observe
the greatest declines in risk profiles.

Hypothesis 3: More stringent regulatory frameworks, including recovery and resolution regimes,
could lead to more improved risk profiles for BHCs with weaker corporate governance.

       Testing relies on a difference-in-difference approach similar to the one presented in equation
(3), where we compare bank risk around the staggered introduction of living wills requirements in
2012. The treatment group includes banks that are directly affected by the regulatory policy. The
control group consists of domestic banks that are less directly impacted by the regulatory policy.
The identification of the two groups depends on banking characteristics, including complexity
measures. For the introduction of living wills, the changes in complexity for BHCs that are affected
by these resolution planning guidelines are compared to those that are not, with the treatment
timing introduced as BHC-specific.8


3       Banking data: Complexity, governance, and risk
Complexity, risk, and governance data are defined at the level of the BHC. As US banking organi-
zations under $25 billion in asset size tend to have low complexity (Goldberg and Meehl 2020), the
analysis focuses on the universe of BHCs with US parentage (top-holder) and at least $25 billion
in total assets, and the period 1996Q1 through 2018Q2.
       The average number of BHCs that satisfy these inclusion criteria is 33 across all the quarters.
The total number of BHCs by quarter is a minimum of 23 and rises to a maximum of 49 in later
quarters. Roughly one quarter of the BHC-quarter observations are over $250 billion, and the
remaining three quarters are between $25 and $250 billion.9 The size distribution shifted towards
larger institutions over time: indeed, only 2-7 BHCs are in the over $250 billion category before
2000, and this grows to 11 in the later quarters.
       The summary statistics over the variables for the bank holding companies included in the
estimation sample are presented in Table 1. The upper panel of this table presents the distribution
of variables across BHC-quarter observations, showing the distribution of total assets, deposit share
in funding, loans relative to assets, and total equity capital to assets.
8
    Banks with consolidated assets of more than 50 billion have to submit resolution planning documentations.
9
    Our data includes the new BHCs that were required to filed the FR-Y9C after 2009Q1. These banks were Goldman
    Sachs, Morgan Stanley, American Express, CIT Group, Ally Financial, Discover Financial Services, and Metlife.




                                                        11
3.1       BHC Complexity

Large BHCs often have significant ownership positions or controlling interests in a range of legal
entities (alternatively referred to as affiliates or subsidiaries). The complexity measures we construct
utilize information on the structure, number, location, and industry type of bank and non-bank
affiliates under each BHC with this information contained in regulatory reporting. Conceptual
foundations are in Cetorelli and Goldberg (2014), the database for US BHCs in Cetorelli and
Stern (2015), and refinements of concepts and evidence for large US BHCs in Goldberg and Meehl
(2020). Organizational, business and geographic complexity metrics rely respectively on counts of
legal entities in each BHC, and related information on their different business or industry types and
international versus United States locations of entities. One innovation in this current paper is that
we introduce principal component analysis over alternative pieces of information relevant for types
of complexity, including additional information that informs other aspects of business or geographic
complexity.10 Organizational, business, and geographic complexity indices are both BHC b and time
t specific. Subscripts distinguish the number and characteristics of the legal entities within each
BHC. Organizational complexity is computed as the total number of legal entities within the BHC,
Countb,t .
       Figure 1 shows the distribution of BHC organizational complexity by two broad BHC size
categories, representing quarterly averages and standard deviation of complexity for BHCs in asset
size bucket starting in 1996. The respective vertical lines are dates of the GLBA and DFA Living
Will guidance. BHCs under $250 billion on average have around 120 legal entities, with considerable
variation. Within this group, the largest and most complex BHCs can have thousands of legal
entities, on average over 2000 since the mid-2000s, further detailed in Goldberg and Meehl (2020).
While BHC size and organizational complexity are strongly positively correlated, these are different
concepts. Importantly considerable variation is observed across BHCs and over time in all forms
of complexity, even after accounting for BHC size.
       Business complexity, reflecting the span of financial and nonfinancial businesses of a BHC, is
constructed using principal component analysis over information on the industries and businesses
of the entities within each BHC. These alternative inputs, described in Table A2, are type counts,
Herfindahl-type indices reflecting higher values indicating more dispersion of businesses within
the BHC, the portion of these legal entities that are outside the financial sector, the number of
industrial categories spanned by the legal entities, the total number of broad business categories
spanned by these legal entities, the dispersion of legal entities across these types of businesses,
and the share of income derived from sources other than interest. The measures vary considerably
over time and for the smaller versus larger US BHCs. We apply principal components techniques
10
     The construction approaches for the respective indices are presented in Table A1.



                                                           12
        Figure 1: Complexity Measures across BHCs, average by BHC asset size categories




      (a) Total Affiliate Count            (b) BPC1: Business Scope              (c) GPC1: Geographic Scope

Note: This figure presents average complexity measures by date across the BHCs within each
asset size category. The red vertical lines indicate the time of Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (1999) and
Dodd-Frank Act Living Will Guidance (2012). The dark grey and light grey areas reflect a standard
error band around the averages of banks in the asset size categories $25-$250 bil and $250+ bil
respectively.



to summarize the top two common elements that span these four business complexity series and
reduce the dimensionality of the data. The resulting first principal component, BP C 1b,t discussed
further in Appendix A1, captures business scope. Business scope is considerably broader for the
largest US BHCs relative to those under $250 billion (Figure 1). The averages across this latter
group of BHCs have trended downward in the years after the DFA. For the largest US BHCs,
business scope has evolved over time with shifting mixtures of financial and nonfinancial business,
but not markedly declined (Goldberg and Meehl, 2020).
     Geographic complexity is measured using the information on location of the legal entities in
the BHC, plus supplementary information from the balance sheet that further captures the degree
and dispersion of geographic complexity. Components include the count of countries spanned by a
BHC's subsidiaries.11 , the dispersion of BHC affiliate locations across countries12 , and bank-specific
quarterly reporting on US bank international exposures to related and unrelated counterparties.
Such information is important as the aforementioned structure data can miss the pattern of foreign
branch locations of US banks. The very largest BHCs, over $750 billion in assets, exhibit substan-
tially more geographic complexity than the other BHCs below $750 billion, and with BHCs below
$250 billion generally having low geographic complexity. The dimensionality reduction across the
measures of geographic complexity yields two principal components with the resulting first compo-
11
   A variant of this measure could be the counts of locations spanned by banking subsidiaries and branches per se.
   Moreover, if appropriate data is available, balance sheet and income data for the BHC could be used to construct
   additional metrics.
12
   This measures of geographic complexity do not address the concept of dispersion of branch locations or businesses
   within the United States, a topic considered in some research on the consequences of the historic elimination
   interstate banking restrictions through the 1980s and with the Riegle-Neal Act in 1994.



                                                        13
nent (Appendix A1), GP C 1b,t , capturing geographic scope of the BHC.


3.2       BHC Risk

The BHC optimizes over a frontier of different risks, not a single risk measure. While the hy-
potheses of Section 2 articulate the ways that BHC complexity and risk are related, our empirical
specifications focus on four types of risk measures at the BHC-time level: idiosyncratic, liquidity,
systematic, and systemic. This span reflects potential BHC complexity consequences optimized by
assessing trade-offs across types of risk.
       Idiosyncratic risk is proxied by measures commonly used in the literature (Berger et al., 2017;
Lepetit et al., 2008). Both measures reflect BHC income diversification, so higher values reflect
lower idiosyncratic risk. Components are constructed based on return on assets (RoA) and equity
share, or are a comparison of firm average returns with its standard deviation SD RoAb,t .

                                                              AverageEquityb,t
                        Z-Scoreb,t = (AverageRoAb,t +                          )/SD RoAb,t
                                                                 Assetsb,t

                        Market Z-Scoreb,t = (AvgReturnsb,t + 1)/SD StockReturnsb,t

Within Market Z-Score, AvgReturnsb,t is the 120-day average BHC stock returns, and Idiosyncratic
Returns (SD StockReturnsb,t ) is the standard deviation of its BHC idiosyncratic stock returns
(after extracting the market return, Fama-French factors, and a momentum factor). Increasing
income diversification is associated with higher levels of risk and less net income diversification,
while increasing z-score is associated with lower levels of risk.
       We inform the issue of whether complexity provides diversification benefits by also directly
examining the standard deviation of returns on assets and of the idiosyncratic stock returns. Figure
2 shows patterns over time of these metrics. In the post-crisis period, the largest BHCs had more
stable RoA, while market-based idiosyncratic variation tended to be more similar.
       BHC liquidity risk is proxied by a LIBOR-OIS beta, which is computed from regressing the
BHC returns on the LIBOR-OIS spread over a 180-day window. A BHC with higher liquidity risk
exposure has lower returns when liquidity costs rise.13
       Systematic risk exposures of the BHC are proxied by the dynamic beta developed by Engle
(2016). The advantage of this measure is that it does not rely on ad-hoc rolling windows for its
calculation, as is the case for the commonly used measures of beta (Fama and MacBeth, 1973; Bali,
Engle and Tang, 2017). The data to calculate this variable comes from CRSP and Kenneth French's
13
     The balance sheet data are accounting data from the FR Y9C report. Stock return information is sourced from the
     Center for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). With the first computed over 12 quarters of data and the second
     based on rolling daily returns over 120 days. Given the skewness in the distribution of the Z-score, the econometric
     specifications use log Z-score values. The LIBOR-OIS spreads are from Bloomberg.



                                                            14
         Figure 2: Diversification Measures across BHCs, average by BHC asset size categories




                (a) Income Diversification                            (b) Idiosyncratic Returns

Note: This figure presents the average diversification measures by date across the BHCs within
each asset size category. The red vertical lines indicate the time of Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (1999)
and Dodd-Frank Act Living Will Guidance (2012). The dark grey and light grey areas reflect a
standard error band around the averages of banks in the asset size categories $25-$250 bil and
$250+ bil respectively.



online data library. Exposure of the BHC to systemic risk are proxied by SRISKb,t , which is a
prediction of a BHC's capital shortfall conditional on a severe market decline per the methodology
of Brownlees and Engle (2016).        14

       Visualizations of average values for BHCs sorted by size bucket and over time are provided in
Figures 2 and 3. Through the end of 2018, measures of BHC return volatility on average have
declined in the post DFA living will periods for all size categories of (large) US BHCs. Exposure to
systemic risk (Figure 3 panel d) especially declined for the larger BHCs, and particularly diminished
on average for BHCs with assets greater than $750 bil.


3.3       BHC Governance

The strength of BHC governance is proxied by measures that assume stronger governance arises
from better shareholder monitoring and transparency. The first governance proxy is the share of
institutional ownership of each bank, measured using data we collected from Thomson Reuters. As
institutional owners are considered informed investors that can monitor firm managers, larger shares
of institutional owners should lead to fewer agency problems (Gaspar, Massa and Matos, 2005).
14
     This measure is computed using publicly available stock return information from CRSP and BHC balance sheet
     information from Compustat. The code to compute SRISK and the dynamic conditional beta was kindly shared
     by the Volatility Laboratory (V-Lab) at New York University.



                                                       15
           Figure 3: Risk Measures across BHCs, average by BHC asset size categories




               (a) (-1) Log Z-score                            (b) (-1) Log Market Z-score




          (c) Dynamic Conditional Beta                                (d) SRISK




              (e) LIBOR-OIS Beta

Note: This figure presents the average risk measures by date across the BHCs within each asset
size category. The axis on the Z-scores are flipped to show that higher values reflect more risk. The
red vertical lines indicate the time of Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (1999) and Dodd-Frank Act Living
Will Guidance (2012). The dark grey and light grey areas reflect a standard error band around the
averages of banks in the asset size categories $25-$250
                                                  16     bil and $250+ bil respectively.
The second governance proxy collected is the absence of CEO duality, with duality arising when
the CEO is also the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the BHC. CEOs with dual roles may
exert excessive power over the Board, limiting the amount of information filtered to shareholders
(Baldenius, Melumad and Meng, 2014). This may exacerbate agency problems within the bank
and to a potential riskier profile. We collect information on the CEOs role from S&P's Execucomp
and Capital IQ. A third governance proxy is the share of independent directors, expected to be
positively correlated with the degree of monitoring of the CEO by shareholders. This information
is collected from Capital IQ and Refinitiv's ESG indicators. We computed the principle component
over institutional ownership shares, denoting GovP C 1b,t as a measure to capture better agency
governance. Visualizations of average values of GovP C 1b,t and CEO non-duality for BHCs sorted
by size bucket and date are provided in Figure 4. On average, the years following the DFA LW
showed governance improvements in GovP C 1b,t that continued pre-DFA trends as institutional
owners broadened their holdings of BHC stocks. Patterns across shares of independent directors
were less clear by size category and relatively similar in the post GFC period. Independent direct
shares rose discretely post-crisis and in advance of the DFA.

Figure 4: Governance Measures across BHCs, averages by date within BHC asset size categories




    (a) GovPC1: Bank Ownership Governance                       (b) CEO Non-Duality

Note: This figure presents the average governance measures by date across the BHCs within each
asset size category. The red vertical lines indicate the time of Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (1999) and
Dodd-Frank Act Living Will Guidance (2012). The dark grey and light grey areas reflect a standard
error band around the averages of banks in the asset size categories $25-$250 bil and $250+ bil
respectively.




                                                17
3.4       Macroeconomic Controls

The controls for general economic and financial conditions in some regression specifications include
US real GDP growth, the credit cycle, and global risk conditions. The credit cycle is captured by
the credit to GDP gap in the United States, calculated by the Bank for International Settlements.
Risk conditions are captured by the VIX index, which shows the implied volatility in S&P500 stock
index option prices from Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE). For robustness tests, we use
an alternative metric, the Bekaert, Engstrom and Xu (2017) risk index, to specifically capture risk
sentiment.


4       Empirical Results

4.1       The Average Relationship Between Complexity, Diversification, and Risk

On average, is complexity associated with BHC diversification and risk, and how does governance
influence these outcomes? Our first set of test results use the system of equations described in
specifications (1) and (2). Each complexity measure is explored through a separate regression
specification, as is each distinct risk or return diversification measure. We estimate each of these
equations separately in a panel setup and also estimate them jointy using 2SLS with instrumental
variables for risk and complexity on the right hand side. For the latter specifications, the measures
of complexity in equation (1) are instrumented using: the size of the bank proxied by its log of
assets (measured in 2012 dollars), an indicator variable equal to one during the period between
the GLBA and the passage of the DFA, and the average complexity of BHC competitors within
the same tercile of the size distribution.15 In equation (2), we follow DeYoung, Peng and Yan
(2013) and instrument the risk measures with the market to book ratio of each individual BHC,
the nonperforming loans ratio, and by the VIX. The system of equations uses data between 1996q1
and 2018q2. All specifications have BHC fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the BHC
level.
       Table 2 summarizes the sign and significance patterns from a series of regressions on the re-
spective complexity and diversification or risk variables. Each cell of this table represents the key
result relevant for hypothesis 1a or 1b, each drawn from a separate regression. For each entry in
the table we report only the sign and significance of the coefficient of the respective complexity or
diversification (risk) variable. The full specification results are reported in the online appendix. The
columns on the left show the results from specifications without any instrumental variables, while
those on the right instrument for both diversification (risk) and complexity variables in respective
15
     As described in Section 2, regulations are one of the main factors that drive complexity. The period between the
     GLBA and the DFA is considered a period of looser regulation, which is captured by the indicator variable.



                                                          18
equation.
       The single equation estimations (without instrumental variables) show the significant associa-
tions between complexity, diversification and risk. The standard deviation of idiosyncratic returns
is negatively and significantly associated with more organizational and business complexity. The
standard deviation of RoA is negatively and significantly associated with geographic complexity.
Market Z-Score measures of BHC idiosyncratic risk reflect these diversification benefits, as organi-
zational and business complexity are associated with lower Market Z-Scores.
       The better identified system of equations using instrumental variables, shown in the right
columns of Table 2, provide more compelling evidence of causal relationships. We estimate separate
systems of equations for each complexity measure while respectively instrumenting for the lagged
complexity and diversification measures.16 In these estimations, our instruments are not weak for
the complexity variables, as captured by the KPWF statistic. Organizational complexity and the
geographic scope of BHCs are associated with lower variability of RoA. The lower panel on the
drivers of diversification shows that complexity is only marginally associated with the variability
of RoA, although the instruments for this diversification measure are weak. Specifications that
instead use the standard deviation of stock returns as the dependent variable find no average rela-
tion between complexity driving this type of idiosyncratic return measure based on equity prices.
However, BHCs with more volatile idiosyncratic stock returns appear to contract business scope.
Overall, it is both organizational complexity and the geographic scope of BHCs that dampen the
variation on banks' balance sheet returns.
       Tests for the average relation between risk and complexity without instruments are based on
the same system of equations as for the diversification measures. The entries on the left show
the results without instrumenting risk and complexity, while those on the right instrument those
variables.
       The systems of equations show that organizational complexity and business scope are associated
with lower idiosyncratic risk, as measured by the market z-score. At the same time, organizational
and geographic complexity are associated with higher systemic risk (as measured by SRISK), with
more geographic complexity also associated with higher systematic risk. These same complexity
traits are associated with less liquidity risk exposure. US BHCs appear to be using organizational
and geographic complexity to reduce idiosyncratic and liquidity risks, but at the cost of an increasing
systematic and systemic risks.
       The results of the system of equations with instrumental variables show consistent findings.
In general, more organizational and geographic complexity lowers idiosyncratic and liquidity risks,
16
     In the online appendix, we report the Kleiberger-Paap Wald F (KPWF) statistic as the measure for weak identi-
     fication of the instruments in each regression. We are able to reject the null of weak instruments for most of our
     specifications.




                                                           19
and raises systematic and systemic risk exposures. The bottom panel shows a partial a feedback
effect between complexity and risk. Higher BHC systematic and systemic risk exposures are also
more complex. Interestingly, BHCs with higher liquidity risks tend to lower geographic complexity.
   The quantitative importance of the relation between complexity, diversification, and risk is
high, especially for the largest BHCs (more than $750 billion in assets). For example, using the IV
estimations, a one standard deviation increase in organizational complexity, equivalent to a change
of about 1,000 legal entities, would lead to a 4 standard deviation increase in income diversification,
as measured by the RoA, and to a 3 standard deviation change in the z-score. Similarly, a one
standard deviation increase in geographic complexity would lead to a 1.1 standard deviation decline
in liquidity risk exposure. Equivalent increases in organizational and geographic complexity are
associated with a 1.3 and 1.7 standard deviation increases in systematic risks. For the smaller BHCs,
these changes range in the order between 1 and 1.5 standard deviations. The association between
geographic complexity and liquidity risk is not economically significant, as a 1 standard deviation
increase in geographic complexity is just associated withe a 0.6 standard deviation decrease in
liquidity risks.
   The economic significance of the reverse relation, from diversification and risk on changes in
complexity, is low. A one standard deviation change in the statistically significant risk measures
are only associated with changes in complexity that are just a fraction of their standard deviations.
This applies to both the large and small BHCs.
   In sum, the results from the these estimations lead us to nuance the conclusions around Hy-
pothesis 1a, which was crafted for general risk and complexity conclusions. Instead, we document
a rich tradeoff. More complex and diversified BHCs appear to have lower idiosyncratic and liquidity
risks, but this comes at the expense of having higher systematic and systemic risks.
   Hypothesis 1b conjectured that BHCs with better governance arrangements might be able
to increase complexity without increasing their risk exposures. We test this using the same speci-
fications reported in Table 2, but now focus on the  coefficients from equations (1) and (2) that
highlight direct roles of both governance variables, alternatively captured by GovP C 1b,t (the first
principal component encapsulating institutional ownership and board independence) and the CEO
non-duality.
   Table 3 shows the sign and significance of the coefficients for these governance measures in
each one of the diversification and risk regressions. Better governance in BHCs, as as captured
GovP C 1b,t and shown in panel A, is only associated with larger idiosyncratic and liquidity risk
exposures. However, better governance is robustly associated with more organizational and business
complexity. These results appear to reject Hypothesis 1b: better governed banks are the ones that
increase complexity as they seek more diversified income streams. Panel B provides corresponding
results using absence of CEO duality to capture governance. Similar results arise as with the first


                                                  20
prinicipal component of institutional ownership and board independence, but weaker. Altogether,
some governance traits may help banks to navigate an increase in complexity while at the same
time controlling the levels of risk of the organization.
       Overall, the results suggest that BHC organizational complexity enhances income diversification
and reduces idiosyncratic risk exposures. This result is driven by BHCs with better governance
arrangements that push for more complex organizational structures. However, although more
complex organizational structures may reduce idiosyncratic risks, the same complex organizational
structures increase the systematic risks of BHCs, making them vulnerable to large coordinated
events.


4.2       Complexity, Governance, and BHC Living Wills

As changes in the regulatory environment are partially targeted at BHC complexity, the next set
of results focus on the consequences of introduction of LWs in 2012.17 First, tests assess whether
BHC complexity changed when these regulatory actions were implemented per Hypothesis 2a.
Second, tests focus on Hypothesis 2b, establishing whether the BHCs with weaker governance
arrangements then exhibited the larger changes in complexity. As discussed around equation (3),
these empirical tests work like difference in difference tests using a sample period of about 3 years
before and 3 years after the regulatory change.
       The dependent variables are the levels of organizational complexity, business scope, and ge-
ographic scope. db,t is an indicator variable equal to 1 after the staggered introduction of LWs
in mid-2012. The window between 2009q2 and 2018q2 is considered to assess the impact of this
regulation. All regressions include as controls BHC (log of real) assets, the loans to assets ratio,
the deposits to assets ratio, the liquid assets ratio, and equity to assets, and aggregate measures
(GDP growth, the credit to GDP gap, and the VIX) with all lagged by one quarter. The regressions
also include BHC fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the BHC level. In Table 3 columns
(2)-(3), (5)-(6), and (9)-(10), db,t is interacted with an indicator variable equal to 1 for BHCs with
assets above $750 billion. The coefficient on this interaction term allows us to assess whether the
impact of this regulation was larger for those BHCs with a larger systemic footprint.
       The introduction of LWs had a significant effect on BHCs' organizational complexity. Columns
(1) and (2) show that the overall number of affiliate across BHCs decreased after the introduction
of LWs. This decrease was concentrated in the largest BHCs (more than $750 billion in assets),
which had a notably larger number of affiliates prior to the introduction of LWs. Other measures
of complexity do not change significantly either for the average BHC or for the largest BHCs.
       Columns (3), (6), and (9) provide estimates from a similar set of regressions that include
17
     We present similar test for the passage of the GLBA in 1999, which is available upon request.



                                                           21
interactions between db,t and two governance measures, in addition to the size indicator. The
values for these governance measures are as of 2009. Hypothesis 2b posits BHC with better
governance will adjust less to regulatory loosenings, as these are the ones where complexity is more
likely to have diversification motives dominate "empire building" motives.
   The table show that governance did not, on average, influence the change of complexity after
the introduction of LWs. Organizational complexity was most affected by the change in regulation,
and the largest BHCs reduced complexity of their organizations more (and also were much more or-
ganizational complexity ex ante ). The BHCs with better governance did not adjust their structure
significantly differently than other BHCs. In addition the specification for geographic complexity
shows a coefficient for the interaction between db,t and our CEO Non-Duality indicator as neg-
ative and weakly significant. BHCs with non-dual roles for the CEO decreased their geographic
complexity by somewhat more after the introduction of LWs.
   The results confirm that regulations affect specific aspects of complexity, as described in Hy-
pothesis 2a, especially those types of complexity directly targeted by those regulations. In the
case of LWs, the legal entity rationalization guidance described in Section 2 specifically targeted
the organizational structure of banks. Thus, it is not surprising that BHCs reduced their number of
affiliates following the regulation. However, we do not find support for Hypothesis 2b, as the BHC
governance measures in general are not associated with a differential change in complexity follow-
ing the introduction of new regulations. In this case, regulatory changes substitute for governance
in limiting organizational complexity. Section 4.4 returns to these issues with a more conceptual
discussion of liquidity regulation and capital regulations also could alter the BHC complexity and
risk trade-offs.
   We have conducted standard tests to assess the validity of these difference-in-difference estima-
tors, following Atanasov and Black (2016). Figure OA.1 in the Online Appendix show the tests
for parallel trends for our sample of treated (living wills reporters) and non-treated BHCs. We
plot the coefficient on the interaction between the indicator of those BHCs subject to LWs and a
set of time dummies. Parallel trends generally characterize all the measures of complexity and, in
particular, organizational complexity as the main variable of interest. We also run a set of placebo
tests using the passage of the DFA as the indicator of interest. In these specifications, we only
use the pre-living wills period, between 2009 and 2012. This set of regressions, presented in figure
OA.4 in the Online Appendix, does not indicate a significant change in complexity in the post-DFA
treatment period.


4.3    Living Wills, Diversification, and Risk

In this section we test whether the living will regulatory actions that affect banks' complexity
are associated with changes in the diversification of banks' income streams and their risk profiles.

                                                22
However, as noted in Section 2, the DFA also included other provisions to increase the resilience of
banking organizations, with specific and well documented emphasis on those BHCs and activities
that posed systemic risks to the financial system. New capital and liquidity regulations were
implemented to reduce the probability of failure of banks, while new resolution rules where enacted
to facilitate the resolution of systemic institutions. As research has explored the effects of these
changes on BHC risks, identification of the specific role of living wills is also challenging.
   The first set of tests, reported in Table 4, focus on the change in banks' diversification after the
staggered introduction of LWs starting in mid-2012. As shown in column (1), the introduction of
LWs was associated with a general reduction in RoA variability. However, this decrease in the stan-
dard deviation of RoA was not associated with the the size of the BHCs or their governance traits,
as shown in columns (2) and (3). In columns (4)-(6) we present results for the same specification,
but with the standard deviation of BHC idiosyncratic returns as the dependent variable. BHCs'
variability of returns did not decrease after the introduction of LWs, on average. However, we do
find a relative increase for the largest banks, where the interaction between db,t and a dummy equal
to 1 for banks with more than $750 billion in assets is positive and significant. Altogether, these
findings suggest that the regulatory change had a mixed effect on banks' income diversification,
despite the introduction of LWs having an impact on the level of BHCs' organizational complexity.
We expect that the specific role of LWs is difficult to isolate in such specifications.
   Next, we analyze the relation between complexity, governance, and bank risk after the intro-
duction of LWs. These specifications target Hypothesis 3, regarding whether more stringent
regulatory frameworks lead to lower risk profiles of banks. In addition, we assess whether the
change in risk is related to the governance structure of banks, as BHC with weaker governance may
achieve relatively more risk reduction with tighter regulations.
   Table 5 provides results with columns corresponding to the respective risk measures as depen-
dent variables: idiosyncratic risk of BHCs (z-score and market z-score), systematic risk (dynamic
beta), systemic risk (SRISK), and the BHCs' liquidity risk. This setup allows us to assess whether
changes in regulations that alter complexity shift banks' risk profiles, with BHCs engaging in
strategies that may reduce one type of risk but increase another one.
   As shown in columns (1)-(3) and also (4)-(6), the introduction of LWs is associated with a
decrease in the z-score for BHCs after they started reporting LWs (negative and statistically sig-
nificant coefficient for db,t ). In general, neither BHC size nor governance measures are consistently
associated with a change in idiosyncratic risk in this period. The only exception is GovP C 1b,t with
better governed BHCs having a larger reduction of liquidity risk after the introduction of LWs.
   The next panel of results cover systematic, systemic, and liquidity risks. The reporting of
LWs do not appear to be associated with an increase in banks systematic risk on average, as the
coefficients on db,t are mostly not significant. As shown in column (4), SRISK decreased, on average,


                                                  23
after banks started reporting LWs. Importantly, columns (5) and (6) show that, in general, SRISK
decreased more markedly for the largest BHCs. We find an average increase in liquidity risk after
the introduction of LWs. However, this result is weaker for larger banks and banks with more
institutional owners and independent directors. This finding is consistent with the results shown in
the system of equations. A reduction in complexity and systemic risk may come at the expense of
larger liquidity risk. In this particular case, the trade off is somewhat muted, as the more systemic
banks did not experience an outsized increase in their liquidity risk.
   As with the previous results based on difference-in-difference estimations, we conduct tests
to assess the validity of this technique for our specifications (see figures OA.2, OA.3, OA.5, and
OA.6 in the Online Appendix). For our statistically significant results, such as for systemic and
liquidity risks, these tests show that trends are parallel in general in the pre-event period. In
addition, placebo tests with the passage of the DFA do not yield any significant changes. This
set of results on risk consistently show that BHCs that had to report LWs had lower measures
of idiosyncratic and systemic risk after the introduction of this regulatory requirement, consistent
with Hypothesis 3. The decline in systemic risk was stronger for larger BHCs. Liquidity risks
exhibited the opposite pattern, as BHCs increased in this type of risk exposure, especially for
smaller BHCs. The regulatory change influenced the risk profile of both larger and smaller BHCs.
   Next, we test whether those changes were larger for BHCs that were more complex in the
dimension that was most affected by the introduction of LWs, organizational complexity. This set
of tests allows us to further identify the effect of the introduction of LWs relative to other regulatory
changes that may have been phased in at the same time.
   Table 6 reports the results for the diversification measures and Table 7 for the risk measures. In
these specifications we replace the size indicator variable with the level of organizational complexity
of each BHC as of 2009. We expect that BHCs with higher organizational complexity prior to
the introduction of LWs made adjustments that were associated with more significant changes in
income diversification and overall risk profiles. In addition, triple interaction terms between the db,t
indicator variable, the governance measures, and the level of organizational complexity are used to
assess whether BHCs with weaker governance adjusted by more after the adoption of the new LW
rules.
   The results show that income variation for more organizationally complex BHCs decreased by
less than their peers after the introduction of LWs. This result is consistent with the average
result that complexity was associated with better income diversification. As more organizationally
complex BHCs reduced their organizational complexity, risk diversification suffered relative to other
BHCs. The results for other risk metrics show that organizationally complex banks did not alter
idiosyncratic risk exposures differently than BHCs after the introduction of LWs. Given the result
on diversification, which is a component of these idiosyncratic risk measures, this result signals that


                                                   24
the overall change in idiosyncratic risk was probably driven by changes in other regulations such
as those on capital requirements. This interpretation is more consistent with the other result that
complexity is associated with lower levels of idiosyncratic risk exposure. We find mixed results on
systematic and systemic risks. Consistent with the other results, more organizationally complex
BHCs had a larger decrease in systemic risk after the introduction of LWs. In contrast, these
BHCs had smaller declines in systematic risk. Within this group, BHCs with better governance,
as measure by CEO non-duality, effectively reduced systematic risk relative to their less complex
peers.
   In sum, some of the changes after the introduction of LWs are consistent with the average
relations documented in Section 4.1. In those cases where that is not the case, other factors not
associated with complexity likely drove the changes in risk profiles.


4.4      Potential Effects of Enhanced Liquidity and Capital Regulation

A simple set of graphical illustrations provide intuition around how other types of regulation alter
the dynamics between complexity, living wills, and risk profiles. Consider first a simple illustration
of the empirical findings from Section 4.1, with Figure 5, panel A, showing the positive relationship
between complexity (organizational and geographic) and BHC market risk, and a negative rela-
tionship with idiosyncratic risk from diversification and liquidity risk from utilizing internal capital
markets and management at a conglomerate level. Under this partial equilibrium setting, the BHC
chooses a level of complexity, for example C0 , that captures the trade-offs as complexity rises along
the horizontal axis. Initial levels of systematic market risk, idiosyncratic risk, and liquidity risk all
are normalized to R0 .
   The other three panels consider the effects of resolution frameworks (panel b), tighter liquidity
requirements (panel c) and tighter capital requirements like those arising from Basel III higher
minimum capital ratios and stress testing (panel d). Under LWs, the BHC internalizes more of
the externalities associated with systemic risk exposures. Instead of exclusively considering the
upward sloping market risks, the trade-offs on the increasing risk side also consider the systemic
risk exposures which expand with complexity. The level of complexity chosen by the BHC is thus
smaller, shifting to C1 . In panel c, regulations that reduce BHC exposure to liquidity risk shift down
the associated curve corresponding to liquidity and idiosyncratic risks. As the liquidity risk gains
from organizational and geographic diversification are lower, the desired amount of complexity at
the BHC level can decline, consistent with Luciano and Wihlborg (2018). Tighter bank capital
requirements, depicted in panel d, can either raise or lower optimal complexity from the vantage
point of the BHC depending on the relative size of the curve shifts and their shapes.




                                                   25
           Figure 5: Illustration of Risk and Complexity Relationships, with Regulation Shifts

    Risk                                                        Risk

                                                                                      Market + Systemic




                                        Market                                            LW     Market

                         A                                                    B A
    R0
                                        Liq . + Idio .                                           Liq . + Idio .

                                           Complexity                                              Complexity
                         C0                                                   C1 C0
                        (a) Baseline                                   (b) DFA Living Will Guidance

    Risk                                                        Risk




                                          Market                                                   Market
             LCR          A                                            Cap.Reg.       A            Market
                   C                      Liq . + Idio .                                           Liq . + Idio .
                                                                                  D
                                       Liq . + Idio .                                           Liq . + Idio .
                   C2    C0       Complexity                                      C3 C0        Complexity
                 (c) Liquidity regulation                                  (d) Capital regulation

Note: The red curve represents market (M arket) and systemic risk, while the blue curve represents
liquidity (Liq.) and idiosyncratic (Idio.) risks. The dashed red and blue lines are shifts in market
and liquidity and idiosyncratic risks respectively around major regulatory changes. A is the starting
equilibrium point, and B , C , and D are equilibrium points after the DFA Living Wills, Liquidity
Coverage Ratio, and Capital Requirement regulations respectively. refers to changes in risk across
all BHCs.



5        Conclusion
The links between BHC complexity and risk became apparent during the global financial crisis.
Large and complex BHCs had significant systemic risk exposures and, given their systemic im-
portance, were very difficult to resolve during the crisis. The TBTF phenomenon was also a too


                                                           26
complex to fail phenomenon, underscoring extensive post crisis efforts to make BHCs more resilient
so that failure probabilities would decline, and make banks less complex, so that externalities from
failures would have fewer costly externalities.
   A starting point of this paper has been that the broader relationship between types of BHC
complexity and the frontier of types of BHC risks has not been well understood. Agency problems
weigh against diversification gains in driving risk outcomes. We show that the regulatory actions
taken after the global financial crisis, specifically living wills guidance, were associated with signif-
icant declines in organizational complexity among US BHCs with over $25 billion in assets. These
changes translated into reductions in BHCs' idiosyncratic and systemic risks, partially explained
by a decrease in BHCs' income variability.
   BHC governance and regulatory changes can jointly influence BHCs' risk profiles. In some cases,
regulatory changes force BHCs to adjust their complex structures. BHCs with weak governance
change the most, as they are pushed into taking actions that improves their risk profile. In other
cases, BHCs with better governance are able to navigate complex structures, reaping benefits
in their income diversification and reducing their exposures to idiosyncratic risks and liquidity
risks. Although new regulations have decreased idiosyncratic and systemic risks through changes
in complexity, liquidity risk (and less so for systematic risk) exposures increased. This finding is
consistent with average results measured over a longer horizon between profiles of BHC risk and
types of organizational, business, and geographic complexity. These organizational, business, and
geographic complexity types go well beyond the more balance sheet and opacity based constructs
more regularly used in international policy circles to describe complexity. The ability of BHCs
to manage complexity, taking the form of extracting diversification benefits and reducing agency
problems, and thereby reducing adverse risk consequences, also depends on the governance of BHCs.


References
Acharya, Viral, Deniz Anginer, and Joseph Warburton. 2016. "The End of Market Disci-
  pline? Investor Expectations of Implicit Government Guarantees." working paper, NYU Stern.
Antill, Sam, and Asani Sarkar. 2018. "Is Size Everything?"Technical Report 864, Federal
  Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report.
Arteta, Carlos, Mark Carey, Ricardo Correa, and Jason Kotter. 2019. "Revenge of the
  Steamroller: ABCP as a Window on Risk Choices." Review of Finance, 24(3): 497528.
Atanasov, Vladimir, and Bernard Black. 2016. "Shock-Based Causal Inference in Corporate
  Finance and Accounting Research." Critical Finance Review, 5(2): 207304.
Baggatini, Giulio, Falko Fecht, and Patrick Weber. 2018. "The Fire-Sale Channel of Uni-
  versal Banks in the European Sovereign Debt Crisis." manuscript.


                                                   27
Balasubramnian, Bhanu, and Ken Cyree. 2014. "Has market discipline on banks improved
  after the DoddFrank Act?" Journal of Banking and Finance, 41(C): 155166.
Baldenius, Tim, Nahum Melumad, and Xiaojing Meng. 2014. "Board composition and
  CEO power." Journal of Financial Economics, 112(1): 53  68.
Bali, Turan G., Robert F. Engle, and Yi Tang. 2017. "Dynamic Conditional Beta is Alive
  and Well in the Cross Section of Daily Stock Returns." Management Science, 63(11): 3760 
  3779.
Barth, James, and Clas Wihlborg. 2017. "Too big to fail: Measures, remedies, and conse-
  quences for efficiency and stability." Financial Markets, Institutions, and Instruments, 26(4):
  175245.
Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Nancy Xu. 2017. "The Time Variation in Risk Appetite
  and Uncertainty." Research paper 17-108, Columbia Business School.
Berger, Allen, Sadok El Ghoul, Omrane Guedhami, and Raluca Roman. 2017. "Inter-
  nationalization and Bank Risk." Management Science, 63(7): 22832301.
Brandao-Marques, Luis, Ricardo Correa, and Horacio Sapriza. 2018. "Government sup-
  port, regulation, and risk taking in the banking sector." Journal of Banking and Finance, Forth-
  coming.
Brewer, Elijah, and Julapa Jagtiani. 2013. "How Much Did Bankgs Pay to Become Too-Big-
  To-Fail and to Become Systemically Important?" Journal of Financial Services Research, 43(1):
  135.
Brownlees, Christian, and Robert F. Engle. 2016. "SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall
  Measure of Systemic Risk." The Review of Financial Studies, 30(1): 4879.
Buch, C. M., C. T. Koch, and M. Koetter. 2013. "Do Banks Benefit from Internationalization?
  Revisiting the Market Power - Risk Nexus." Review of Finance, 17(4): 14011435.
Carmassi, Jacopo, and Richard Herring. 2016. "The Corporate Complexity of Global Sys-
  temically Important Banks." Journal of Financial Services Research, 49(2): 175201.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda Goldberg. 2014. "Measuring Complexity in Global Banks." Fed-
  eral Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, 20(2): 107126.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda Goldberg. 2016. "Organizational Complexity and Balance Sheet
  Management in Global Banks." Working Paper 22169, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cetorelli, Nicola, Michael Jacobides, and Sam Stern. 2017. "Transformation of Corporate
  Scote in U.S. Banks: Patterns and Performance Implications." Staff Report 813, Federal Reserve
  Bank of New York.
Cetorelli, Nicola, Jamie McAndrews, and James Traina. 2014. "Evolution in Bank Com-
  plexity." Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, 20(2): 85106.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Samuel Stern. 2015. "Same Name, New Businesses: Evolution in the


                                               28
  Bank Holding Company." blog, Liberty Street Economics.
Cetorelli, Nicola, and James Traina. 2018. "Resolving "Too Big to Fail"." Staff Report 859,
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Chernobai, Anna, Ali Ozdagli, and Jianlin Wang. 2020. "Business Complexity and Risk
  Management: Evidence from Operational Risk Events in U.S. Bank Holding Companies." Journal
  of Monetary Economics, Forthcoming.
Claessens, Stijn, and Neeltje Van Horen. 2014a. "Foreign Banks: Trends and Impact." Jour-
  nal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46(s1): 295326.
Claessens, Stijn, and Neeltje Van Horen. 2014b. "Location Decisions of Foreign Banks and
  Competitor Remoteness." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46(1): 145170.
Coles, Jeffrey, Naveen D. Daniel, and Lalitha Naveen. 2006. "Managerial incentives and
  risk-taking." Journal of Financial Economics, 79(2): 431468.
Dam, L., and M. Koetter. 2012. "Bank Bailouts and Moral Hazard: Evidence from Germany."
  Review of Financial Studies, 25(8): 23432380.
DeYoung, Robert, Emma Peng, and Meng Yan. 2013. "Executive Compensation and Busi-
  ness Policy Choices at U.S. Commercial Banks." Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
  48(1): 165196.
Duchin, R., and D. Sosyura. 2014. "Safer ratios, riskier portfolios: Banks' response to govern-
  ment aid." Journal of Financial Economics, 113(1): 128.
Engle, Robert F. 2016. "Dynamic Conditional Beta." Journal of Financial Econometrics, 14(4):
  643667.
Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth. 1973. "Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical
  Tests." Journal of Political Economy, 81(3): 607636.
Fleming, Michael, and Asani Sarkar. 2014. "The Failure Resolution at Lehman Borthers."
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, 20(2): 175206.
Flood, Mark, Dror Kennett, Robin Lumsdaine, and Jonathan Simon. 2020. "The Com-
  plexity of Bank Holding Companies: A Topological Approach." Journal of Banking and Finance,
  Forthcoming.
Freixas, Xavier, Gyongyi Loranth, and Alan Morrison. 2007. "Regulating Financial Con-
  glomerates." Journal of Financial Intermediation, 16(4): 479514.
Gandhi, Priyank, and Hanno Lustig. 2015. "Size Anomalies in U.S. Bank Stock Returns."
  Journal of Finance, 70(2): 733768.
Gaspar, Jose-Miguel, Massimo Massa, and Pedro Matos. 2005. "Shareholder investment
  horizons and the market for corporate control." Journal of Financial Economics, 76(1): 135165.
Goetz, Martin, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. 2013. "Identifying the valuation effects and
  agency costs of corporate diversification: Evidence from the geographic diversification of U.S.


                                               29
  Banks.." Review of Financial Studies, 26(7): 17871823.
Goetz, Martin, Luc Laeven, and Ross Levine. 2016. "Does the geographic expansion of banks
  reduce risk?" Journal of Financial Economics, 120(2): 346362.
Goldberg, Linda, and April Meehl. 2020. "Complexity in Large U.S. Banks." Federal Reserve
  Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, 26(2): 128.
Gong, D., H. Huizinga, and L. Laeven. 2018. "Nonconsolidated Subsidiaries, Bank Capital-
  ization and Risk Taking." Journal of Banking and Finance, 97(1): 109129.
Jensen, Michael, and William Meckling. 1976. "Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
  agency costs and ownership structure." Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4): 305  360.
Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine. 2007. "Is there a diversification discount in financial conglom-
  erates?" Journal of Financial Economics, 85(2): 331367.
Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine. 2009. "Bank governance, regulation and risk taking." Journal
  of Financial Economics, 93(2): 259275.
Lepetit, Laetitia, Emmanuelle Nys, Philippe Rous, and Amine Tarazi. 2008. "Bank
  income structure and risk: An empirical analysis of European banks." Journal of Banking and
  Finance, 32(8): 14521467.
Luciano, Elisa, and Clas Wihlborg. 2018. "Financial Synergies and the Organization of Bank
  Affiliates: A Theoretical Perspective on Risk and Efficiency." Journal of Banking and Finance,
  88(C): 208224.
Penas, Maria, and Hanak Unal. 2004. "Gains in Bank Mergers: Evidence from the Bond
  Markets." Journal of Financial Economics, 74(1): 149179.
Ragu, Rajan, and Luigi Zingales. 2001. "The Firm as a Dedicated Heirarchy: A Theory of
  Origins and Growth of Firms." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3): 805851.
Scharfstein, David, and Jeremy Stein. 2000. "The Dark side of Internal Capital markets:
  Divisional Rent Seeking and Inefficient Investments." Journal of Finance, 55(6): 25372564.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1989. "Management entrenchment: The case of
  manager-specific investments." Journal of Financial Economics, 25(1): 123  139.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. "A Survey of Corporate Governance." Journal
  of Finance, 52(2): 737783.
Stein, Jeremy. 2002. "Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentralized versus
  Heirarchical Firms." Journal of Finance, 57(5): 18911921.
Xuan, Yuhai. 2009. "Empire-Building or Bridge-Building? Evidence from New CEOs Internal
  Capital Allocation Decisions." The Review of Financial Studies, 22(12): 49194948.




                                               30
                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics of Variables

                                                           mean      sd       min     p25     p50     p75     max      count
     BHC Sample
     Assets ($2012 billions)                                258      458      23       48      91     202     2542     3659
     Loans to Assets Ratio                                  0.58     0.19    0.02     0.52    0.65    0.71    0.87     3658
     Deposits to assets ratio                               0.63     0.18    0.00     0.58    0.66    0.74    0.94     3538
     Liquid assets ratio                                    0.26     0.15    0.00     0.16    0.22    0.31    0.82     3652
     Equity to assets ratio                                 0.09     0.03    0.03     0.07    0.09    0.11    0.22     3659
     Number of BHCs                                          33        6      23       29      32      34      49      3659
     BHC Complexity
     Total affiliate count                                 382.35   672.69      4       58     115    388     4494     3601
     BPC1: Business Scope                                   0.00     1.28    -3.57    -1.03   -0.17   1.06    3.27     3593
          CountB                                            5.22      0.55      3       5        5      6       6      3601
          CountN                                           17.19     8.16      4        12      14     20      53      3601
          Non-Financial Count Share                         0.45     0.18    0.05      0.32    0.42   0.55    0.97     3601
          BHHI                                              0.75     0.16    0.08      0.68    0.79   0.85    1.00     3601
          Non-interest income share                         0.45      0.19    0.00     0.31   0.41    0.53    1.00     3651
     GPC1: Geographic Scope                                 0.00      1.77   -1.53    -1.35   -0.74   1.19    6.53     3601
          CountC                                           14.78     18.10      1       2        6     22      87      3601
          Count Net due to positions                       11.66     18.07      1       1        3     16     100      3659




31
          CHHI                                              0.31     0.29    0.00      0.04    0.21   0.60    0.94     3601
          Share of foreign office claims in total assets    0.08     0.12    0.00      0.00    0.01   0.13    0.52     3659
     BHC Diversification
     Income Diversification                                0.010     0.01    0.000    0.004   0.007   0.011   0.078    3467
     Idiosyncratic Returns                                 0.014     0.01    0.004    0.009   0.011   0.016   0.159    3564
     BHC Risk
     (-1) Log Z-Score                                      -2.81    0.84      -5.89   -3.37   -2.77   -2.22    -0.57   3467
     (-1) Market Z-Score                                   -4.04     0.47     -5.14   -4.36   -4.12   -3.80    -1.79   3565
     Dynamic Beta                                           1.16     0.43     0.17     0.90    1.09    1.34    4.38    3111
     SRISK                                                  1.79    16.44    -68.09   -2.34   -0.16    1.90   142.64   3111
     LIBOR-OIS Beta                                        -0.03    0.11      -0.87   -0.05   -0.01    0.02     0.40   2151
     BHC Governance
     GovPC1: Bank Ownership Governance                     -0.00     1.20    -4.07    -0.76   0.12    0.98     2.41    2450
          Total Inst. Ownership, Pct. Shares Outstanding    0.64     0.17    0.00      0.52   0.63    0.76     1.94    2960
          Share of independent directors                    0.78     0.12    0.29      0.71   0.80    0.88     1.00    2703
     CEO duality                                           0.13      0.33      0                                 1     2619
     Macro Controls
     VIX                                                   19.35     7.24     10.31   13.72   17.40   23.17   58.59    114
     Credit to GDP Gap (BIS, %)                            -0.50     8.41    -16.10   -6.90   1.45    7.20    12.20    134
     Annualized real GDP Growth (%)                        2.66      2.32     -8.40    1.50    2.95    4.00   7.50     134
                                      Table 2: Complexity and Diversification and Risk, Average Long Run Relationship

     This table presents signs and significance of estimates of equations (1) and (2) without IV. The first panel uses the regression with diversification or risk
     measures on the left hand side and complexity on the right hand side, with bank and macro controls. The second panel uses the regression with complexity
     measures on the left hand side and diversification or risk on the right hand side, with bank and macro controls. Bank controls capturing the log of real assets,
     the liquid assets ratio, loans to deposits ratio, equity to assets ratio are included. The estimations also include controls for GDP growth and the credit to
     GDP gap. All regressions include standard errors clustered at the bank level. * denotes statistically significant results at the 10 percent level, ** at the 5
     percent level, and *** at the 1 percent level.

                                                                    Single Equation Estimates                       IV System Estimates
       Diversification (Risk) as Dependent Variable                 Org.            Bus. Scope      Geo. Scope      Org.             Bus. Scope      Geo. Scope

       Income Diversification                                       -               +               -**             -***             -               -***

       Idiosyncratic Returns                                        -**             -**             +               -                -               -

       (-1) Log Z-score                                             +               +               -               -**              -               -***

       (-1) Log Market Z-score                                      -***            -***            +               -                -*              +




32
       LIBOR-OIS Beta                                               -***            -               -**             -                -               -**

       Dynamic Beta                                                 +               -               +***            +**              +               +***
       SRISK                                                        +*              +               +**             +***             +**             +**

       Complexity as Dependent Variable                             Org.            Bus Scope       Geo. Scope      Org.             Bus Scope       Geo. Scope

       Income Diversification                                       -               +               -               +                -               +*

       Idiosyncratic Returns                                        -*              -**             +               -                -**             +

       (-1) Log Z-score                                             +               +               -               +                -               +**

       (-1) Log Market Z-score                                      -**             -***            +               -                -**             +

       LIBOR-OIS Beta                                               -***            -*              -**             -                +               -**

       Dynamic Beta                                                 +               -               +***            +**              +               +***
       SRISK                                                        +***            +               +*              +***             +               +**
                                    Table 3: Governance effects on Risk and Complexity, Average Long Run Relationship
                                                                 Panel A: Governance PC1

     This table presents signs and significance of the coefficients on GovPC1 in regressions of equations (1) and (2) with and without IV. The first panel uses the
     regression with risk or diversification measures on the left hand side and complexity and governance on the right hand side, with bank and macro controls.
     The second panel uses the regression with complexity measures on the left hand side and risk or diversification on the right hand side, with bank and macro
     controls. Bank controls capturing the log of real assets, the liquid assets ratio, loans to deposits ratio, equity to assets ratio are included. The estimations
     also include controls for GDP growth, the credit to GDP gap, and the VIX. All regressions include standard errors clustered at the bank level. * denotes
     statistically significant results at the 10 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1 percent level.

                                                                    Single Equation Estimates for:                  IV System Estimates for:
       Diversification (Risk) as Dependent Variable                 Org.            Bus. Scope      Geo. Scope      Org.             Bus. Scope      Geo. Scope

       Income Diversification                                       +               +               +               +*               +               +*

       Idiosyncratic Returns                                        +               +               +               +                +               +

       (-1) Log Z-score                                             +               +               +               +*               +               +




33
       (-1) Log Market Z-score                                      +***            +***            +**             +***             +***            +**

       LIBOR-OIS Beta                                               +**             +**             +**             +**              +**             +**

       Dynamic Beta                                                 +***            +***            +***            +*               +               +*
       SRISK                                                        +               +               +               -                -               -

       Complexity as Dependent Variable                             Org.            Bus Scope       Geo. Scope      Org.             Bus Scope       Geo. Scope

       Income Diversification                                       +**             +***            +               +**              +***            +

       Idiosyncratic Returns                                        +*              +***            +               +*               +***            +

       (-1) Log Z-score                                             +**             +***            +               +**              +***            +

       (-1) Log Market Z-score                                      +**             +***            +               +**              +***            +

       LIBOR-OIS Beta                                               +               -               +               +                -               +**

       Dynamic Beta                                                 +**             +***            +               +*               +***            +
       SRISK                                                        +**             +***            +               +*               +***            +
                                   Table 3, continued: Governance, Risk, and Complexity, Average Long Run Relationship
                                                                   Panel B: CEO Duality

     This table presents signs and significance of the coefficients on CEO Duality in estimates of equations (1) and (2) without IV. The first panel uses the
     regression with risk or diversification measures on the left hand side and complexity on the right hand side, with bank and macro controls. The second
     panel uses the regression with complexity measures on the left hand side and risk or diversification on the right hand side, with bank and macro controls.
     Bank controls capturing the log of real assets, the liquid assets ratio, loans to deposits ratio, equity to assets ratio are included. The estimations also include
     controls for GDP growth, the credit to GDP gap, and the VIX. All regressions include standard errors clustered at the bank level. * denotes statistically
     significant results at the 10 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1 percent level.

                                                                     Single Equation Estimates                        IV System Estimates
       Diversification (Risk) as Dependent Variable                  Org.            Bus. Scope       Geo. Scope      Org.             Bus. Scope      Geo. Scope

       Income Diversification                                        +**             +**              +**             +**              +*              +**

       Idiosyncratic Returns                                         -**             -**              -***            -***             -***            -***

       (-1) Log Z-score                                              +               +                +               +*               +               +




34
       (-1) Log Market Z-score                                       -               -*               -**             -*               -               -**

       LIBOR-OIS Beta                                                +               +                +               +                +               +

       Dynamic Beta                                                  +               +                +               -                +               -
       SRISK                                                         +               +                +               -                -               -

       Complexity as Dependent Variable                              Org.            Bus Scope        Geo. Scope      Org.             Bus Scope       Geo. Scope

       Income Diversification                                        +**             +                +               +                +               +

       Idiosyncratic Returns                                         +**             +                +               +**              +               +

       (-1) Log Z-score                                              +**             +                +               +**              +*              +

       (-1) Log Market Z-score                                       +**             +                +               +**              +               +

       LIBOR-OIS Beta                                                +*              +                +*              +*               +               +**

       Dynamic Beta                                                  +               +                +               +                +               +
       SRISK                                                         +               +                +               +                +               +
                                 Table 3: Complexity Change around the DFA LW Guidance, with Size and Governance

     This table presents estimates of equation (3) using information around the passage of the Living Will guidance in 2012. The dependent variables are
     the following three measures of complexity: organizational complexity, business scope, and geographic scope. db,t is an indicator variable equal to
     1 after the LW became law in 2012Q3 for affected banks. GovP C 1 is the first principal component of share of stocks owned by institutional own-
     ers and the share of independent directors of a bank. CEO Non-Duality indicates when the CEO is not also the Chairman of the Board of Di-
     rectors of the BHC. 750+  b,2009 is an indicator variable for BHCs greater than $750 billion in assets.  BHC controls capture the log of real assets,
     the liquid assets ratio, loans to deposits ratio, equity to assets ratio, lagged one quarter. The estimations also include controls for GDP growth,
     the credit to GDP gap, and the VIX. The sample period is 2009Q2-2018Q2. All regressions include BHC fixed effects and standard errors clus-
     tered at the BHC level. * denotes statistically significant results at the 10 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1 percent level.
                                                    Log Total Count                   BPC1: Business Scope                  GPC1: Geographic Scope
                                            (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)           (9)




35
     db,t                                -0.160         -0.115        -0.119       -0.053       -0.083      -0.054       -0.070      -0.088        -0.021
                                          (0.049)        (0.062)       (0.063)    (0.085)      (0.104)     (0.081)      (0.062)     (0.057)       (0.067)
     db,t X 750+ b,2009                                 -0.230        -0.233                     0.048       0.056                   0.082          0.096
                                                         (0.112)       (0.112)                 (0.118)     (0.123)                  (0.167)       (0.153)
     db,t x GovPC1b,2009                                                -0.020                               0.031                                 0.039
                                                                       (0.084)                             (0.079)                                (0.062)
     db,t x CEO Non-Dualityb,2009                                       0.081                               -0.288                                -0.605
                                                                       (0.210)                             (0.331)                                (0.350)
     N                                     1183          1140          1140         1183        1140        1140         1183        1140          1140
     Adj. within-R2                        0.27          0.30          0.30         0.11        0.11        0.11         0.24        0.25          0.28
     BHC FE                                Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
     Number of BHCs                         47            43            43           47          43          43           47          43            43
                                              Table 4: Diversification Change around the DFA LW Guidance

     This table presents estimates of equation (3) using information around the passage of the Living Will guidance in 2012. The dependent variables
     are the following two measures of diversification: Income Diversification and Idiosyncratic Returns. db,t is an indicator variable equal to 1 af-
     ter the LW became law in 2012Q3 for affected banks. GovP C 1 is the first principal component of share of stocks owned by institutional own-
     ers and the share of independent directors of a bank. CEO Non-Duality indicates when the CEO is not also the Chairman of the Board of Di-
     rectors of the BHC. 750+  b,2009 is an indicator variable for BHCs greater than $750 billion in assets.  BHC controls capture the log of real assets,
     the liquid assets ratio, loans to deposits ratio, equity to assets ratio, lagged one quarter. The estimations also include controls for GDP growth,
     the credit to GDP gap, and the VIX. The sample period is 2009Q2-2018Q2. All regressions include BHC fixed effects and standard errors clus-
     tered at the BHC level. * denotes statistically significant results at the 10 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1 percent level.
                                                             Income Diversification                                     Idiosyncratic Returns
                                                   (1)                  (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)




36
     db,t                                       -0.004               -0.004               -0.004              0.001             -0.000               0.001
                                                 (0.001)              (0.001)             (0.002)            (0.001)           (0.001)              (0.001)
     db,t x 750+ b,2009                                                0.003               0.003                               0.004               0.004
                                                                      (0.002)             (0.002)                              (0.002)              (0.001)
     db,t x GovPC1b,2009                                                                   0.001                                                     0.000
                                                                                          (0.004)                                                   (0.001)
     db,t x CEO Non-Dualityb,2009                                                          -0.004                                                  -0.006
                                                                                          (0.003)                                                   (0.003)
     N                                            1120                 1085                1085               1143               1100               1100
     Adj. within-R2                               0.24                 0.25                0.25               0.62               0.63               0.64
     BHC FE                                       Yes                  Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
     Number of BHCs                                48                   44                  44                 48                 44                 44
                                                       Table 5: Risk Change around the DFA LW Guidance

     This table presents estimates of equation (3) using information around the passage of the Living Will guidance in 2012. The dependent variables
     are the following five measures of risk: (-1) Log Z-Score, (-1) Log Market Z-Score, Dynamic Beta, SRISK, and LIBOR-OIS Beta. db,t is an indica-
     tor variable equal to 1 after the LW became law in 2012Q3 for affected banks. GovP C 1 is the first principal component of share of stocks owned
     by institutional owners and the share of independent directors of a bank. CEO Non-Duality indicates when the CEO is not also the Chairman of
     the Board of Directors of the BHC. 750+    b,2009 is an indicator variable for BHCs greater than $750 billion in assets. BHC controls capture the log of
     real assets, the liquid assets ratio, loans to deposits ratio, equity to assets ratio, lagged one quarter. The estimations also include controls for GDP
     growth, the credit to GDP gap, and the VIX. The sample period is 2009Q2-2018Q2. All regressions include BHC fixed effects and standard errors
     clustered at the BHC level. * denotes statistically significant results at the 10 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1 percent level.
                                                                   (-1) Log Z-Score                                      (-1) Log Market Z-Score
                                                      (1)                   (2)                (3)               (4)                  (5)                 (6)
     db,t                                         -0.487               -0.500                -0.414           -0.046                -0.056             -0.050
                                                    (0.120)             (0.136)              (0.175)           (0.020)              (0.020)            (0.027)
     db,t x 750+ b,2009                                                  0.110                 0.122                                 0.044               0.045
                                                                        (0.246)              (0.222)                                (0.059)            (0.058)
     db,t x GovPC1b,2009                                                                      -0.090                                                     0.001
                                                                                             (0.239)                                                   (0.026)
     db,t x CEO Non-Dualityb,2009                                                             -0.441                                                    -0.043
                                                                                             (0.296)                                                   (0.091)




37
     N                                               1120                1085                 1085              1143                 1100                1100
     Adj. within-R2                                  0.39                0.39                 0.40              0.82                 0.82                0.82
     BHC FE                                          Yes                 Yes                  Yes               Yes                  Yes                 Yes
     Number of BHCs                                   48                  44                   44                48                   44                  44

                                                    Dynamic Beta                                SRISK                               LIBOR-OIS Beta
                                            (1)             (2)       (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)           (7)             (8)        (9)
     db,t                                  0.021         -0.010      0.032        -4.404         0.507          1.317      0.051            0.058      0.069
                                          (0.036)       (0.037)     (0.034)        (1.689)      (1.429)       (1.926)      (0.008)           (0.008)   (0.009)
     db,t x 750+ b,2009                                   0.118      0.121                    -21.333       -21.378                         -0.028     -0.027
                                                        (0.106)     (0.098)                     (7.766)       (7.556)                        (0.014)   (0.016)
     db,t x GovPC1b,2009                                             0.002                                     -2.187                                   -0.011
                                                                    (0.029)                                   (1.361)                                  (0.008)
     db,t x CEO Non-Dualityb,2009                                   -0.311                                     -1.645                                   -0.061
                                                                    (0.167)                                   (6.569)                                  (0.038)
     N                                     1082             1039     1039          1082         1039           1039          1143            1100       1100
     Adj. within-R2                        0.55             0.56     0.56          0.24         0.35           0.35          0.10            0.10       0.10
     BHC FE                                Yes              Yes      Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes        Yes
     Number of BHCs                         44               40       40            44           40             40            48              44         44
                            Table 6: Diversification Change around the DFA LW Guidance for organizationally complex banks

     This table presents estimates of equation (3) using information around the passage of the Living Will guidance in 2012. The dependent variables are
     the following five measures of complexity: organizational complexity, business scope and dispersion, and geographic scope and dispersion. db,t is an in-
     dicator variable equal to 1 after the LW became law in 2012Q3 for affected banks. GovP C 1 is the first principal component of share of stocks owned
     by institutional owners and the share of independent directors of a bank. CEO Non-Duality indicates when the CEO is not also the Chairman of
     the Board of Directors of the BHC. 750+    b,2009 is an indicator variable for BHCs greater than $750 billion in assets. BHC controls capture the log of
     real assets, the liquid assets ratio, loans to deposits ratio, equity to assets ratio, lagged one quarter. The estimations also include controls for GDP
     growth, the credit to GDP gap, and the VIX. The sample period is 2009Q2-2018Q2. All regressions include BHC fixed effects and standard errors
     clustered at the BHC level. * denotes statistically significant results at the 10 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1 percent level.
                                                                                Income Diversification                          Idiosyncratic Returns
                                                                        (1)              (2)               (3)          (4)             (5)              (6)




38
     db,t                                                            -0.004            -0.012            -0.011        0.001         -0.005            -0.004
                                                                      (0.001)          (0.006)           (0.006)      (0.001)         (0.002)           (0.002)
     db,t x Org. Complexb,2009                                                          0.002            0.002                        0.001            0.001
                                                                                       (0.001)           (0.001)                      (0.000)           (0.000)
     db,t x GovPC1b,2009 x Org. Complexb,2009                                                              0.000                                         -0.000
                                                                                                         (0.001)                                        (0.000)
     db,t x CEO Non-Dualityb,2009 x Org. Complexb,2009                                                    -0.001                                      -0.001
                                                                                                         (0.001)                                        (0.000)
     N                                                                 1120              1114             1114          1143           1137             1137
     Adj. within-R2                                                    0.24              0.26             0.26          0.62           0.63             0.63
     BHC FE                                                            Yes               Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes              Yes
     Number of BHCs                                                     48                47               47            48             47               47
                                 Table 7: Risk Change around the DFA LW Guidance for organizationally complex banks

     This table presents estimates of equation (3) using information around the passage of the Living Will guidance in 2012. The dependent variables are
     the following five measures of complexity: organizational complexity, business scope and dispersion, and geographic scope and dispersion. db,t is an in-
     dicator variable equal to 1 after the LW became law in 2012Q3 for affected banks. GovP C 1 is the first principal component of share of stocks owned
     by institutional owners and the share of independent directors of a bank. CEO Non-Duality indicates when the CEO is not also the Chairman of
     the Board of Directors of the BHC. 750+    b,2009 is an indicator variable for BHCs greater than $750 billion in assets. BHC controls capture the log of
     real assets, the liquid assets ratio, loans to deposits ratio, equity to assets ratio, lagged one quarter. The estimations also include controls for GDP
     growth, the credit to GDP gap, and the VIX. The sample period is 2009Q2-2018Q2. All regressions include BHC fixed effects and standard errors
     clustered at the BHC level. * denotes statistically significant results at the 10 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level, and *** at the 1 percent level.
                                                                                      (-1) Log Z-Score                                (-1) Log Market Z-Score
                                                                          (1)                (2)                (3)            (4)                (5)               (6)
     db,t                                                            -0.487                -1.151            -1.135          -0.046            -0.092              -0.085
                                                                        (0.120)            (0.576)           (0.571)         (0.020)          (0.091)             (0.086)
     db,t x Org. Complexb,2009                                                              0.131             0.150                             0.009               0.010
                                                                                           (0.103)           (0.093)                          (0.018)             (0.018)
     db,t x GovPC1b,2009 x Org. Complexb,2009                                                                 -0.028                                               -0.001
                                                                                                             (0.047)                                              (0.005)
     db,t x CEO Non-Dualityb,2009 x Org. Complexb,2009                                                        -0.106                                               -0.019
                                                                                                             (0.087)                                              (0.019)




39
     N                                                                   1120               1114                1114           1143              1137              1137
     Adj. within-R2                                                      0.39               0.40                0.41           0.82              0.82              0.82
     BHC FE                                                              Yes                Yes                 Yes            Yes               Yes               Yes
     Number of BHCs                                                       48                 47                  47             48                47                47

                                                                        Dynamic Beta                              SRISK                       LIBOR-OIS Beta
                                                                  (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)             (5)     (6)         (7)            (8)       (9)
     db,t                                                        0.021     -0.277        -0.253      -4.404       18.089     19.010      0.051          0.077     0.080
                                                                (0.036)    (0.159)       (0.135)      (1.689)      (9.442)    (8.530)    (0.008)        (0.034)   (0.031)
     db,t x Org. Complexb,2009                                             0.059         0.062                    -4.409     -4.126                      -0.005    -0.004
                                                                           (0.031)       (0.028)                   (2.095)    (1.902)                   (0.006)   (0.006)
     db,t x GovPC1b,2009 x Org. Complexb,2009                                             0.001                               -0.677                               -0.002
                                                                                         (0.007)                              (0.372)                             (0.002)
     db,t x CEO Non-Dualityb,2009 x Org. Complexb,2009                                   -0.065                                -2.279                              -0.008
                                                                                         (0.035)                              (2.638)                             (0.010)
     N                                                           1082       1076          1076        1082            1076    1076         1143          1137      1137
     Adj. within-R2                                              0.55       0.56          0.56        0.24            0.29    0.30         0.10          0.10      0.10
     BHC FE                                                      Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes             Yes     Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes
     Number of BHCs                                               44         43            43          44              43      43           48            47        47
Appendix

A1     Constructing Complexity Variables and Principal Components

                          Table A1: Definitions of Complexity Variables

 Variable                                Definition
 Organizational
 Countb,t                                Total Count of subsidiaries held by BHC
 Business
 BP C 1b,t                               Business scope
                                         The first principal component over the following BHC-specific mea-
                                         sures:
     Nonfinancial Count Shareb,t         Share of non-financial affiliates
                                         Total count of business types (commercial banks, mutual/pension
     CountBb,t                           funds, insurance, other financial, non-fin management firms, other
                                         nonfinancial)
                                                                                     2
                                          CountB              B        countj
                                         CountB -1       1-   j =1    B                   where B are business types
                                                                      j =1 countj
     BHHIb,t
                                         and countj is the number of BHC's subsidiares that are classified
                                         in accordance with each business type j .
     CountNb,t                           Number of 4-digit NAICS industries
     Non-interest income shareb,t        Share of income from non-interest sources
 Geographic
 GP C 1b,t                               Geographic scope
                                         The first principal component over the following BHC-specific mea-
                                         sures:
     CountCb,t                           Count of countries spanned by BHC's affiliates
                                                                                                        2
                                                               CountC               C       countc
                                         CountCHHI =          CountC -1   1-        c=1    C                where C is the
                                                                                           c=1 countc
     CHHIb,t
                                         set of countries and countc is the count of subsidiaries in each country
                                         c.
     Share of foreign office claimsb,t   Share of foreign office claims in total assets, by bank
     CountN DTb,t                        Count Net Due to Positions, countries, by bank


   Organizational complexity is computed as the total number of legal entities within the BHC,
Countb,t . Industry type is indexed by i based on NAICS code, or summed over every i for a BHC
at a date and denoted by I ; business-type is indexed by j and spans 6 types of business activi-
ties (Banking, Insurance, Mutual and Pension Funds, Other Financial, Nonfinancial Management,




                                                     i
                                    Table A2: PCA of Complexity Variables

                                                                                  Comp1          Comp2
                                      Business Complexity (BP C 1b,t )
                 Non-Financial Count Share                                         0.14      -0.76
                 CountB                                                            0.55       0.23
                 BHHI                                                              -0.41      0.46
                 CountN                                                            0.54      -0.02
                 Non-interest Income Share                                         0.47       0.39
                 Fraction of variance explained                                         0.598
                                   Geographic Complexity (GP C 1b,t )
                 CountC                                                             0.52        -0.28
                 CHHI                                                               0.46         0.77
                 Share of foreign office claims in total assets                     0.51         0.14
                 Count Net due to positions                                         0.51        -0.55
                 Fraction of variance explained                                            0.911
                                          Governance (GovP C 1b,t )
                 Total Inst. Ownership, Percent of Shares Outstanding               0.71          0.71
                 Share of independent directors                                     0.71         -0.71
                 Fraction of variance explained                                              1


Other Nonfinancial);18 geographical location is denoted by country c, and the sum over all locations
is denoted by C , taking a minimum value of 1 if all affiliates of the BHC are situated within the
U.S.
       As there are multiple measures of Business Complexity and Geographic Complexity, we per-
form principle components analysis to reduce the data dimensionality. The first two principle
components across the Business Complexity measures, BPC1 and BPC2, respectively account for
43 percent and 25 percent of the variation across the broader range of measures. Based on observ-
ing the correlations between these principle components and the original series, we view BPC1 as
representing business scope and BPC2 as representing business diversity or dispersion. The first
two principle components, GPC1 and GPC2, respectively account for 78 percent and 13 percent of
the variation across the broader range of geographic complexity measures. Based on observing the
correlations between these principle components and the original series, we view GPC1 as repre-
senting geographic scope and GPC2 as representing geographic diversity or dispersion. Table A2
provides the PCA of the respective complexity variables and the first two principle components.



18
     Business types are defined according to NAICS codes as follows: (1) Bank: NAICS code == 5221; (2) Insurance:
     NAICS code == 5241, 5242; (3) Mutual and Pension Fund: NAICS code ==52511, 52591; (4) Other Financial: 2
     digit NAICS code 52, but subsidiary does not fall into the categories of Bank, Insurance, or Mutual and Pension
     Fund; (5) Nonfinancial Management Firms: NAICS code == 5511; (6) Other Nonfinancial: 2 digit NAICS code is
     not 52 and 4 digit NAICS code is not 5511.


                                                          ii
