                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   HOW HURRICANES SWEEP UP HOUSING MARKETS:
                            EVIDENCE FROM FLORIDA

                                        Joshua S. Graff Zivin
                                            Yanjun Liao
                                           Yann Panassie

                                        Working Paper 27542
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27542


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




Data provided by Zillow through the Zillow Transaction and Assessment Dataset (ZTRAX). More
information on accessing the data can be found at http://www.zillow.com/ztrax. The results and opinions
are those of the authors and do not reflect the position of Zillow Group. We thank Richard Carson,
Julie Cullen, and Mark Jacobsen for insightful discussions. We thank Rebecca Fraenkel for initial
data extractions. We have also benefited from comments and suggestions by Judd Boomhower, Gordon
McCord, and seminar participants at UCSD, Wharton Risk Center, and Camp Resources 2019. All
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Yanjun Liao, and Yann Panassie. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Hurricanes Sweep Up Housing Markets: Evidence from Florida
Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Yanjun Liao, and Yann Panassie
NBER Working Paper No. 27542
July 2020
JEL No. J10,Q54,R23,R31

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impacts of hurricanes on the housing market and the associated
implications for local population turnover. We first characterize the post-hurricane equilibrium
dynamics in local housing markets using microdata from Florida during 2000-2016. Our results
show that hurricanes cause an increase in equilibrium prices and a concurrent decrease in
transactions in affected areas, both lasting up to three years. Together, these dynamics imply a
negative transitory shock to the housing supply as a consequence of the hurricane. Furthermore,
we match buyer characteristics from mortgage applications to provide the first buyer-level
evidence on population turnover. We find that incoming homeowners in this period have higher
incomes, leading to an overall shift in the local economic profile toward higher-income groups.
Our findings suggest that market responses to destructive natural disasters can lead to uneven and
lasting demographic changes in affected communities, even with a full recovery in physical
capital.

Joshua S. Graff Zivin                           Yann Panassie
University of California, San Diego             US Government Accountability Office
9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519                      441 G St. NW
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519                         Washington, DC 20226
and NBER                                        panassiey@gao.gov
jgraffzivin@ucsd.edu

Yanjun Liao
University of Pennsylvania
3819 Chestnut Street
St. Leonard's Court, Suite 130
Philadelphia, PA 19104
yjpenny@wharton.upenn.edu
1     Introduction

Approximately fifteen tropical cyclones make landfall across the globe each year, including
an average of three in the United States where they are concentrated along the Gulf and east
coasts. These storms, known as hurricanes in the United States, are characterized by strong
winds and heavy rainfall that can generate substantial damage to physical infrastructure.
The frequency and intensity of hurricanes, which are fueled by warm ocean temperatures
in the tropics, are forecasted to increase substantially under climate change, along with the
economic damages that accompany them.

    While the initial damage from hurricanes is physical, it can lead to a wide range of
behavioral responses that tend to amplify local economic consequences. These include dis-
investment from affected regions, diminished employment opportunities, and out-migration,
among others.1 If real estate markets are well functioning, all of these impacts should be
capitalized into housing values (Rosen, 1974), thereby providing a succinct measure of total
economic damages. This approach has been taken by many studies focused on the impacts
of a singular extreme storm, e.g. Hurricanes Andrew, Katrina, and Sandy (Bin and Polasky,
2004; Hallstrom and Smith, 2005; Kousky, 2010; Atreya et al., 2013; Bin and Landry, 2013;
Ortega and Taspinar, 2018; Gibson and Mullins, 2020).

    In this paper, we estimate the impact of hurricanes on housing values for all storms that
make landfall in Florida between 2000 and 2016. Our focus on all storms is substantively
important for two reasons. First, we are able to assess the economic impacts of more typical
storms that are not complicated by the supply shortages, rebuilding bottlenecks, and philan-
thropic investments that generally accompany severe events. Second, our larger sample size
over a longer period of time allows us to exploit an identification strategy that better captures
general equilibrium effects. These are especially important since hurricanes are likely to
impact housing supply as a result of destruction as well as housing demand as homeowners
and businesses learn more about risks in a particular location.2
    1 Past literature has examined household responses (Gagnon and Lopez-Salido, 2014; Bleemer
and Van der Klaauw, 2017; Gallagher and Hartley, 2017; McCoy and Zhao, 2018), migration patterns
(Paxson and Rouse, 2008; Boustan et al., 2017), industry and labor market consequences (Groen and
Polivka, 2008; McIntosh, 2008; Belasen and Polachek, 2009; Deryugina et al., 2018; Seetharam,
2018), macroeconomic growth (Skidmore and Toya, 2002; Hsiang and Jina, 2014; Strobl, 2011), and
government spending (Deryugina, 2017).
    2 This paper is also closely related to the small literature that examines the impacts of wars, earth-

quakes, and flooding on local economic activity through the destruction of capital and infrastructure

                                                    2
   Our rich transaction-level data also allow us to examine the implications of these adjust-
ments on local demographics. Even if price effects are transient, changes in the composition
of neighborhoods can have long-lasting impacts by altering the distribution of rents associ-
ated with locally circumscribed access to economic opportunities and amenities (Kling et al.,
2005, 2007; Chetty et al., 2016). To our knowledge, this paper is the first to present micro-
evidence directly linking demographic changes to home transactions in response to local
environmental shocks.

   Our analysis is based on hurricane data from the National Oceanic and Oceanographic
Association (NOAA) along with a detailed housing dataset that combines transaction records
and county tax assessments. The transaction data include 95% of all housing transactions
within the State of Florida. The repeated tax assessments over time provide rich information
on hedonic characteristics for each parcel, thereby allowing us to infer characteristics of
transacted homes with a high level of accuracy. As such, this dataset allows us to identify
and track individual parcels over time, observing most transactions and major renovations
that took place between 2000 and 2016.

   Our estimation strategy is unique in the literature, combining a staggered difference-in-
differences framework that exploits the randomness in the paths and timing of hurricanes
with a repeat sales model that ensures credible identification of within-home price changes.
Treatment for an individual parcel is defined as being exposed to hurricane-strength wind
speed, independent of damage to that particular parcel. We find that home prices increase
in exposed areas in the three years following a hurricane. Compared to unexposed areas,
home prices in exposed areas are 5% higher on average during this period, with a peak
of 10% in the second year. This effect is identified in two models. The first uses variation
within census tract while controlling for property characteristics, seasonality, and differential
economic growth across counties. The second employs parcel fixed effects and therefore
restricts the identifying variation to result from repeated sales of the same property. The
estimates are very similar across the two models, providing strong evidence that the price
effect is mainly driven by within-home appreciation rather than a shift in the composition of
transacted homes.

   We also find that the transaction probability of homes in exposed areas falls by 0.6 per-
centage points or 6% of the baseline probability. The timing of this quantity effect is similar

(Ikle, 1951; Davis and Weinstein, 2002; Miguel and Roland, 2011; Gignoux and Men´
                                                                                endez, 2016;
Feigenbaum et al., 2017; Kocornik-Mina et al., 2020).

                                               3
to that of the price effect: both last around three years before returning to the baseline. Taken
together, they suggest that the housing markets within exposed areas experience a temporary
negative supply shock. The duration of this effect is consistent with the time it takes for
hurricane victims to seek financial aid from insurance companies or federal agencies, and to
eventually restore any substantially damaged homes to habitable or sellable conditions.3

    While the adjustment in the market equilibrium appears to be transitory, our analysis sug-
gests that it generates lasting impacts on local demographics. Using the subset of our housing
transactions that can be matched to Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) records, we
show that the average income of new buyers increases nearly proportionally to the rise in
home prices.4 In subsequent years, transacted prices and buyer incomes return to baseline
levels but not below, yielding a long-term stock effect whereby more than 25% of homes are
occupied by households with a higher income than before the hurricane arrived. On the other
hand, we do not find any major changes to the racial, ethnic, or gender profiles of buyers,
suggesting that the socio-demographic characteristics of neighborhoods are quite stable in
the face of these housing market shocks. The distributional impacts we measure are of direct
relevance to any assessments of the equity impacts of hurricanes, and they provide a unique
opportunity to explore the implications of gentrification in a causal framework.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data, Section
3 develops our estimation framework, Section 4 reports and interprets the results, and Section
5 concludes.



2     Background and Data

We have two objectives in this paper: first, to examine the equilibrium adjustments in the
housing market following a hurricane; second, to understand the implications for population
turnover. The first objective requires data that represents the universe of transactions, and the
second requires demographic information on the home buyers. We build a comprehensive
    3 Housing  shortages of this nature have been increasingly identified by media reporting on recent
hurricane events. See, for example, the Wall Street Journal's coverage of the impact of Hurricane Irma
in Florida Keys (https://www.wsj.com/articles/hurricane-irma-destroyed-25-of-homes-in-florida-
keys) or that of Hurricane Florence in North Carolina (https://www.wsj.com/articles/hurricane-
florence-creating-housing-shortage-for-displaced-north-carolinians).
    4 These transactions involve properties with similar home characteristics and price dynamics to

the entire market.

                                                  4
dataset that combines Florida hurricane exposure at the parcel level, housing transactions,
tax assessments, and mortgage-holder demographics. This section gives an overview of the
background and data for this study.


2.1      Florida Housing Market

Florida is the third most populous state in the U.S, and it is home to a large number of
seasonal residents and retirees. Racial and ethnic composition varies considerably across lo-
cations within the state. South Florida has a large Hispanic population, while the panhandle
has the state's highest concentration of Blacks (see Figure A5 for the demographic compo-
sition in Florida counties and nearby states based on the 2010 Census). Florida has a similar
percentage of family households5 as surrounding states. Given its prominent tourism indus-
try, the homeowner vacancy rate (2-6%) and the rental vacancy rate are significantly higher
than those of nearby states (see Figure A6 for statistics on family and housing in Florida
counties).

    Our primary source of housing data is the Zillow Transaction and Assessment Dataset
(ZTRAX). The data cover Florida housing transactions between 2000 and 2016, accounting
for around 95% of all transactions over this period. Each transaction record contains infor-
mation on the timing of the sale, transaction price, mortgage profile (including loan amount
and lender's name), location, as well as buyers' and sellers' names. We exclude three types
of transactions where the price likely deviates from the home's market value: (1) non-arm's-
length transactions6 ; (2) foreclosure sales7 ; and (3) transactions that involve multiple homes
on different parcels.

    We also obtain parcel-level8 assessment records over the same period from ZTRAX,
which are originally generated by the county assessor's offices. The assessment data contain

    5A  family household is a household maintained by a householder who is in a family.
    6 An  arm's length transaction is one in which the buyers and sellers act independently and do not
have any relationship to each other. An example of a non-arm's-length transaction is one between
family members, where the price is often lower than market value. We rely on a combination of
Zillow's internal code and the type of deed to determine the nature of the transaction.
    7 Foreclosed properties are often sold at substantially lower prices than comparable non-

foreclosure sales, partly because lenders have an incentive to sell them quickly. For example, Camp-
bell et al. (2011) finds an average foreclosure discount of 27% in Massachusetts.
    8 A parcel is also known as a lot or a plot. It is a defined piece of real estate, usually resulting from

the division of a large area of land.

                                                     5
an essential set of hedonic characteristics for each parcel, including square footage, year built
and remodeled, lot size, number of rooms, number of bathrooms, number of units, and land
use codes. We use land use codes to group homes into three property types based on land
use classifications in county tax assessments: single-family residence (69.7% of all sample
transactions), condominium (24.1%), townhouse (6.2%).9 Importantly, we observe multiple
assessments for a single parcel and hence can track changes in these characteristics over
time. The transaction and assessment datasets are matched by parcel and assessment year to
ensure the condition of each property at the time of transaction is accurately reflected in the
data.

    The data contain precise geographic coordinates for each parcel.10 This has two major
advantages. First, it allows us to determine the hurricane exposure of any home by directly
calculating its distance from a hurricane track, as described below. Second, we can use the
coordinates in conjunction with detailed shapefiles11 to accurately identify the census tract12
for each parcel. This in turn allows us to match housing transactions to mortgage records
from HMDA with high accuracy, ultimately enabling us to exploit fine geographic variation
in our estimation.

    Figure A1 plots the monthly median price by home type in the top panel. Median home
prices experienced large fluctuations during our study period ­ starting around $100,000
in 2000, rising to a peak of more than $200,000 in 2007, declining back to $100,000 in
2010-2012, before gradually climbing upward as the economy recovered from the financial
crisis. The lower panel shows that, conversely, the composition of transacted property types
remained stable over time. Since we match buyers with mortgages (henceforth "borrowers")
to HMDA records, we also report median prices for the subset of all Zillow borrowers and the
share of such sales (see Figure A2 in the Appendix). The pattern of prices closely resembles
that for all buyers, but the share of sales with a mortgage decreased from 75% in 2007 to
50% in 2010 as the financial crisis unfolded.



   9 Other  common terminology for these are respectively single-family detached, multi-family, and
single-family attached.
   10 The longitude and latitude measures are reported with a precision of five decimal places (or 1.11

meter at the equator).
   11 Source: TIGER/Line Shapefiles, Census Bureau. Available at https://www.census.gov/geo/

maps-data/data/tiger-line.html.
   12 Florida's 67 counties are comprised of more than 4200 census tracts.



                                                  6
                Figure 1: Florida Hurricane Exposure by Census Tract, 1992-2017
                      (a) All hurricanes                                                      (b) Category 3+


        Alabama                                                                  Alabama
                                  Georgia                                                                Georgia
                                                          Jacksonville                                                           Jacksonville
                                                  q                                                                      q




                                                              Orlando                                                                Orlando

         Cumulative                                   q                                                                      q

         exposure
                               Tampa                                                                  Tampa
                                                                                 Cumulative
            0                                 q                                                                      q
                                          q                                      exposure                        q
            1            St. Petersburg                                                         St. Petersburg
                                                                                    0
            2
                                                                                    1
            3
                                                                                    2
            4
                                                                                    3
            5
            6                                                    q   Miami                                                              q   Miami




Notes: these figures depict hurricane exposure by census tract across Florida. Panel (a) shows the
number of times each census tract was exposed to hurricane-strength wind speed (64 nautical miles
per hour and above) and Panel (b) shows the number of times each was exposed to category 3 wind
speed (96 nautical miles per hour and above) between 1992 and 2017. Calculations are based on
hurricane track point measurements and census tract population centroids.


2.2    Hurricane History and Exposure

Florida is located on the peninsula between the Gulf of Mexico and the North Atlantic,
and its unique geography has exposed it to more hurricanes than any other U.S. state. A
tropical cyclone is classified as a hurricane when the 1-minute sustained wind speeds reach
64 nautical miles (kn) per hour (or 74 mph). Between 1992 and 2017, a total of fifteen
hurricanes swept past parts of Florida. Of these, five reached wind speeds corresponding to
Category 3 and above within Florida.13

   Each hurricane is recorded in six-hour intervals in the Tropical Cyclone Extended Best
Track dataset.14 Each observation consists of the geographic coordinates of the center, max-
imum sustained wind speed, and maximum radial extent of 34, 50, and 64 kn wind speeds.

  13 Thresholds for the Saffir­Simpson hurricane wind scale are: Category 1, 74-95 mph; Category
2, 96­110 mph; Category 3, 111­129 mph; Category 4, 130­156 mph; Category 5, 157+ mph.
   14 Data source: Demuth et al. (2006). Available at http://rammb.cira.colostate.edu/research/

tropical-cyclones/tc-extended-best-track-dataset/.

                                                                             7
Following the approach in Deryugina (2017), we approximate the full hurricane path by
linear interpolation between consecutive observations.15 Since the maximal reach radius of
96 kn is not provided in the dataset, we construct a measure by estimating a nonlinear re-
lationship between wind speed and its reach radius (see Appendix B.1 for details on this
procedure).

   Throughout this paper, we define hurricane exposure by whether a location was ever
within the reach of a 64 kn wind speed radius along a hurricane path. Severe exposure is
similarly defined but with a 96 kn wind speed.16 This requires proximity to the hurricane
path as well as high sustained wind speed at that stretch of the path. In our hurricane sample,
the average radius of 64kn wind speed is 95 miles, and that of 96 kn wind is 45 miles. It
is important to note that our exposure measure does not directly indicate actual damage to a
house. Homes lying outside of the hurricane-strength wind speed radius, for example, might
also be affected by heavy precipitation, while some homes inside might sustain little damage
due to factors such as advantageous topography or more resilient building materials. Our
estimates therefore capture the combined impacts of the damage to a subset of housing and
the general equilibrium effect from the ensuing housing shortage.

   Figure 1 shows the geographic distribution of hurricane events by census tract, defining
exposure using their population-weighted centroids. In Panel (a), we see that approximately
90% of tracts experience at least one hurricane event between 1992 and 2017, with high
variation in frequency across locations. We plot the distribution of severe exposure events
separately in panel (b). This set of locations is much more limited (16%) and concentrated
in south Florida. The average census tract experiences 2.6 hurricane events and 0.16 severe
exposure events between 1992 to 2017.




  15 We  also assume the hurricane center travels with constant speed between two consecutive obser-
vations, while wind speed and radii change linearly with time. See Appendix B.2 for more details on
the interpolation procedure.
   16 We use the category 3 speed threshold both to be in line with previous literature, and because

we do not believe the difference between the categories 1 and 2 thresholds is sufficient to produce
measurable differences in outcomes. Category 4 wind speeds, on the other hand, almost never reach
Florida shores over our hurricane time period.

                                                 8
2.3     Home Mortgage Disclosure Act

The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), enacted by Congress in late 1975, requires
all large financial institutions17 to disclose all of their home lending activity every year. The
loans reported were estimated to represent approximately 90 percent of closed-end home
lending nationwide in 2016 (Dietrich et al., 2018). These records are made publicly avail-
able to promote mortgage market transparency.18 The HMDA data provide the date, property
location (census tract), mortgage loan amount, application purpose (purchase, improvement,
or refinancing), mortgage lender's name, and applicant demographics including annual in-
come, gender, and race.

     We merge the subset of successful loan applications for purchases from HMDA to our
transaction data. Similarly to Bayer et al. (2016), matches are based on the year of each
transaction, the census tract of the home, the loan amount (in 1000s), and the lender name.19
The full procedure ultimately matches a little more than half of the original Zillow transac-
tions with a mortgage, with no significant yearly variation in pairing success.20 This match
rate is similar to Bayer et al. (2016), who merge HMDA data to the universe of housing
transactions in the Bay Area. The merged data enable us to look at the evolution of borrower
demographic characteristics following hurricane events.



3      Econometric Framework

This section describes our research design. The first part of our analysis concerns post-
hurricane adjustments in the housing market. We study two main outcomes that characterize
the equilibrium: housing price and transaction probability. We model each separately with
different units of analysis, but both specifications ultimately rely on the randomness of hur-
ricane paths and their timing as the identifying variation. In the second part of the analysis,

    17 By2020 definition, a large financial institution is one with more than $47 million in assets. This
threshold is subject to yearly revision.
   18 See http://www.ffiec.gov/hmda for more details.
   19 See Appendix C for detail on the matching procedure.
   20 There are two main reasons why the match rate is not closer to 80%. First, because we cannot

distinguish between mortgages of the same amount issued by the same lender in the same census tract
in a given year, we drop all such observations. Second, we keep only high-quality matches based on
lender names.

                                                   9
we use the framework from the housing price model to examine population turnover.


3.1     Housing Price Model

We model the transaction price of a home as follows:

                            10
                                       
      log (P riceimy ) =           Hurrimy +  HouseChariy + ht + hm + hcy + imy                   (1)
                            =-6


where i denotes an individual transaction, m is the month and y the year of the transaction,
h is the type of the transacted property, and t is the census tract and c the county of the prop-
erty.21 The unit of analysis is an individual transaction. log (P riceimy ) is the log of the price
                                                        
in transaction i occurring in month m of year y .22 Hurrimy is a set of indicators specifying
whether the transaction occurs  years after the house was exposed to a hurricane ( = 0
refers to transactions in the first twelve months after a hurricane,  = 1 the next twelve
months, and so on; a negative  indicates the transaction happens before the hurricane).
HouseChariy is a set of house characteristics commonly used in hedonic models, including
lot size, structural age, effective age,23 number of stories and number of bathrooms. We
control for the latter two characteristics flexibly using a set of value bins. Remodels can lead
these variables to change over time for a given parcel, and we assign characteristics from the
latest assessment that precedes the transaction.

    We also account for both fixed and time-varying regional differences in housing attributes
and local amenities by using a set of geographic and temporal fixed effects. ht denote census
tract fixed effects, which absorb cross-sectional correlations in the likelihood of being hit by
a hurricane and time-invariant local amenities, such as proximity to the coast. hm denote
month-of-year fixed effects that control for the seasonality in both home prices and the timing
of hurricanes. It is also important to account for housing market booms and busts during our
sample period, especially given their uneven impacts across markets (Ferreira and Gyourko,
2012). We use county-by-year fixed effects (hcy ) to control for changing macroeconomic

  21 Census   tracts and counties are defined according to the 2000 census definition throughout to
maintain geographic consistency across time.
   22 Similarly to most of the hedonic pricing literature, we use the log of the transaction price to

address the skewed distribution of prices, as well as to obtain plausible effects over a wide range of
price levels.
   23 The time (in years) since the last major remodel.



                                                 10
conditions at the county level. Finally, all fixed effects are also interacted with the property
type (h).

    The key variables of interest are the hurricane indicators. They are constructed based on
the definition of hurricane exposure for individual parcels as described in Section 2.2.24 The
identification of the causal effect of hurricanes on the housing market relies on the exogeneity
of storm paths and timing. Specifically, the identifying assumption is that, conditional on the
set of controls, these indicators are orthogonal to any idiosyncratic shocks to transaction
prices:
                                  
                     E [imy × Hurri |HouseChariy , ht , hm , hcy ] = 0 .

Our estimation is thus based on a staggered difference-in-differences (DD) framework with
many hurricane treatments at different times.25 Areas exposed to a hurricane are compared
to unexposed areas before and after the hurricane in a repeated cross-section of housing
transactions.

    There are two main advantages to using this set of event time indicators rather than
a single indicator as in a standard DD specification. First, the post-hurricane indicators
estimate dynamics flexibly rather than imposing any restrictions on the trend or duration
of the market adjustments. These dynamics provide important insights into the adjustment
process. Second, this approach allows us to assess the credibility of our DD design by
estimating and comparing pre-hurricane trends directly.

    Throughout this paper, we cluster standard errors at the county level to allow for cor-
relations in the idiosyncratic shocks to all transactions occurring in the same county over
the entire sample period. Furthermore, we estimate the following four variants of our main
specification.

    Repeat sales. Hurricanes may change the composition of transacted homes. Equation
(1) used an exhaustive set of controls to greatly limit the extent to which our estimates could
be driven by compositional shifts, but to fully eliminate within-tract selection of transacted


  24 Specifically,we calculate exposure to each of the 15 hurricanes for each transacted property. We
then construct the hurricane indicators based on the transaction timing relative to all hurricane events
the house is exposed to.
   25 This design has been used by several studies of the economic impacts of natural disasters such

as Belasen and Polachek (2009), Strobl (2011), Gallagher (2014), Hsiang and Jina (2014), Deryugina
(2017), and Boustan et al. (2017)

                                                  11
attributes, we replace the census tract fixed effects (ht ) with parcel-level ones (p ):

                            10
                                       
      log (P riceimy ) =           Hurrimy +  HouseChariy + p + hm + hcy + imy                 (2)
                            =-6


This approach restricts the identifying variation to sales of properties that transact more than
once over our time period, and holds all time-invariant characteristics fixed (Cannaday et al.,
2005; Hallstrom and Smith, 2005; Harding et al., 2007).26

   Wind intensity heterogeneity. We explore the heterogeneous effects of different wind
intensities, as we expect stronger winds to result in more severe damages to the housing
stock. Specifically, we split the sample into areas exposed to Category 1-2 wind speeds and
those exposed to the faster winds of Category 3 and above storms, as discussed in Section
2.2. We estimate the dynamics of both groups simultaneously using interactions of pooled
category indicators with event time indicators.

   Other outcome variables. Understanding any systematic shift in housing or buyer char-
acteristics after a hurricane is important for us to assess the nature of market responses to the
disasters. To do so, we replace the outcome variable in equation (1) with other characteristics
of interest, including lot size and buyer income.

   Standard DD. To summarize our results, we also estimate a standard DD model, defining
treatment as exposure to a hurricane in the 36 months preceding a sale. The identifying
assumption for this specification is the same as that for the event study specification, but we
rely on the evidence from the results of the event study to determine the length of the housing
market adjustments.


3.2    Transaction Probability Model

Market equilibria are characterized by both prevailing prices and quantities. At the individual
home level, transacted quantity is either zero or one. Formally, let 1(T ransacted)py be
an indicator of whether a transaction record exists for parcel p in year y . We model its



  26 Thisapproach is used to generate several major house price indices, including the Case-Shiller
Index, Federal Housing Finance Agency's (FHFA) monthly House Price Index, and CoreLogic's
LoanPerformance Home Price Index.

                                                12
relationship to hurricane events as follows:

                                10
                                          
      1(T ransacted)py =              Hurrpy +  HouseCharpy + p + hy + cy + py .                     (3)
                               =-6


where p, h, y , and c denote parcel, property type, year, and county as before. Here, the
unit of analysis is a parcel-year. We construct a balanced panel of parcels that have ever
been transacted during our sample period.27 We treat all parcel-year observations without
a transaction record as having no transaction. This approach introduces measurement error
if there are unreported transactions, which could lead to biased estimates if the missing
pattern is endogenous to or correlated with hurricane events. In our analysis, we drop all
observations for counties that did not start reporting transactions until after the beginning
of our sample period.28 We exclude all parcels with structures built after 2000, so that this
panel consists of the transacted housing stock that was present since the beginning of the
study period. Note that because Florida is subject to tight land supply due to land use and
geographic constraints (Saiz, 2010), new developments are relatively scarce, especially in
densely populated urban areas.

    We construct the panel by year rather than by month because of computational con-
straints. As most hurricanes between 2000 and 2016 occurred in August, we set event years
to begin in August and end in July. For example, a transaction in an area exposed to Katrina
(August 2005) has its year 0 indicator turned on only if it occurs between August 2005 and
July 2006. This ensures a correct event year classification for the vast majority of transac-
tions, an uncontaminated event year -1 indicator, and a small and predictable downward bias
in the estimate of the event year 0 indicator.29

    Despite the differences in the data structure, this model shares many similarities to the
previous one on housing prices. We deploy the same event-study specification, which also
controls for time-varying property characteristics observed from repeated assessments. Be-

   27 As discussed in Section 2, we also exclude three types of transactions that might not reflect
market conditions.
   28 These counties drive an insignificant fraction of Florida's housing market activity, with combined

sales accounting for less than 1% of total sales over the period in which we observe sales in all
counties (2005-2016).
   29 The year 0 indicator is slightly attenuated because it captures some transactions in areas affected

by four hurricanes in the couple months before these actually took place. These are Wilma (October
2005), Frances and Jeanne (September 2004), and Matthew (September 2016).

                                                   13
cause the threat to identification is similar to that from the previous model, we include parcel
fixed effects, county-by-year fixed effects, and type-by-year fixed effects. As such, our iden-
tification assumption is also similar to that of our prior model and requires that:

                                   
                       E [py × Hurrp |HouseCharpy , p , hy , cy ] = 0   .


   Our dataset includes three main parcel types: single-family residence, condominium,
and townhouse. Since substitutability between these may be limited, we also estimate this
transaction probability model separately for each type. The type-by-year fixed effects are
eliminated in these estimations. Standard errors are clustered at the county level throughout.


3.3    Variation in Hurricane Exposure

Figure 1 shows that hurricane exposure in Florida is quite dispersed geographically. In this
section, we take a closer look at variation over time as well as the relative contribution by
individual hurricanes.

   In our regression models, we use a set of event time treatment indicators to estimate dy-
namics of various outcome variables. In Table A9, we tabulate the means of these indicators
in the price model and show the contribution of each hurricane to treatment saturation. The
share of treated transactions fluctuates between 8 and 12% across event years. In Table A10,
we generate a similar variation profile for the transaction probability model as specified in
equation (3). Again, the total treated share is relatively stable at around 10%. Together, these
patterns underscore the similarities in the identifying variation used in the two models.

   Lastly, we examine variation in exposure to severe storms, which we define as experi-
encing category 3 or greater wind speeds (Table A11). The fraction of transactions having
been exposed to high wind speeds is small, less than 1% across all years. This greatly limits
the statistical power available to estimate the heterogeneous effects of higher wind speeds.
Further considering that the landfall of these storms is geographically clustered within south
Florida30 for which the parallel trends assumption is less likely to hold, these results will
ultimately be interpreted more cautiously.



  30 See   Figure 1.

                                               14
4     Results

This section reports our results. We begin by estimating the post-hurricane dynamics in hous-
ing prices for areas affected by hurricanes while addressing potential composition effects in
Section 4.1. Likewise, we estimate how transaction probabilities are impacted for parcels
in these areas in Section 4.2. Together, these two outcomes characterize equilibrium shifts
in the housing market as it recovers from hurricanes, and we further consider mechanisms
in Section 4.3. In Section 4.4, we examine the implications of these market adjustments on
local population turnover. In Section 4.5, we explore potential heterogeneity by hurricane
intensity.


4.1    Post-Hurricane Price Dynamics

We begin by estimating the post-hurricane dynamics of housing prices following the event
study specification in equation (1). This analysis is based on all valid transactions (henceforth
"full sample") regardless of whether a mortgage is involved. The first two columns of Table
A1 summarize the average price and home attributes in these transactions.

    The estimated coefficients of event year indicators are plotted along with their 95% con-
fidence intervals in Figure 2, and full results are reported in the first column of Table A12.
None of the estimates for pre-hurricane indicators are statistically different from zero, sup-
porting our choice of fixed effects to control for preexisting differences in average census
tract prices, seasonality, and county-specific dynamics. Our event year 0 and 1 estimates
suggest that hurricanes result in increases in home prices of 5% in the first and 10% in the
second twelve-month periods after the strike. This surge in prices appears to end some-
time in the next twelve-month period (event year 2) as the estimated increase relative to
unaffected homes drops to 2% and is no longer statistically significant. All later event year
estimates are small and not statistically distinguishable from zero. Together, these suggest a
temporary surge in prices in the three years immediately following a hurricane in exposed ar-
eas. In Table A3, we provide additional estimates using a standard difference-in-differences
specification, where we define a transaction as treated when it occurred in event year 0-2.
Consistent with the event study, the estimate suggests an average three-year price increase of
5% for the entire market. When we estimate the price change separately for each of our three
property type (single-family residence, condominium, townhouse) we find that the increase


                                               15
is the largest for condominia, at 8.5%.

   A possible reason for this price increase could be a shift in the distribution of transacted
homes: in the aftermath of a hurricane, homes with greater hurricane resistance or desirabil-
ity based on any characteristics which are unobserved in the data, may be more likely to be
transacted. In the extreme, the price surge could be entirely driven by such compositional
shifts without reflecting changes in any individual home's price. To investigate this further,
we re-estimate our price model with the inclusion of parcel fixed effects and restrict the sam-
ple to only include homes that were transacted at least once both before and after a hurricane.
Results are plotted in Figure 3 and reported in the second column of Table A12. Standard
errors are larger because of the smaller sample size, possibly as well as the more exhaustive
set of fixed effects. On the other hand, this specification produces more stable parallel trends,
and more importantly, the previous patterns are closely reproduced and of larger magnitude.
Our point estimates imply that properties on average sold at 5% higher prices in the event
year immediately following the hurricane, as much as 14% in the next event year, and 8%
in the third event year. These results again suggest that homes sold in the first two to three
years after a hurricane in exposed areas appreciated relative to when they were sold outside
of this post-hurricane window.

   We next perform robustness checks using different subsets of the full sample to address
several concerns. First, comparing home price dynamics across the exposure boundary could
be problematic if the boundary is measured with noise or if there are large spillover effects
from the more exposed areas to nearby areas. To address this concern, we drop transactions
that are within 10 miles of either side of an exposure boundary and estimate the standard
DD specification. Results are reported in column (1) of Table A4. The estimate suggests an
average price increase of 7.7% in the three years after a hurricane, which is larger than the
main results. This shows our finding of a price increase is robust to excluding the comparison
of transactions near the boundary.

   Another concern is that our sample contains hurricanes that occurred within three years
of each other. Some places were hit a second time while they were still adjusting from a
first hurricane hit. In all previously discussed specifications, we let the event time indica-
tors capture all events for transactions affected by multiple hurricanes. However, this could
result in misspecification if the composite effects of the two events are not the linear com-
bination of their respective dynamics. To determine whether our results are affected, we
re-estimate the main price regression but drop all transactions of properties which experi-


                                               16
            Figure 2: Hurricane Effects on House Prices ­ Full Sample

                             .2



                             .1

               Log Price

                                 0



                            -.1



                            -.2
                                     -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                                         Event Time Year

Notes: estimates from equation (1) are plotted with their 95% confidence intervals. The
results are based on the full sample of Florida home sales (N = 7,216,109). The model
controls for standard hedonic variables and census tract, month, and county-year fixed ef-
fects. Standard errors are clustered by county.


            Figure 3: Hurricane Effects on House Prices ­ Repeat Sales

                           .2



                           .1
               Log Price




                            0



                           -.1



                           -.2
                                     -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0   1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                                         Event Time Year

Notes: estimates from equation (2) are plotted with their 95% confidence intervals. The
results are based on only parcels with repeated transactions appearing in both pre- and
post-hurricane periods (N = 1,338,384). The model also controls for age and effective
age at time of sale, and parcel, month, and county-year fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by county.


                                                              17
enced more than one hurricane within three years.31 As shown in column (2) of Table A4,
the estimate is very similar to the main estimates. Finally, we conduct a last robustness check
to address a broader concern regarding the property of our multi-way fixed-effect estimator
under dynamic treatment effects (see, for example, Goodman-Bacon (2018)). Specifically,
we construct a sample based on all transacted properties that were either never affected by
a hurricane or affected by a subset of hurricanes not occurring in three consecutive years.32
This ensures that the three-year dynamic responses to earlier hurricanes are not used as part
of the control for later hurricanes. The estimates based on this sample are reported in col-
umn (3) of Table A4. We find an average increase in home prices of 6.5% in the three years
post-hurricane. This also suggests that biases from overlapping treatment dynamics are not
likely to be the main driver of our results.


4.2    Post-Hurricane Dynamics of Transaction Probability

We now turn our attention to transaction probabilities to better understand the mechanisms
behind the increase in home prices. We estimate these post-hurricane dynamics using equa-
tion (3). As described in Section 3, we construct a balanced panel of parcels where each
observation is a parcel-year with an associated indicator for whether or not a transaction
occurred in that year. The balanced panel approach requires that our analysis focus only on
parcels with structures built before 2000. We report summary statistics for this panel in Table
A2.

   The estimates from the full sample are plotted along with their 95% confidence inter-
vals in Panel (a) of Figure 4 (and are also reported in the third column of Table A12). The
baseline probability of transaction is around 10%. Again, we see a stable pre-trend with all
pre-hurricane indicators being statistically indistinguishable from zero. In event year 0, the
estimate indicates a drop of 0.7 percentage points, or seven percent of the baseline probabil-
ity. The effect shrinks in the next two event years and gradually returns to the baseline.

   As shown in Table A2, the characteristics of the three property types are quite different
and substitutability between them may be limited. Considering the wide confidence intervals
for these estimates, each property type likely experiences different equilibrium dynamics.

  31 Transactions that occurred before the consecutive hurricanes are also dropped to avoid substantial

geographic imbalance in the remaining sample of transactions.
  32 These hurricanes are Andrew, Opal, Irene, Dennis, Katrina, Wilma, and Irma.



                                                 18
                             Figure 4: Hurricane Effects on Transaction Probability by House Type
                                  (a) All Parcel Types                                                                   (b) Single-Family Residence
                   .01                                                                                         .01
   1(Transacted)




                                                                                               1(Transacted)
                     0                                                                                           0




                   -.01                                                                                        -.01




                   -.02                                                                                        -.02
                          -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10                               -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                              Event Time Year                                                                             Event Time Year



                                    (c) Condominium                                                                               (d) Townhouse
                                                                                                               .02
                   .02
   1(Transacted)




                                                                                               1(Transacted)




                     0                                                                                           0




                   -.02
                                                                                                               -.02



                   -.04

                                                                                                               -.04
                          -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10                               -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                              Event Time Year                                                                             Event Time Year


Notes: estimates from equation (3) are plotted with their 95% confidence intervals. Panel (a) plots the
results based on all parcel types (N = 49,302,345), Panels (b)-(d) are based on single-family residence
(N = 33,560,908), condominium (N = 12,832,339), and townhouse (N = 2,909,058), respectively.
The model controls for effective age, parcel and county-year fixed effects. In Panel (a), the model
also includes type-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.




                                                                                          19
Therefore, we also estimate the model for each type separately, and report these results in
Panels (b)-(d) in Figure 4.33

   For single-family residences, which make up around 70% of Florida housing market
transactions, we observe a small but negative effect that peaks at 5 percentage points in event
year 1. None of the event year indicators are statistically significant at the 5% level, but
the negative effects are significant at the 10% level in the first two years post-hurricane. In
contrast, the changes in transaction probability we observe for the other two property types
are statistically significant at conventional levels. Condominia, representing around 20%
of transactions, are nearly 3 percentage points less likely to be transacted in event year 0,
and still around 1 percentage point less likely to transact in the following two event years.
Townhouses, which make up the smallest share of the market at under 10%, experience a
transaction probability drop of just under 1 percentage point in the first two event years.

   The standard DD estimates for all parcels and by property type are provided in Table
A5. Aggregated over the three years immediately following a hurricane, our results reveal a
6.8% market-wide decrease in transaction probability. The heterogeneous effects range from
a 23% decrease for condominia to a 3% decline for single-family residences, relative to the
baseline. The large drop in transaction probability in the condominium market is particularly
informative because it coincides with the largest increase in transaction prices, as we showed
previously.


4.3    Mechanisms for Price and Transaction Probability Dynamics

In the previous sections, we show that areas hit by a hurricane see an increase in housing
prices and a concurrent fall in transactions. These dynamics together are consistent with
a negative supply shock. We further find that this shock is temporary, as both price and
probability appear to respond for two to three years and eventually return to the baseline.
It is worth noting that this does not imply that hurricanes only induce supply-side adjust-
ments. In fact, localities exposed to hurricanes are likely to experience changes in housing
demand through mechanisms such as people updating their beliefs about local disaster risks
(Bin and Polasky, 2004; Hallstrom and Smith, 2005; Bin et al., 2008; Gibson and Mullins,
2020) as well as disruptions to local industries and labor markets (Belasen and Polachek,
2009; Seetharam, 2018). Our results should be viewed as net of these demand-side effects,
  33 This   specification drops the property-type-by-year fixed effects, but is otherwise identical.

                                                    20
illustrating a general equilibrium adjustment. In this section, we further discuss the nature
of the negative supply shock and consider a number of alternative explanations.

    Hurricanes generate extreme winds and major flooding that can cause severe damage to
buildings. As a result, part of the housing stock in exposed areas may become uninhabitable
in the short run, driving part of the negative supply shock. But severe damage is also likely
to lower transaction volume by making it very difficult to sell devastated property. At the
same time, displaced homeowners may need to temporarily rent in unaffected neighboring
regions (the costs of which are often eligible for insurance coverage and federal assistance).
This increase in rental market demand could result in upward pressure on housing prices, in
particular on condominia if a larger share of these are used as rental properties.

    The timing of our measured impacts is also consistent with that of reconstruction. It
takes time for homeowners to restore their homes to pre-disaster conditions. If their homes
are properly insured, homeowners can obtain payouts relatively quickly. However, claim
disputes and delays in damage assessment are common when insurance companies are over-
whelmed by many claims.34 Moreover, many homeowners seek financial relief from the
government when their insurance coverage is insufficient.35 This requires homeowners to
navigate a highly complex and interlinked system of federal programs and bureaucratic pro-
cesses that can take months and sometimes more than a year to result in some form of com-
pensation.36

    Even after financial disbursement from insurers and federal programs, the repairing and
rebuilding process can take a long time. Anecdotal evidence suggests that post-disaster re-
covery is often hindered by a shortage of construction labor, with many finding that it takes
at least 18-24 months to repair or rebuild their significantly damaged homes after a large
loss. Notably, this duration is consistent with our observed effects on transaction probability
and price, thus destruction and reconstruction provide a highly plausible explanation for the

  34 Assessing  damage can be particularly difficult after a hurricane because wind damage is covered
by homeowners' insurance, but flood damage is not, and hurricanes can cause both types of damages.
After Hurricane Katrina, for example, there were multiple lawsuits over the extent to which damages
should be covered.
   35 CoreLogic (2017) estimated that about 60% of homeowners do not insure their homes up to the

full replacement value. Moreover, only 47% of homeowners living in 100-year floodplains have flood
insurance.
   36 These include FEMA's Individual Assistance and SBA's Disaster Loan programs, and other state

and local government programs (Kutz and Ryan, 2006; Hoople, 2013; Deryugina et al., 2018; Kousky
et al., 2018).

                                                 21
         Figure 5: Changes in Characteristics of Transacted Homes ­ Effective Age

                                           1




                    Effective House Age
                                          .5



                                           0



                                          -.5



                                          -1
                                                -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0   1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                                                    Event Time Year

     Notes: estimates from a variant of equation (1) are plotted with their 95% confidence inter-
     vals. The dependent variable is effective house age, which is the number of years since last
     remodeled (if applicable). The results are based on the full sample of Florida home sales.
     The specification controls for census tract, month, and county-year fixed effects. Standard
     errors are clustered by county.


dynamics we observe. Below, we consider three additional potential mechanisms.

Additional mechanism 1: quality improvement through rebuilding

The rebuilding process may not only restore, but actually improve the condition of a dam-
aged home, thereby driving up its value. This could happen for a number of reasons. First,
the rebuilding project is often subject to stricter building codes than prevailed during original
construction.37 Second, communities that participate in the National Flood Insurance Pro-
gram (NFIP) must follow program rules regarding floodplain management that could also
lead to substantial improvements in housing quality.38 Lastly, hurricanes could fully destroy
some structures in the poorest of conditions, sparing homeowners some of the demolition
costs, and setting in motion a new construction process that would have eventually taken
place anyway. The same could be true of more modest renovations, whereby an insurance

  37 Florida  building codes have been updated multiples times over the sample period. A 2018 report
on new residential building codes and enforcement systems by the Insurance Institute for Business &
Home Safety gave Florida a rating of 95/100, the highest score among all the states it evaluated.
   38 In particular, all substantially damaged properties in 100-year floodplains must be elevated

(Kousky, 2019).

                                                                         22
payout provides an extra incentive for a remodeling that was already being considered.

    We explore this possibility by examining whether the effective age of houses transacted
after a hurricane is systematically different from other years. Effective age is defined as
the number of years since the last remodel, which we calculate by constructing a history of
home renovations using repeated assessment records over the sample period.39 If remodeling
drives price increases, we would expect the houses transacted in this period to have a smaller
effective age, because we would observe a recent renovation. In Figure 5, we plot the event
study coefficients from a specification identical to equation (1) but with effective age as the
dependent variable. The estimates do not reveal any significant changes in the effective age
of transacted homes in hurricane-exposed areas.

    Of course, we do not observe all renovations. However, most major remodeling projects
require a permit, which would trigger an observable reassessment. These include structural
or electrical projects and others that cost more than a few thousand dollars (though thresholds
vary across counties). Smaller projects (such as repainting or new flooring) do not require
a permit, but they are also less likely to materially move prices. Moreover, while compli-
ance with the permitting process is imperfect, it is harder to evade for larger projects, and
far riskier for projects funded by insurance payouts or FEMA assistance. For all of these
reasons, we conclude that non-observed remodels are unlikely to play a significant role in
explaining the overall market dynamics revealed by our analysis.


Additional mechanism 2: composition shift through information revelation

As discussed in Section 4.1, we first control for major hedonic characteristics and subse-
quently include parcel fixed effects to address most types of compositional shifts in housing
transactions. Nevertheless, we cannot completely rule out all compositional effects. Some
homes may be more hurricane-resistant due to structural factors and material resiliency. If
this is difficult for potential buyers to observe (or sellers to credibly signal), hurricanes could
provide an opportunity to overcome the information asymmetry problem. This type of infor-
mation revelation would be consistent with our price appreciation results.

    This mechanism has two testable implications. First, hurricanes are likely to lead buyers

  39 Most parcels are not assessed annually. A parcel is likely to be re-assessed when a major im-
provement (which requires permitting from the local housing authority) or transaction happens. For
each parcel, we pull together all available assessment records and fill in the missing years using the
previous assessment observation.

                                                 23
                                           Figure 6: Changes in Characteristics of Transacted Homes
                                             (a) Lot Size                                                                                    (b) House Age
                         1000                                                                                             1



                          500                                                                                            .5
    Lot Size (sq. ft.)




                                                                                                     House Age
                             0                                                                                            0



                          -500                                                                                           -.5



                         -1000                                                                                           -1
                                 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10                                    -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0    1       2       3       4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                                 Event Time Year                                                                                   Event Time Year



                                       (c) Number of Stories                                                                          (d) Number of Bathrooms
                           .03                                                                                             .03


                           .02                                                                                             .02
                                                                                                   Number of Bathrooms
  Number of Stories




                           .01                                                                                             .01


                            0                                                                                                  0


                          -.01                                                                                             -.01


                          -.02                                                                                             -.02


                          -.03                                                                                             -.03
                                 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10                                        -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0       1       2       3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                                 Event Time Year                                                                                    Event Time Year


Notes: estimates from a variant of equation (1) are plotted with their 95% confidence intervals. The
dependent variable in each panel is indicated in the caption above the graph. The results are based
on the full sample of Florida home sales. The specification controls for census tract, month, and
county-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.




                                                                                              24
to more highly value the characteristics that are associated with hurricane resistance. Sec-
ond, if so valued, hurricanes should induce a compositional shift toward these characteristics
in transacted homes. Unfortunately, such characteristics ­ building and roof materials, etc.
­ are not easily observable in our data.40 Here, we provide a partial test of these impli-
cations using observed characteristics that are predictors of disaster resistance. One such
characteristic is the house's age: newer homes are more resistant to hurricanes because of
improvements in building technology and more stringent building codes. Effective age may
also play a role, particularly if the triggering event involved major structural modifications.
Another characteristic is the number of stories, as taller buildings are more prone to wind
damage, all else equal.

   To test for differential capitalization, we estimate the following equation:

         log (P riceimy ) =1 Hurrimy +  HouseChariy +  Hurrimy × HouseChariy
                                                                                                (4)
                          + ht + hm + hcy + imy .

Here, we augment the standard DD specification with an interaction between the treatment
indicator (Hurrimg ) and each of the home characteristics.  captures the differential capital-
ization effect during the adjustment period. Results are reported in Table A6, and we find no
differential capitalization effect for house age or for being a one-story building. We also find
a smaller price effect for being recently renovated, in contrast to the expectation that such
homes could be more resistant to hurricanes.

   We also test for any systematic changes in these variables among transacted homes, as
predicted by the second testable implication. As shown in Figure 6, none of these character-
istics experience detectable changes after hurricane exposure. If anything, there is a gradual
rise in average house age, which is likely a mechanical effect due to the aging of the housing
stock.

Additional mechanism 3: speculative buyers or investors

The last alternative mechanism that we explore is speculation. Disasters may open up oppor-
tunities for developers and other risk-neutral agents to buy properties in damaged areas and
renovate them for profit, as suggested by anecdotal evidence.41 To test for this mechanism,

  40 The  assessment data contains flags for building quality and roof material. However, our explo-
ration revealed serious inconsistencies across these measures, in addition to patchy coverage.
   41 For example, see City Lab, https://www.citylab.com/equity/2020/03/nashville-tornado-real-



                                                25
                                                              Figure 7: Testing for Speculative Buyers
                                      (a) Non-individual Buyers                                                                          (b) Out-of-state Buyers
                             .03                                                                                              .03


                             .02                                                                                              .02
   1(Non-individual Buyer)




                                                                                                      1(Out-of-state buyer)
                             .01                                                                                              .01


                               0                                                                                                0


                             -.01                                                                                             -.01


                             -.02                                                                                             -.02


                             -.03                                                                                             -.03
                                    -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10                                       -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                                    Event Time Year                                                                                  Event Time Year

Notes: estimates from a variant of equation (1) are plotted with their 95% confidence intervals. The
dependent variable is an indicator for non-individual buyer in Panel (a) (N = 7,216,109), and an
indicator for out-of-state buyer in Panel (b) (N = 6,859,171). The models control for census tract,
month, and county-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.


we examine the composition of sales in terms of (1) individuals versus non-individuals and
(2) in-state versus out-of-state buyers.

              In our data, we observe which transactions involve any non-individual buyers, and these
account for 13.2% of all transactions in the sample. We again employ the event study speci-
fication but with an indicator for the involvement of non-individual buyers as the dependent
variable. Results are plotted in Panel (a) of Figure 7. While we observe a slightly decreasing
trend in non-individual buyers, this trend is not only statistically insignificant in the three
post-hurricane event years (after which it reverses), but it also appears to predate the hurri-
cane. Overall, the pattern is not indicative of any consistent change in investor purchases in
the immediate aftermath of a hurricane, and we conclude that institutional investing therefore
cannot explain the housing market dynamics in our setting.

              To determine which buyers live out-of-state, we use the buyer address recorded in the
transaction data. Approximately 54% of buyers use the address of the transacted property
as their corresponding address, reflecting their intention to immediately inhabit the property.
Among the remaining buyers, an out-of-state address likely reflects purchases by investors
or those acquiring a second home. These buyers account for 15.1% of all purchases in our


estate-speculators-opportunity-zone/607558/, or the Wall Street Journal, https://www.wsj.com/
articles/the-new-storm-chasers-real-estate-disaster-investors-11564498767.

                                                                                                 26
sample. We again estimate a variant of equation (1), with an indicator for being out-of-state
on the left hand side. The results, plotted in Panel (b) of Figure 7, show no movement in the
fraction of transactions that are made by out-of-state buyers, providing further evidence that
our market dynamics are very unlikely to be driven by an increase in speculative buying.


4.4   Implications for Population Turnover

The equilibrium shifts in the housing market we documented in the previous section may af-
fect the income and wealth distributions of impacted regions, and these could have associated
demographic consequences for hurricane-battered communities. In this section, we turn our
attention to buyer income. In this analysis, we focus on the subsample of home buyers for
whom we obtained a high-quality match in HMDA records ("HMDA sample" henceforth),
where we observe buyer income. The HMDA sample is therefore a subset of all transactions
with a mortgage ("borrower sample" henceforth). In this section, we begin by comparing
samples to gauge the representativeness of the HMDA sample relative to both the borrower
and full samples, and then proceed in estimating the equilibrium effect of hurricane exposure
on income and other demographic characteristics.

   Table A1 reports the mean and median of characteristics of transacted homes in the three
samples. The full sample contains more outlier homes which are expensive and have larger
lot sizes than typical homes. Since these are likely to be estates of the wealthy, these pur-
chases would be less likely to be financed by mortgages. Most property characteristics are
otherwise comparable at both the mean and median of their values across the three samples.
We also confirm that the borrower and HMDA samples have similar post-hurricane price dy-
namics by re-estimating equation (1) in both of these samples. Results are plotted in Figure
8 for the HMDA sample and Appendix Figure A4 for the borrower sample, and both resem-
ble the pattern estimated in the full sample. We also examine whether hurricanes affect the
distribution of cash buyers versus borrowers (Appendix Figure A3), and find no evidence
of a significant change. Overall, the transactions in the HMDA sample appear to be quite
comparable to the two larger samples based on observable characteristics. Nevertheless, we
caution that there may be important differences between cash buyers and borrowers, and also
between those borrowing from large lenders covered by HMDA and those borrowing from
smaller ones.

   Using the HMDA sample, we now estimate the effect of hurricanes on the average in-


                                             27
          Figure 8: Hurricane Effects on House Prices ­ HMDA Sample

                              .1




               Log Price    .05




                              0




                            -.05
                                   -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                                       Event Time Year

Notes: estimates from equation (1) are plotted with their 95% confidence intervals. The
results are based on the HMDA sample (N = 1,928,142). The model includes standard
hedonic variables and census tract, month, and county-year fixed effects. Standard errors
are clustered by county.



          Figure 9: Hurricane Effects on Buyer Income ­ HMDA Sample

                              .1




                            .05
               Log Income




                              0




                            -.05
                                   -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                                       Event Time Year

Notes: estimates from a variant of equation (1) are plotted with their 95% confidence in-
tervals. The dependent variable is buyer income. The results are based on the HMDA
sub-sample (N = 1,846,467). The model includes standard hedonic variables and census
tract, month, and county-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.


                                                            28
come of new buyers by replacing the outcome variable in equation (1) with buyer income
(Figure 9). We find the dynamics of post-hurricane income to be strikingly similar to those
of prices: the average income increases by around 4% in the first event year, nearly 7% in the
second, and reverts to 4% in the third before returning to its pre-hurricane baseline in later
years. Table A7 reports the standard DD coefficients for each property type, where we find a
similar increase in buyer income across-the-board. Combined with our previous finding that
homes transacted post-hurricane are similar to those transacted before, these results suggest
that comparable homes are being transferred to buyers of higher income levels.

    There are several plausible reasons why post-hurricane buyers could have higher in-
comes. First, high-income households generally have a higher willingness-to-pay for hous-
ing in any location.42 In an impacted market after a storm, higher-income households are
thus more likely to outbid others. Second, financial institutions may become more cautious
about lending in hurricane-struck locations. For example, they could be less willing to is-
sue larger loans to accommodate a higher home price.43 Our results suggest that hurricanes
may exacerbate pre-existing constraints and further limit location choices for lower-income
households.

    To put these findings in context, approximately 28% of local homes changed hands dur-
ing the three-year adjustment period. If our results on HMDA buyers generalize to the non-
borrower side of the market, the implications for local communities are profound. Given
that homeownership is often a long-term decision, this pattern may result in a lasting change
in the economic profile of affected communities toward higher income, and likely higher
wealth. In turn, the influx of higher-income households could trigger further gentrification
in these neighborhoods, as the new residents demand (and are able to pay for) new local
amenities (Card et al., 2008; Guerrieri et al., 2013). In most cases, gentrification eventually
produce winners and losers, largely depending on who the incumbent homeowners are, and
who rents.

    In addition to income, we also examine the race and gender profiles of buyers from
the HMDA sample. Based on the race of the mortgage applicant and co-applicant (when

  42 This  is a common feature in models of locational choice with heterogeneous income levels, e.g.
Banzhaf and Walsh (2008).
   43 A recent study finds that lenders securitize a larger fraction of their loans after a hurricane to

transfer risks to government-sponsored enterprises such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (Ouazad
and Kahn, 2019). Conforming loans must not exceed certain loan limits. This requirement could
further tighten credit constraints facing lower-income households.

                                                  29
applicable)44 , we classify each application into three categories: (1) the applicant(s) is non-
Hispanic white; (2) the applicant(s) is a racial or ethnic minority; (3) one applicant is non-
Hispanic white while the other is a minority. We estimate the changes in these outcomes in
three years post-hurricane using a standard DD specification and report the results in Table
A8. The estimates are all very small. We find a 0.2 percentage points decrease in the fraction
of non-Hispanic white applicants from a 60.5% baseline, which is both economically small
and statistically insignificant. We also find a marginally significant increase of 0.5 percentage
points for minority applicants and a compensating 0.3 percentage points decrease for pairs of
applicants with mixed minority status. Similarly, we classify applications into two categories
based on whether all applicants are female and estimate a 0.4 percentage points increase in
the fraction of female applicants out of a 29.6% baseline. We conclude that there is no
meaningful change to the overall racial or gender profile of buyers post-hurricane.


4.5    Heterogeneous Effects

In this section, we explore the heterogeneous effects of differential wind speed exposure. As
described in Section 2.2, we further classify exposure as either low intensity (64-95 kn wind
speed) or high intensity (96 kn and above). In our sample, high-intensity exposure is limited
because we determine exposure for each point within the path of the hurricane winds. If a
category 3 or higher hurricane passes through a location at lower than 96 kn wind speeds,
we do not consider this location to have been exposed to high-intensity winds. Nevertheless,
exploring this heterogeneity helps bridge our results to the existing literature, which largely
focuses on the information content of a single, high-intensity hurricane.

   To examine heterogeneity, we estimate a variant of equation (1) which allows for separate
post-hurricane dynamics for each of the two levels of exposure, and we plot the post-period
coefficients in Figure 10.45 Since most instances of exposure are of low intensity, the price
dynamics generated by low-intensity exposure are very similar to the overall pattern shown
in Figure 2. The high-intensity exposure estimates, on the other hand, suffer from wider
errors because of the significantly lower treatment saturation.46 The general pattern is very

  44 40.55%   of the mortgage applications in HMDA have a co-applicant.
  45 We   pool the pre-hurricane indicators for the two types of exposure to enhance power, and as
before, the pre-period indicators are both flat and statistically zero.
   46 At most 1% of homes are ever sold from areas affected by category 3 and above wind speeds

in any year before or after a hurricane, as such wind speeds rarely affected Florida over our sample

                                                30
           Figure 10: Heterogeneous Effects by Hurricane Intensity ­ Full Sample


                                 .2




                     Log Price
                                 .1




                                  0




                                 -.1
                                       -1   0     1    2    3    4    5      6     7    8    9     10
                                                           Event Time Year
                                            Category 1-2 wind speed       Category 3+ wind speed


     Notes: estimates for separate wind categories are plotted with their 95% confidence inter-
     vals. The results are based on the full sample of Florida home buyers (N = 7,216,109). The
     model includes standard hedonic variables and census tract, month, and county-year fixed
     effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.


similar: the average price jumps up in event year 0, peaks at event year 1, and tapers down
in subsequent years. The point estimates are larger for the high-intensity storms, with a peak
of 15% compared to 10% for low intensity. The effect also appears to be more persistent:
the fourth year after high-intensity exposure still experiences a statistically significant 5%
increase in housing prices, whereas the corresponding estimate is small and insignificant
for low-intensity exposure. The lack of power, however, ultimately constrains our ability to
detect statistically differential effects.



5     Conclusion

This paper provides two sets of findings. First, we estimate the equilibrium dynamics oc-
curring in the Florida housing market in the wake of a hurricane. We find an increase in
housing prices and a concurrent decrease in transaction probability, both lasting up to three
years. The direction and duration of these effects are consistent with the underlying mech-

period (see the right panel of Figure 1, but recall that it depicts tract-centroid and not individual home
category 3 hurricane exposure).

                                                                31
anism whereby a part of the housing stock is first damaged by hurricanes, and eventually
restored. We find little empirical support for alternative explanations. Second, we examine
demographic changes in local communities associated with these market adjustments and
find that incoming home buyers during the recovery period have higher average income con-
ditional on the characteristics of transacted homes, resulting in an enduring increase in the
distribution of income, and likely wealth in these communities.

   Several interesting implications emerge from these findings. First, our results suggest
that there is a limited demand response from any updated beliefs about the riskiness of an
affected location. In the short run, any behavioral response on the demand side of the mar-
ket is dominated by the effect of the supply shock. Since potential home buyers are likely
well informed about the general risk of hurricane exposure in Florida, the realization of a
hurricane conveys little information beyond the very local effect on homes located in flood
zones, as identified in previous studies. Moreover, we remarkably find no evidence that hur-
ricanes fundamentally change the long-run demand for housing in affected areas. Whether
this is due to the scarcity of desirable regions with warm winter weather ­ an important urban
amenity (Glaeser and Gyourko, 2005) ­ or the resilience of local businesses and economic
opportunity remains an open question.

   In addition, our transaction probability findings imply a close-to-full recovery in the
housing market after three years. Such timeline for the recuperation of physical capital is
in line with past studies on capital destruction by natural disasters (Gignoux and Men´
                                                                                      endez,
2016; Kocornik-Mina et al., 2020). Since the incentive to rebuild is governed by the com-
parison between construction costs and housing prices (Gyourko and Saiz, 2004), higher
housing prices during the adjustment period provide a strong price signal for the recovery,
even for areas with high-intensity exposure. This stands in contrast to the evidence from
New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, where recovery was slow. Due to unexpected levee
failures, Katrina's impacts in New Orleans were much more severe than other hurricanes.
The widespread damage there likely affected local amenities and industries so much that
it fundamentally altered the long-run housing market equilibrium. While New Orleans is
undoubtedly an outlier, an important question for future research will be to understand the
sensitivity of market outcomes and long-run welfare consequences to different levels of dam-
age.

   Finally, we return to the increase in the average income of home buyers. To the extent
that higher income residents bring along more expensive assets and spur more economic


                                             32
development in these areas, this could result in more expensive future hurricane damage
claims. For the privately insured, these risks should be reflected in higher premiums. But
for publicly funded insurance and disaster relief programs under FEMA, HUD, and other
government agencies, these risks could come at the expense of taxpayers (Dinan, 2016). As
of 2019, the National Flood Insurance Program was over 20 billion dollars in debt even after
Congress cancelled an additional 16 billion in 2017. To the extent that homeowners are
counting on public assistance or insurance rates not reflective of actual risks, some of this
gentrification may be the result of moral hazard, highlighting the need for program reform
as advocated for by many researchers (Congressional Budget Office, 2017; Kousky et al.,
2018).

   The empirical relationship between housing supply and buyer income is interesting in
and of itself. Our model highlights the important role of financial constraints as a driver
of post-hurricane housing market dynamics. As such, reforms to lending practices in the
recovery period could play an important role in ensuring an equitable recovery from natural
disasters. Clearly, such reforms would need to account for the usual information asymmetries
that shape lending programs. Whether the scope for adverse selection and the tools available
to combat it are sufficient to address these distributional concerns is a rich area for future
research.




                                             33
References
Atreya, A., Ferreira, S., and Kriesel, W. (2013). Forgetting the flood? an analysis of the
  flood risk discount over time. Land Economics, 89(4):577­596.
Banzhaf, H. S. and Walsh, R. P. (2008). Do people vote with their feet? an empirical test of
  tiebout. American Economic Review, 98(3):843­63.
Bayer, P., McMillan, R., Murphy, A., and Timmins, C. (2016). A dynamic model of demand
  for houses and neighborhoods. Econometrica, 84(3):893­942.
Belasen, A. R. and Polachek, S. W. (2009). How disasters affect local labor markets the
  effects of hurricanes in florida. Journal of Human Resources, 44(1):251­276.
Bin, O., Kruse, J. B., and Landry, C. E. (2008). Flood hazards, insurance rates, and amenities:
  Evidence from the coastal housing market. Journal of Risk and Insurance, 75(1):63­82.
Bin, O. and Landry, C. E. (2013). Changes in implicit flood risk premiums: Empirical evi-
  dence from the housing market. Journal of Environmental Economics and management,
  65(3):361­376.
Bin, O. and Polasky, S. (2004). Effects of flood hazards on property values: evidence before
  and after hurricane floyd. Land Economics, 80(4):490­500.
Bleemer, Z. and Van der Klaauw, W. (2017). Disaster (over-) insurance: the long-term
  financial and socioeconomic consequences of hurricane katrina. Working Paper.
Boustan, L. P., Kahn, M. E., Rhode, P. W., and Yanguas, M. L. (2017). The effect of natural
  disasters on economic activity in us counties: A century of data. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Campbell, J. Y., Giglio, S., and Pathak, P. (2011). Forced sales and house prices. American
  Economic Review, 101(5):2108­31.
Cannaday, R. E., Munneke, H. J., and Yang, T. T. (2005). A multivariate repeat-sales model
  for estimating house price indices. Journal of Urban Economics, 57(2):320­342.
Card, D., Mas, A., and Rothstein, J. (2008). Tipping and the dynamics of segregation. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1):177­218.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., and Katz, L. F. (2016). The effects of exposure to better neighbor-
  hoods on children: New evidence from the moving to opportunity experiment. American
  Economic Review, 106(4):855­902.
Congressional Budget Office (2017). The national flood insurance program: Financial
  soundness and affordability. Report.
CoreLogic (2017). The marketpulse. 6(10).
Davis, D. R. and Weinstein, D. E. (2002). Bones, bombs, and break points: the geography
  of economic activity. American Economic Review, 92(5):1269­1289.
Demuth, J. L., DeMaria, M., and Knaff, J. A. (2006). Improvement of advanced microwave


                                              34
  sounding unit tropical cyclone intensity and size estimation algorithms. Journal of Applied
  Meteorology and Climatology, 45(11):1573­1581.
Deryugina, T. (2017). The fiscal cost of hurricanes: disaster aid versus social insurance.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3):168­98.
Deryugina, T., Kawano, L., and Levitt, S. (2018). The economic impact of hurricane katrina
  on its victims: evidence from individual tax returns. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 10(2):202­33.
Dietrich, J., Liu, F., Skhirtladze, A., Davies, M., Jo, Y., and Candilis, C. (2018). Data
  point: 2017 mortgage market activity and trends. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,
  October.
Dinan, T. (2016). Potential increases in hurricane damage in the united states: implications
  for the federal budget. Congress of the United States, Congressional Budget Office.
Feigenbaum, J. J., Lee, J., and Mezzanotti, F. (2017). Capital destruction and economic
  growth: The effects of sherman's march, 1850-1920. Working Paper.
Ferreira, F. and Gyourko, J. (2012). Heterogeneity in neighborhood-level price growth in the
  united states, 1993-2009. American Economic Review, 102(3):134­40.
Gagnon, E. and Lopez-Salido, D. (2014). Small price responses to large demand shocks.
  Working Paper.
Gallagher, J. (2014). Learning about an infrequent event: evidence from flood insurance
  take-up in the united states. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(3):206­
  33.
Gallagher, J. and Hartley, D. (2017). Household finance after a natural disaster: The case of
  hurricane katrina. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3):199­228.
Gibson, M. and Mullins, J. T. (2020). Climate risk and beliefs in new york floodplains.
  Working Paper.
Gignoux, J. and Men´
                   endez, M. (2016). Benefit in the wake of disaster: Long-run effects of
  earthquakes on welfare in rural indonesia. Journal of Development Economics, 118:26­
  44.
Glaeser, E. L. and Gyourko, J. (2005). Urban decline and durable housing. Journal of
  Political Economy, 113(2):345­375.
Goodman-Bacon, A. (2018). Difference-in-differences with variation in treatment timing.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Groen, J. A. and Polivka, A. E. (2008). The effect of hurricane katrina on the labor market
  outcomes of evacuees. American Economic Review, 98(2):43­48.
Guerrieri, V., Hartley, D., and Hurst, E. (2013). Endogenous gentrification and housing price
  dynamics. Journal of Public Economics, 100:45­60.
Gyourko, J. and Saiz, A. (2004). Reinvestment in the housing stock: the role of construction

                                             35
  costs and the supply side. Journal of Urban Economics, 55(2):238­256.
Hallstrom, D. G. and Smith, V. K. (2005). Market responses to hurricanes. Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management, 50(3):541­561.
Harding, J. P., Rosenthal, S. S., and Sirmans, C. (2007). Depreciation of housing capital,
  maintenance, and house price inflation: Estimates from a repeat sales model. Journal of
  urban Economics, 61(2):193­217.
Hoople, D. (2013). The budgetary impact of the federal government's response to disasters.
  Congressional Budget Office.
Hsiang, S. M. and Jina, A. S. (2014). The causal effect of environmental catastrophe on
  long-run economic growth: Evidence from 6,700 cyclones. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Ikle, F. C. (1951). The effect of war destruction upon the ecology of cities. Social Forces,
   29(4):383­391.
Kling, J. R., Liebman, J. B., and Katz, L. F. (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood
  effects. Econometrica, 75(1):83­119.
Kling, J. R., Ludwig, J., and Katz, L. F. (2005). Neighborhood effects on crime for female
  and male youth: Evidence from a randomized housing voucher experiment. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 120(1):87­130.
Kocornik-Mina, A., McDermott, T. K., Michaels, G., and Rauch, F. (2020). Flooded cities.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 12(2):35­66.
Kousky, C. (2010). Learning from extreme events: Risk perceptions after the flood. Land
  Economics, 86(3):395­422.
Kousky, C. (2019). The role of natural disaster insurance in recovery and risk reduction.
  Annual Review of Resource Economics, 11:399­418.
Kousky, C., Michel-Kerjan, E. O., and Raschky, P. A. (2018). Does federal disaster assis-
  tance crowd out flood insurance? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
  87:150­164.
Kutz, G. D. and Ryan, J. J. (2006). Hurricanes Katrina and Rita Disaster Relief: Improper
  and Potentially Fraudulent Individual Assistance Payments Estimated to be Between 600
  Million and 1.4 Billion: Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Investigations, Committee
  on Homeland Security, House of Representatives. US Government Accountability Office.
McCoy, S. J. and Zhao, X. (2018). A city under water: A geospatial analysis of storm
 damage, changing risk perceptions, and investment in residential housing. Journal of the
 Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 5(2):301­330.
McIntosh, M. F. (2008). Measuring the labor market impacts of hurricane katrina migration:
 evidence from houston, texas. American Economic Review, 98(2):54­57.
Miguel, E. and Roland, G. (2011). The long-run impact of bombing vietnam. Journal of


                                            36
  development Economics, 96(1):1­15.
Ortega, F. and Taspinar, S. (2018). Rising sea levels and sinking property values: hurricane
  sandy and new york's housing market. Journal of Urban Economics, 106:81­100.
Ouazad, A. and Kahn, M. E. (2019). Mortgage finance in the face of rising climate risk.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Paxson, C. and Rouse, C. E. (2008). Returning to new orleans after hurricane katrina. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 98(2):38­42.
Rosen, S. (1974). Hedonic prices and implicit markets: product differentiation in pure com-
  petition. Journal of Political Economy, 82(1):34­55.
Saiz, A. (2010). The geographic determinants of housing supply. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 125(3):1253­1296.
Seetharam, I. (2018). The indirect effects of hurricanes: Evidence from firm internal net-
  works. Working Paper.
Skidmore, M. and Toya, H. (2002). Do natural disasters promote long-run growth? Eco-
  nomic inquiry, 40(4):664­687.
Strobl, E. (2011). The economic growth impact of hurricanes: evidence from us coastal
  counties. Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(2):575­589.




                                            37
Appendix

Figures

                                       Figure A1: Florida Housing Market Sales and Composition


                                  250
          Median price ($1000s)




                                  200

                                  150

                                  100

                                  50

                                       0
                                       Jan00   Jan02     Jan04      Jan06      Jan08     Jan10    Jan12     Jan14       Jan16
                                                                             Month of Sample


                                  .8
          House type share




                                  .6

                                  .4

                                  .2

                                  0
                                       2000    2002       2004        2006        2008     2010      2012       2014        2016
                                                                                  Year

                                                       Single family residence           Condo              Townhouse



      Source: authors' calculation based on ZTRAX data.
      Notes: the top panel plots the monthly median prices for the three major home
      types. The bottom panel plots the annual sales percentages of each home type.
      These time series are based on the full sample of Florida home buyers.




                                                                                 38
                                             Figure A2: Florida Borrowers Market Price and Sales Share



  Median price (thousands of dollars)
                                        250

                                        200

                                        150

                                        100

                                         50                                                                    Townhouse
                                                                                                               Single family res.
                                                                                                               Condo
                                             0
                                             Jan00    Jan02    Jan04    Jan06      Jan08    Jan10   Jan12   Jan14         Jan16


                                        1
  Borrower sales share




                                        .8

                                        .6

                                        .4

                                        .2

                                        0
                                         Jan00       Jan02    Jan04    Jan06      Jan08     Jan10   Jan12   Jan14        Jan16
                                                                                Month of Sample



Source: authors' calculation based on ZTRAX data.
Notes: the top panel plots the median price in the borrower subsample. The
bottom panel plots the share of borrower sales among all sales. All time series
are monthly.




                                                                                  39
Figure A3: Hurricane Effects on the Share of Transactions Involving a
Mortgage

                      .1



                    .05
      1(Mortgage)




                      0



                    -.05



                     -.1
                           -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                               Event Time Year

Notes: estimates from a variant of equation (1) are plotted with their 95% confi-
dence intervals. The dependent variable is an indicator of whether the transaction
involves a mortgage. The results are based on the full sample (N = 7,226,845).
The model includes standard hedonic variables and census tract, month, and
county-year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.




                                                    40
   Figure A4: Hurricane Effects on House Prices ­ Borrower Sample

                    .1



      Log Price   .05



                    0



                  -.05



                   -.1
                         -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1    0    1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10
                                             Event Time Year

Notes: estimates from Equation (1) are plotted with their 95% confidence inter-
vals. The results are based on the borrower sample (N = 4,083,298). The model
controls for standard hedonic variables and census tract, month, and county-year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.




                                                  41
Tables

                   Table A1: Summary Statistics of Housing Transactions

                                 Full Sample         Borrower Sample        HMDA Sample
    Variable                   Mean      Median       Mean     Median      Mean      Median
    Price                     272,775    155,000     238,031   178,000    252,401    187,900
    Assessed Value            149,678    103,326     149,064   110,640    159,264    117,914
    No. of Buildings           0.939        1         0.947       1        0.942         1
    No. of Stories              1.25        1          1.23       1         1.24         1
    No. of Bathrooms            1.79        2          1.86       2         1.86         2
    Lot Size (sq. ft.)         11,605     7,143       11,708    7,500      11,906      7,700
    House Age                   22.1       19          19.7      16         20.9        17
    Effective House Age         17.7       15          15.3      12         16.3        13
    Loan Amount                  ­          ­        194,797   150,000    198,277    157,250
    Buyer Income                  ­         ­           ­         ­       113,116     72,000
    N                             7,414,454             4,207,160             1,972,728
    % Single Family                  69.7                  76.1                  76.9
    % Condo                          24.1                  17.4                  16.9
    % Townhouse                       6.2                   6.6                   6.2
         Notes: The unit of observation is a transaction. The full sample contains all transac-
         tions. The borrower sample contains all transactions with a mortgage. The HMDA
         sample contains all transactions that have a valid match to the HMDA records.




                                                42
                     Table A2: Summary Statistics of the Parcel-Year Panel

                          Statistic      All          Single Family   Condominium   Townhouse
Transacted                Mean          0.102            0.103           0.101        0.103
Assessed Value            Mean         149,437          154,697         136,827      132,850
                          Median       105,450          110,500         84,222       107,650
No. of Buildings          Mean           0.963            0.993          0.880        0.967
                          Median           1                1              1            1
No. of Stories            Mean           1.22             1.11            2.06         1.26
                          Median           1                1              1            1
No. of Bathrooms          Mean           1.67             1.75            1.37         1.98
                          Median           2                2               2            2
Lot Size (sq. ft.)        Mean          16,876           16,093          29,732       4,164
                          Median        9,027            9,500           8,802        3,485
House Age                 Mean           30.1             31.8            27.7         21.2
                          Median          28                28             28           21
Effective House Age       Mean           23.8              23.9           25.1         18.0
                          Median          22                21             26           18
N (parcel-year)                       49,363,437       33,619,163      12,834,600   2,909,674
Share (%)                                 100             68.11           26.00        5.89
    "Transacted" is an indicator of whether the parcel has been involved in a transaction in the
  given year.




                                                 43
             Table A3: The Effect of Hurricanes on Housing Prices

                               (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)
Log(Price)                     All       Single Family   Condominium      Townhouse
Event Year 0-2             0.0505         0.0536           0.0850          0.0491
                            (0.0147)       (0.0118)        (0.00727)        (0.0158)

Age                        -0.00436      -0.00353          -0.0159        -0.00779
                            (0.000730)    (0.000405)        (0.00531)      (0.00107)

Effective Age              -0.00808      -0.00722          -0.00253        -0.0136
                            (0.000819)    (0.000890)       (0.00430)        (0.00456)

Lot Size (1,000 sq. ft.)   0.00272        0.00337         -0.000309         0.0325
                           (0.000473)     (0.000258)      (0.000295)        (0.0150)

N                          7,216,109      5,029,557        1,741,743        444,809
R2                           0.571          0.556            0.611           0.604
County-Year-Type FEs          Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Month-Type FEs                Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
Tract-Type FEs                Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes
  Notes: this table reports estimates from a variant of equation (1), where the set of
  event indicators are replaced by a single indicator of whether the transaction occurs
  in year 0-2 following exposure to a hurricane. The dependent variable is the log of
  transaction price. The unit of analysis is a transaction. The regressions also control
  for the number of stories and the number of bathrooms in bins, and an indicator for
  event year 3-10. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the county level. 
  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                          44
       Table A4: Robustness Checks on Housing Price Results

                               (1)             (2)                (3)
                          Boundary Obs.     Repeat Hits    Overlapping Events
Event Year 0-2               0.0765          0.0492              0.0651
                              (0.0120)       (0.00990)            (0.0123)

N                           3,031,677        5,739,937           3,128,012
R2                            0.590            0.563               0.600
County-Year-Type FEs            Yes              Yes                Yes
Month-Type FEs                  Yes              Yes                Yes
Tract-Type FEs                  Yes              Yes                Yes
  Notes: this table reports estimates from a version of equation (1), where the
  set of event indicators are replaced by a single indicator of whether the trans-
  action occurs in year 0-2 following exposure to a hurricane. The unit of analy-
  sis is a transactions. Each column corresponds to a different subset of the full
  sample. Column (1) drops all observations within 10 miles to the boundary of
  hurricane-scale wind exposure. Column (2) drops all observations that have
  been exposed to two hurricanes within three years through out the sample
  period. Column (3) is based on a subset of hurricanes, selected so that they
  either coincide with another hurricane in the set or are not within three years
  of any other hurricanes. The observations associated with hurricanes outside
  of this set are dropped. The regressions also control for the number of stories
  and the number of bathrooms in bins, and an indicator for event year 3-10.
  Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the county level.  p < 0.10,
   p < 0.05,  p < 0.01




                                      45
     Table A5: The Effect of Hurricanes on Transaction Probability

                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
1(Transacted)           All        Single Family     Condominium       Townhouse
Event Year 0-2      -0.00679          -0.00308         -0.0230           -0.00387
                     (0.00326)       (0.00332)          (0.0105)        (0.00241)

N                   49,302,345      33,560,908        12,832,339        2,909,058
R2                    0.0856          0.0866            0.0832           0.0977
County-Year FEs         Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes
Type-Year FEs           Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes
Parcel FEs              Yes              Yes               Yes             Yes
  Notes: this table reports estimates from a version of equation (3), where the set
  of event indicators are replaced by a single indicator of whether the transaction
  occurs in year 0-2 following exposure to a hurricane. The dependent variable is
  an indicator of whether a transaction takes place that involves the given parcel
  in a given year. The unit of analysis is a parcel-year. The regressions also
  control for effective age, lot size, and an indicator for event year 3-10. Standard
  errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the county level.  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,
   p < 0.01




                                        46
          Table A6: Differential Capitalization

                          (1a)                     (1b)
Log(Price)             Main Effect           Interaction Effect
Event Year 0-2           0.0874
                         (0.0441)

House Age               -0.0060                   0.0006
                         (0.0009)                (0.0008)

Effec. House Age        -0.0091                  0.0023
                         (0.0008)                (0.0010)

One-Story               -0.0692                   0.0180
                         (0.0206)                (0.0200)
N                                    7,216,109
R2                                     0.560
  Notes: this table reports estimates from equation (4). Col-
  umn (1a) reports the coefficients associated with the treat-
  ment indicator and home characteristics, and column (1b)
  reports the coefficients of the interaction term of each of the
  characteristics with the treatment indicator. The model also
  controls for lot size and number of bathrooms and their in-
  teraction with the event indicator, an indicator for event year
  3-10, as well as tract-type, month-type, and county-year-
  type FEs. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by
  county.  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                              47
Table A7: The Effect of Hurricanes on Housing Prices and Buyer Income
(HMDA Sample)

                         (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
                         All       Single Family    Condominium       Townhouse
                          Dependent variable: log price
 Event Year 0-2       0.0588         0.0598            0.0589          0.0557
                      (0.00454)      (0.00508)         (0.00821)       (0.00976)

 N                    1,928,142      1,482,160          326,189         119,793
 R2                     0.720          0.711             0.765           0.786
                        Dependent variable: log income
 Event Year 0-2       0.0460         0.0480            0.0426          0.0400
                      (0.00504)      (0.00699)          (0.0104)        (0.0110)

 N                    1,846,467      1,421,677          309,904         114,885
 R2                     0.417          0.404             0.456           0.362
 County-Year FEs         Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes
 Month FEs               Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes
 Tract FEs               Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes
   Notes: this table reports estimates from a version of equation (1), where the set
   of event indicators are replaced by a single indicator of whether the transaction
   occurs in year 0-2 following exposure to a hurricane. The dependent variable
   is the log of transaction price in the top panel and the log of buyer income in
   the bottom panel. The unit of analysis is a transaction. The sample contains all
   transactions that have a match with the HMDA records. The regressions also
   control for home characteristics and an indicator for event year 3-10. Standard
   errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the county level.  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,
    p < 0.01.




                                        48
Table A8: The Effect of Hurricanes on Additional Buyer Demographics
(HMDA Sample)

                              (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)
                             White        Minority       Mixed          Female
 Event Year 0-2             -0.00205      0.00503      -0.00297       0.00412
                            (0.00342)    (0.00348)      (0.00105)     (0.00206)

 N                         1,928,142     1,928,142      1,928,142     1,928,142
 R2                          0.225         0.240          0.009         0.034
 Mean D.V.                   0.605         0.364          0.031         0.296
 County-Year-Type FEs          Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Month-Type FEs                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Tract-Type FEs                Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
   Notes: this table reports estimates from a version of equation (1), where
   the set of event indicators are replaced by a single indicator of whether the
   transaction occurs in year 0-2 following exposure to a hurricane. The de-
   pendent variables in columns (1)-(3) represent the race and ethnicity com-
   bination of the applicant and co-applicant (when applicable). Respectively,
   they are an indicator of the applicant(s) being non-Hispanic white, an indi-
   cator of the applicant(s) being a racial or ethnic minority, and an indicator of
   one applicant being non-Hispanic white while the other is a minority. The
   dependent variable in column (4) is an indicator of the applicant(s) being fe-
   male. The unit of analysis is a transaction. The regressions also control for
   home characteristics and an indicator for event year 3-10. Standard errors
   (in parentheses) are clustered at the county level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,
    p < 0.01.




                                        49
Online Appendices

A     Additional Figures and Tables

                       Figure A5: Demographics in Florida Counties
               (a) Percent White                       (b) Percent Hispanic or Latino




               (c) Percent Black                                 (d) Median Age




Source: Census Data Mapper based on data from the 2010 Census.




                                             50
               Figure A6: Family and Housing Statistics in Florida Counties
         (a) Percent Family Households              (b) Percent Occupied Housing Units




         (c) Homeowner Vacancy Rate                       (d) Rental Vacancy Rate




Source: Census Data Mapper based on data from the 2010 Census.




                                             51
                                 Table A9: Variation in hurricane event time indicators (housing price model)

                                                                              Event Time
     Hurricane      -6     -5      -4     -3      -2      -1      0      1        2        3     4      5     6      7       8      9     10
     Andrew92       .       .      .       .       .      .       .      .        .         .     .     .      .    1.0     1.5    1.4    1.4
     Opal95         .       .      .       .       .      .       .      .        .         .    0.2   0.3    0.3   0.4     0.4    0.4    0.3
     Earl98         .       .      .       .       .      .       .     0.2      0.3       0.3   0.4   0.4    0.4   0.3     0.2    0.2    0.2
     Georges98      .       .      .       .       .      .       .     0.0      0.0       0.0   0.0   0.0    0.0   0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0
     Irene99        .       .      .       .       .      .      2.8    3.4      3.6       4.0   4.2   4.6    3.7   2.4     1.6    1.8    2.5
     Charley04      .      1.3    2.0     2.1     2.3    2.5     2.5    2.1      1.4       0.9   0.9   1.4    1.5   1.5     1.8    1.8    1.9
     Frances04      .      1.0    1.4     1.6     1.8    2.1     2.3    2.0      1.3       0.8   0.9   1.2    1.1   1.2     1.5    1.6    1.7
     Jeanne04       .      1.1    1.4     1.6     1.8    1.9     2.0    1.5      1.0       0.7   0.7   1.0    1.1   1.1     1.3    1.4    1.4
     Ivan04         .      0.1    0.1     0.2     0.2    0.2     0.2    0.2      0.1       0.1   0.1   0.1    0.1   0.1     0.1    0.1    0.1
     Dennis05      0.1     0.1    0.1     0.1     0.2    0.2     0.1    0.1      0.1       0.1   0.1   0.1    0.1   0.1     0.1    0.1    0.1
     Katrina05     0.5     0.8    0.8     0.8     0.9    1.0     0.9    0.6      0.4       0.3   0.6   0.6    0.6   0.7     0.7    0.7    0.6
     Wilma05       2.6     3.1    3.4     3.8     4.1    4.6     3.4    2.2      1.5       1.8   2.5   2.6    2.6   3.0     3.1    3.1    2.3
52




     Hermine16     0.0     0.0    0.1     0.1     0.1    0.1     0.0     .        .         .     .     .      .     .       .      .      .
     Matthew16     0.6     0.7    0.9     1.0     1.0    0.7     0.1     .        .         .     .     .      .     .       .      .      .
     Irma17        1.7     2.0    2.1     2.3     1.9    0.3      .      .        .         .     .     .      .     .       .      .
     Total         5.0     8.5    10.2   11.3    11.8    10.9   11.7    10.3     8.4       8.1   9.3   10.7   9.9   10.2.   10.5   10.8   10.7
       Notes: all numbers in percentage points. Definition of exposure given in Section 2.2.
                          Table A10: Variation in hurricane event time indicators (transaction probability model)

                                                                              Event Time
     Hurricane      -6     -5      -4     -3      -2      -1      0      1        2        3     4      5      6      7      8      9     10
     Andrew92       .       .      .       .       .      .       .      .        .         .     .     .      .      .     1.4    1.4    1.4
     Opal95         .       .      .       .       .      .       .      .        .         .     .    0.3    0.3    0.3    0.3    0.3    0.3
     Earl98         .       .      .       .       .      .       .      .       0.3       0.3   0.3   0.3    0.3    0.3    0.3    0.3    0.3
     Georges98      .       .      .       .       .      .       .      .       0.0       0.0   0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0
     Irene99        .       .      .       .       .      .       .     3.2      3.2       3.2   3.2   3.2    3.2    3.2    3.2    3.2    3.2
     Charley04      .       .     1.9     1.9     1.9    1.9     1.9    1.9      1.9       1.9   1.9   1.9    1.9    1.9    1.9    1.9    1.9
53




     Frances04      .       .     1.3     1.3     1.3    1.3     1.3    1.3      1.3       1.3   1.3   1.3    1.3    1.3    1.3    1.3    1.3
     Jeanne04       .       .     1.4     1.4     1.4    1.4     1.4    1.4      1.4       1.4   1.4   1.4    1.4    1.4    1.4    1.4    1.4
     Ivan04         .       .     0.1     0.1     0.1    0.1     0.1    0.1      0.1       0.1   0.1   0.1    0.1    0.1    0.1    0.1    0.1
     Dennis05       .      0.1    0.1     0.1     0.1    0.1     0.1    0.1      0.1       0.1   0.1   0.1    0.1    0.1    0.1    0.1    0.1
     Katrina05      .      0.7    0.7     0.7     0.7    0.7     0.7    0.7      0.7       0.7   0.7   0.7    0.7    0.7    0.7    0.7    0.7
     Wilma05        .      3.0    3.0     3.0     3.0    3.0     3.0    3.0      3.0       3.0   3.0   3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0    3.0
     Hermine16     0.1     0.1    0.1     0.1     0.1    0.1     0.1     .        .         .     .     .      .      .      .      .      .
     Matthew16     0.8     0.8    0.8     0.8     0.8    0.8     0.8     .        .         .     .     .      .      .      .      .      .
     Irene17       1.9     1.9    1.9     1.9     1.9    1.9      .      .        .         .     .     .      .      .      .      .      .
     Total         2.7     5.8    9.2     9.2     9.2    9.2     7.3    9.6      9.9       9.9   9.9   10.2   10.2   10.2   11.6   11.6   11.6
       Notes: all numbers in percentage points. Definition of exposure given in Section 2.2.
                         Table A11: Variation in category 3+ hurricane event time indicators (housing price model)

                                                                              Event Time
     Hurricane      -6     -5      -4     -3      -2      -1      0      1        2        3     4     5     6     7     8     9     10
     Andrew92       .       .      .       .       .      .       .      .        .         .     .     .     .    0.3   0.5   0.4   0.4
     Opal95         .       .      .       .       .      .       .      .        .         .    0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0
     Earl98         .       .      .       .       .      .       .     0.0      0.0       0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0
     Georges98      .       .      .       .       .      .       .     0.0      0.0       0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0
     Irene99        .       .      .       .       .      .      0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0
     Charley04      .      0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0
     Frances04      .      0.0    0.1     0.1     0.1    0.1     0.1    0.1      0.0       0.0   0.0   0.1   0.1   0.1   0.1   0.1   0.1
54




     Jeanne04       .      0.1    0.1     0.2     0.3    0.2     0.2    0.2      0.1       0.1   0.1   0.1   0.1   0.1   0.1   0.2   0.1
     Ivan04         .      0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0
     Dennis05      0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0
     Katrina05     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0    0.0      0.0       0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0   0.0
     Wilma05       0.3     0.3    0.4     0.4     0.4    0.4     0.3    0.2      0.2       0.2   0.2   0.3   0.3   0.3   0.3   0.3   0.2
     Hermine16     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     .        .         .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
     Matthew16     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0     0.0     .        .         .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
     Irma17        0.2     0.2    0.2     0.2     0.2    0.0      .      .        .         .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .
     Total         0.5     0.6    0.8     0.9     0.9    0.8     0.7    0.5      0.3       0.3   0.4   0.4   0.4   0.8   1.0   1.0   0.9
       Notes: all numbers in percentage points. Definition of exposure given in Section 2.2.
Table A12: The Impacts of Hurricanes on Prices and Transaction Probability (Event Study)

                                   (1)                    (2)                       (3)
                          Price ­ Full Sample    Price ­ Repeat Sales   Probability ­ Full Sample
 Event Year -6                  -0.0162                 -0.0208                 -0.00399
                               (0.0240)                (0.0447)                (0.00261)
 Event Year -5                 -0.00710                 -0.0151                 -0.00210
                               (0.0300)                (0.0546)                (0.00341)
 Event Year -4                  -0.0171                 -0.0178                0.000104
                               (0.0148)                (0.0471)                (0.00179)
 Event Year -3                  -0.0741                 -0.0252                  0.00159
                               (0.0605)                (0.0394)                (0.00177)
 Event Year -2                  -0.0161                 -0.0263                0.000274
                               (0.0227)                (0.0328)                (0.00166)
 Event Year 0                 0.0508                    0.0531                  -0.00683
                               (0.0121)                (0.0416)                (0.00414)
 Event Year 1                  0.102                   0.128                    -0.00257
                               (0.0228)                (0.0255)                (0.00162)
 Event Year 2                    0.0200               0.0840                    -0.00229
                               (0.0268)                (0.0278)                (0.00289)
 Event Year 3                  0.00897                  0.0257                 -0.00100
                              (0.00988)                (0.0317)                (0.00227)
 Event Year 4                  -0.00664                 0.0114                 0.000927
                               (0.0200)                (0.0301)                (0.00215)
 Event Year 5                  0.00421                  0.0380                  0.00154
                               (0.0208)                (0.0314)                (0.00125)
 Event Year 6                  -0.00119                0.0641                  0.00539
                               (0.0231)                (0.0352)                (0.00233)
 Event Year 7                  0.00873                0.0540                    0.00162
                               (0.0179)                (0.0235)                (0.00171)
 Event Year 8                   0.0367                0.0600                    0.00199
                               (0.0290)                (0.0136)                (0.00180)
 Event Year 9                   -0.0254               0.0502                   0.00298
                               (0.0320)                (0.0150)                (0.00128)
 Event Year 10                 0.00492                0.0459                   0.00366
                               (0.0109)                (0.0190)                (0.00191)
 County-Year-Type FEs             Yes                    Yes                      Yes
 Month-Type FEs                   Yes                    Yes                      Yes
 Tract FEs                        Yes
 Parcel FEs                                              Yes                       Yes
 Hedonic Variables               Yes                     Yes                       Yes
 N                            7,216,109               1,338,384                49,302,345
 R2                             0.571                   0.778                    0.0856
   Notes: estimates from equations (1)-(3) are reported in columns (1)-(3), respectively. The unit
   of analysis is a transaction in columns (1)-(2), and a parcel-year in column (3). The hedonic
   variables include bins of number of stories and number of bathrooms, lot size, house age, and
   effective age. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the county level.  p < 0.1, 
   p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
                                                55
B     Determining Hurricane Exposure

B.1    Imputing Maximal Reach Radius of 96 Knots Wind Speed

In this section, we describe how we calculate the maximal reach radius associated with a
wind speed of 96 nautical miles per hour (kn). For each hurricane track point, we observe
the radii associated with a wind speed of 34, 50, and 64 kn. We estimate the relationship
between the maximal reach radii and wind speed using the following model:

                 log (M axradiussht ) = ht + 1 Speed + 2 Speed2 + sht                      (5)

where ht are hurricane-track-point fixed effects and Speed (s) takes one of the three speed
values available. Note that instead of specifying the minimum pressure and maximum wind
speed, we choose to employ a set of fixed effects which absorb their variations. The relation-
ship between a wind speed threshold and its associated maximal radius is very well captured
by this model as suggested by its estimation's R2 of 0.93 (0.90 within track-point fixed ef-
fects). The estimated function is negative and concave, suggesting the radius decreases at an
increasing rate as wind speed increases. Full results are reported in Table B1.

                 Table B1: Wind Speed and Maximal Reach Radius Model

                                                      log(Maxradius)
            Speed                                        -0.0224
                                                           (0.004)

            Speed2                                       -0.0002
                                                          (0.00004)
            Hurricane-track-point FEs                       Yes
            N                                              1188
            R2                                             0.93
            Within-R2                                      0.90
              Notes: Standard errors in parentheses (clustered at the hurricane-track-
              point level).  p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01


    We use the estimates (including the track-point fixed effect) to predict the maximum radii
for 96 kn wind speeds at track points where the maximum sustained wind speed is actually
above 96 kn. This procedure raises the typical concerns regarding out-of-sample predictions
since 96 kn is not within the support of wind speeds used in the estimation. To address this
concern, we check the validity of our predictions by comparing them to the observed radius
of the maximum speed, which is provided in the Extended Best Track dataset. In particular,
because the radius is strictly decreasing in wind speed, our imputed radius should always
be greater than (or equal to) the radius associated with a 96 kn and above maximum speed
in the cases when such speeds are observed. Our prediction satisfies this condition for over


                                              56
                                                                   P3


                                   H2


                                                           I2

                                                  I1
                                                P2
                      H3
                                                                                H1

                                                 r(I1 )         d(H1 , I1 )

                                                          I1




                                                                      P1

                              Figure B1: Hurricane Track Interpolation


90% of imputations and is within rounding error47 for 10 of the 13 extrapolations for which
it fails. In these 13 cases, we replace the model's predicted maximal radius for 96 kn speeds
with the wider observed radius of the maximum speed reached.


B.2    Hurricane Track Interpolation and Exposure Calculation

In this section, we describe the procedure used to assign the exposure status of a home to
a hurricane, with the geometric relationships illustrated in Figure B1. Suppose we want to
determine the exposure status of a home H1 to a hurricane, whose track is recorded by three
observations, P1 , P2 , and P3 . At each track point, we observe the maximal reach radius r(·)
associated with 64 kn wind speed and the maximum wind speed v (·) at the center.
   We take the following steps to calculate exposure:
   1. We interpolate linearly between neighboring track points (P1  P2 , P2  P3 ), and
      calculate the distance from the home H1 to each linear segment. For instance, the
      distance between H1 and P1 ­P2 is d(H1 , I1 ), or the distance between H1 and its pro-
      jection point I1 .
  47 All   radii measurements in the dataset are rounded to the nearest 5 kn.

                                                   57
   2. We calculate key variables for each projection point by interpolating between the ob-
      served track points. These variables are the 64 kn wind speed radius (denoted r(·))
      and the center wind speed (denoted v (·)). We assume these values change linearly
      from one observation to another along the track segment. For example, the 64 kn wind
      speed radius for I1 is calculated using the observed 64 kn radii of P1 and P2 as follows:

                                           d(I1 , P2 )          d(I1 , P1 )
                              r(I1 ) =                 r(P1 ) +             r(P2 ).
                                           d(P1 , P2 )          d(P1 , P2 )

      Similarly, v (I1 ) is calculated using v (P1 ) and v (P2 ):

                                           d(I1 , P2 )           d(I1 , P1 )
                               v (I1 ) =               v (P1 ) +             v (P2 )
                                           d(P1 , P2 )           d(P1 , P2 )

   3. We also calculate the distance of the home to each track point: d(H1 , P1 ), d(H1 , P2 ),
      and d(H1 , P3 ). We thus have a collection of points representing the potential exposure
      set SH1 = {P1 , I1 , P2 , I1 , P3 } with corresponding distances to H1 , 64 kn wind speed
      radii, and center wind speeds.
   4. For each point in SH1 , we check two conditions: (1) whether the center wind speed is
      above 64 kn (e.g. v (I1  64)); (2) whether H1 is within the 64 kn wind speed radius
      (e.g. d(H1 , I1 ) < r(I1 )). If both are satisfied for any point in SH1 , H1 is considered
      to be exposed to the hurricane.48
    Our approach takes care of two other general cases where the path of a hurricane does
not curve around a home the way it does with H1 : the potential exposure set of H2 consists
of {P1 , P2 , I2 , P3 }, while that of H3 consists of {P1 , P2 , P3 }. In practice, a hurricane track
is observed in many more segments. We pre-select the four segments closest to each home
Hi and determine exposure by checking the above conditions for each point in the full set
SHi generated by these segments.




  48 Generally,
              the interpolated radius is either zero or very close to zero at any point where the center
wind speed does not reach 64 kn, in which case exposure is not triggered as the first condition is not
satisfied.

                                                     58
C      Zillow-HMDA Matching Procedure
We use the following procedure to match the HMDA data to transactions:
    1. We first select the subset of HMDA loan applications that are (1) successful and (2)
       whose purpose is a home purchase.
    2. We create all possible pairs of observations from Zillow and HMDA with the same
       year, census tract, and loan amount (in 1000s) using the "joinby" command in Stata.
       A small percentage of lenders make multiple loans of the same amount in a single
       census tract every year. If there also exist multiple Zillow records with these same
       characteristics, we drop all such matches because we cannot infer the exact mapping
       between the multiple observations on the two sides.
    3. Lender names may be recorded differently across and even within Zillow and HMDA.
       Extensive manual inspection revealed general patterns of mismatch, and we apply cor-
       responding corrections to both datasets. For example, we replace acronyms such as
       "FCU" and "NB" with their full forms ("Federal Credit Union" and "National Bank").
    4. We calculate the Jaccard similarity index for every pair of HMDA-Zillow observations
       using the "matchit" command in Stata. This index indicates the extent of the overlap
       between the strings containing the lenders' names from both datasets.
    5. We keep all pairs with a Jaccard similarity index above an acceptable threshold, except
       for those joining a single HMDA record to multiple Zillow transactions each with an
       index above this threshold. The threshold is chosen so that we observe it to produce
       the correct pairing in large random subsamples chosen from every year in our data.




                                              59
