                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HETEROGENEOUS EFFECTS OF STATE ENTERPRISE ZONE PROGRAMS IN
                  THE SHORTER RUN AND LONGER RUN

                                         David Neumark
                                         Timothy Young

                                       Working Paper 27545
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27545


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




We are grateful to the Laura and John Arnold Foundation for support for this research, through
grants to the Economic Self-Sufficiency Policy Research Institute (ESSPRI) at UCI. Any
opinions or conclusions expressed are the authors' alone and do not necessarily reflect those of
the Laura and John Arnold Foundation. We are grateful to Luis Munguia Corella for outstanding
assistance with the research, and to John Ham, Charles Swenson, Aye Imrohorolu, and Heonjae
Song for providing data and code from their original paper (Ham et al., 2011). We are also
grateful to anonymous reviewers for very helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by David Neumark and Timothy Young. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Heterogeneous Effects of State Enterprise Zone Programs in the Shorter Run and Longer Run
David Neumark and Timothy Young
NBER Working Paper No. 27545
July 2020
JEL No. H25,J23

                                           ABSTRACT

We take up two questions that have not been explored in research on enterprise zones. First, does
a considerably longer-run perspective on the effects of state enterprise zones lead to different
answers?And second, are there heterogeneous effects of enterprise zones that depend on the set of
incentives these programs offer, which can vary widely? Our results indicate that whether we
look at state enterprise zone programs through a longer-term lens, or through the lens of program
heterogeneity, we generally do not find any consistent indication of beneficial effects of state
enterprise zone programs, and if anything the longer-run effects are negative. The lack of positive
effects is consistent with most of the prior evidence that focuses on effects that are short-term and
homogeneous.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Timothy Young
Analysis G roup
youngt3@uci.edu
Introduction

         The body of evidence on place-based policies, particularly enterprise zones, provides

little reason to think these policies are effective. As reviewed recently in Neumark and Simpson

(2015), most research on enterprise zone programs fails to find strong evidence that they

contribute to job growth or reduce poverty.

         There are some exceptions. Busso et al. (2013) find strong evidence that some federal

enterprise zones (Empowerment Zones) generated strong job growth, although even then,

Reynolds and Rohlin (2015) report evidence suggesting that these zones may have this effect

through displacing the most-disadvantaged original residents of these zones to other areas.

         Also in contrast to most of the literature, Ham et al. (2011) find that both state and federal

enterprise zones established in the 1990s significantly improved labor market outcomes, with

sharp reductions in poverty from state enterprise zones, and sharp reductions in unemployment

and poverty, and sharp increases in income measures, from federal enterprise zones

(Empowerment Zones as well as Enterprise Communities). 1

         In this paper, we take up two questions that have not been explored in research on

enterprise zones. First, does a considerably longer-run perspective on the effects of state

enterprise zones lead to different answers? It is possible that a longer-run perspective will

provide more evidence of beneficial effects than the shorter-run evidence, especially if enterprise

zones help "jump start" economic activity in targeted areas, creating some self-sustaining gains.

For example, one rationale for enterprise zones specifically, and place-based policies more

generally, is that they may generate benefits from agglomeration externalities intended to lead to


1
 In another paper (Neumark and Young, 2019), we have cast serious doubt on the magnitudes of the effects they
estimate, in part because of data errors, and in part because of estimation strategies ­ in particular, the control tracts
used. We do not rehash that material here but suffice it to say that we find very little evidence of positive effects of
either state or federal enterprise zones. That paper also discusses the differences between Empowerment Zones and
Enterprise Communities; these federal programs are not the focus of the present paper.


                                                            1
persistent gains in economic activity from a shorter-term policy intervention (see Neumark and

Simpson, 2015; and Kline and Moretti, 2014). On the other hand, it is possible that any

beneficial effects of enterprise zones, if they exist, would be muted in the longer run. Over time,

enterprise zone incentives could be capitalized into immobile production factors, perhaps

especially land (e.g., Burnes, 2012; Landers, 2006), diminishing the cost advantage of the zones

for businesses. Zones may also become less effective over time as additional zones are created. 2

Of course, in this latter case the short-run evidence would provide the greatest hope of

uncovering beneficial effects of enterprise zones ­ which it generally does not.

         Most research on the effects of enterprise zones takes a relatively short-run perspective.

For example, Busso et al. (2013) and Reynolds and Rohlin (2015) estimate the impacts of federal

enterprise zones created in the mid-1990s on changes in Census tracts over the 1990s (for their

main analysis). Ham et al. (2011) pursue the same strategy, looking at both federal and state

enterprise zones. Elvery (2009) uses a propensity score method ­ rather than difference-in-

difference methods ­ to measure the impact of enterprise zones created in California and Florida

between 1986 and 1990 on outcomes in 1990 data. Billings (2009) considers a mix of shorter-run

and longer-run effects by using establishment-level data averaged between 1990 and 2000 to

study zones created in the late 1980s.

         There are some exceptions that take a longer-run approach. Neumark and Kolko (2010)

compare short-run and longer-run effects of California's enterprise zone program; however,

these different effects are captured only as shifts in employment levels vs. growth rates, which is

quite restrictive. Freedman (2013) studies effects of Texas enterprise zones over a window that




2
  Estimated if not actual effects could also diminish over time because of greater measurement error (contamination)
from changes in enterprise zone boundaries, variation in incentives, etc. We have tried as best we can to account for
these, and we did not find evidence of changes in incentives for the period we studied.


                                                          2
can be up to six years after an enterprise zone is established, but the study simply focuses on the

annual employment growth instead of breaking out longer-term effects. There are also a few

earlier studies of employment effects with somewhat longer-run perspectives, using research

designs that are less compelling (see Neumark and Simpson, 2015). Boarnet and Bogart (1996)

on enterprise zones in New Jersey, Papke (1994) in Indiana, and O'Keefe (2004) in California

estimated the effects of enterprise zones on employment growth up to six years after their

creation; these studies present conflicting evidence. Our analysis takes a considerably longer-run

perspective, focuses on state enterprise zones (and is done both with and without incorporating

program heterogeneity).

       The second question we consider is whether there are heterogeneous effects of enterprise

zones that depend on the set of incentives these programs offer, which can vary widely. Evidence

on this question could, in principle, help policymakers design more effective enterprise zone

programs. Although the existing research on enterprise zones is generally discouraging, there is a

strong theoretical expectation that well-designed hiring credits could boost job creation.

Estimating the effects of different features of state enterprise zone programs could identify some

features of these programs that are more effective in job creation or other goals such as poverty

reduction.

       Moreover, there is a smattering of evidence pointing to some heterogeneity in the job

creation impacts of enterprise zones, suggesting that certain program designs and/or improved

targeting could produce positive impacts. For example, Neumark and Simpson (2015) suggest

that the initial federal Empowerment Zones studied by Busso et al. (2013) may have been more

effective at creating jobs than subsequent versions of the policy (or other types of enterprise

zones) because the initial Empowerment Zones included large block grants, which may have

been spent on social services or other investments that boosted employment. In addition, Kolko


                                                 3
and Neumark (2010) incorporated survey data from enterprise zone administrators into an

analysis of the effects of California's state enterprise zones and found that a subset of efforts

(e.g., marketing zone incentives) was associated with job gains. Finally, although one step

removed from enterprise zones, recent work on general statewide hiring credits indicates that

such credits are much more likely to lead to job creation when governments can "claw back" the

credits if jobs are not created (Neumark and Grijalva, 2017).

       Given our emphasis on enterprise zone program heterogeneity, in this paper we focus on

state enterprise zone programs, which differ along many dimensions. In doing so, we build on

the work by Ham et al. (2011), who estimated the effects of enterprise zones in 13 states ­ albeit,

in contrast to our paper, without considering heterogeneity across state enterprise zone programs.

       We estimate effects on outcomes related to wages and employment. The predicted

positive effects on wages and employment from place-based policies like enterprise zones stem

from a number of sources, including agglomeration, mitigating spatial mismatch, network effects

on hiring (especially when local hiring is incentivized), and the direct impact of reductions in

labor costs and other costs from tax credits or incentives. In particular, we analyze effects on the

following five outcomes: the unemployment rate; the poverty rate (at the person level); the

fraction of households with wage and salary income; average wage and salary income (measured

at the household level, in $2000 dollars, and including zeros); and the level of employment.

These outcomes, and the particular ways we define them, follow Ham et al. (2011). More

broadly, though, they parallel much of the enterprise zone literature, which assesses enterprise

zones based on their promised effects on employment and wages, which would in turn be

predicted to positively impact the other outcomes we study. The exception is that some studies




                                                  4
focus instead (or as well) on establishment counts or births and deaths. These are not available in

the data we use in this paper. 3

Data

        There are two significant data challenges in this research. The first is to code the

heterogeneity in state enterprise zone policies, and the second is to map, over a longer period, the

Census tracts treated and not treated by state enterprise zone programs. We discuss these in turn.

State enterprise zone policy heterogeneity

        There is significant heterogeneity in enterprise zone benefits across states. We use

multiple data sources to classify the heterogeneity of state enterprise zone benefits for the 13

states we examine in this paper. Our primary source of information on enterprise zone benefits

comes from reading each state's original legislative documents relating to the enactment and

amendment of enterprise zone programs and benefits. State bills and statutes relating to

enterprise zones were accessed through HeinOnline and LexisNexis. The potential features by

which state enterprise zone programs could be classified are too numerous and idiosyncratic to

be directly usable in an empirical analysis. Thus, the information in these documents was used to

classify all enterprise zone benefits for all 13 states into four broad categories. We summarize the

details of each state's enterprise zone benefits in Appendix A. The four categories of benefits we

use in our analysis are listed in Panels 1-4 of Appendix Table A1; we discuss these categories

below. We also classify states by whether each state's enterprise zone legislation requires

employees to be zone residents in order for a business to be eligible for enterprise zone




3
 See Table 18.2 in Neumark and Simpson (2015) for an exhaustive summary of the more-recent research on
enterprise zones, and other overviews covering earlier research in Elvery (2009), Ham et al. (2011), and Wilder and
Rubin (1996).


                                                         5
incentives (Panel 5 of Appendix Table A1), and whether these "live-in" requirements are specific

to hiring credits (Appendix Table A2).

         Our classification process is exhaustive in that every benefit offered by each of the 13

states between 1990-1999 is classified as belonging to one of the broad categories we use. To

verify that the benefits described in the letter of the law match the incentives provided and

marketed in practice to businesses (and in some cases employees), each state's list of benefits

was cross-referenced with peer-reviewed journal articles, 4 state tax forms, 5 state agency reports, 6

and other reports 7 about enterprise zones. See Online Appendix B for full details on the

enterprise zone benefits provided by each of the 13 states. 8

         The four broad categories into which we classify enterprise zone benefits are as follows:

                  ·        Financing

                  ·        Tax credits for investments

                  ·        Miscellaneous

                  ·        Hiring incentives

         Financing options are provided by six states and range from interest free loans (Florida)

to providing tax deductions for contributions to a corporation designated for providing loans to

businesses operating in enterprise zones. The provision of financing options may facilitate new



4
  An early version of Ham et al. (2011), written by Swenson (2008), provides an overview of various state enterprise
zone programs in an appendix.
5
  Some examples include: California tax form 3805z is used by businesses claiming enterprise zone tax incentives
and is available from 1994-2015; Colorado Department of Revenue provides form "FYI Income 22" to businesses
claiming enterprise zone tax incentives; and Massachusetts provides "Schedule EOA" 1099 form to businesses
claiming economic opportunity area credits.
6
  For example, Hawaii's Department of Business produced a report entitled "Hawaii's Enterprise Zones Partnership
Program" in 2007.
7
  For example, Dowall (1996).
8
  For reasons explained below, Illinois gets dropped from our analysis. We nonetheless retain it in the description of
policy variation, in case a reader wants to examine the HSIS state-specific estimates in light of this program
variation. (Illinois remains in their data because they do not use the Neighborhood Change Database; see Neumark
and Young, 2019).


                                                          6
firm entry into enterprise zones on the extensive margin while enabling expansion of existing

firms on the intensive margin.

        All state enterprise zone programs provide tax credits for investments ­ the second

category. The definition of qualified investments varies across states from very vague (Nebraska)

to rather specific (Ohio's environmental remediation tax credit). Generally, states provide

incentives for investments in property, such as real estate, construction materials, and any other

expansion or rehabilitation.

        We also capture a miscellaneous category of enterprise zone benefits that do not fit easily

into a broad category. This category includes benefits provided optionally by local

municipalities, day care reimbursements, loss limitations, and the sale or lease of public property

for business use. Among these, our analysis focuses on the benefits that come in the way of local

property tax incentives. 9

        Finally, our fourth category is hiring credits or hiring incentives, which are common to

enterprise zones and attract the most attention in the literature. Hiring incentives generally reduce

the wage bill for existing employees through tax credits, provide a flat credit for newly-hired

employees, or provide exemptions for payroll and unemployment insurance taxes. These

incentives are designed to encourage firms operating in enterprise zones to expand hiring or to

hire new employees. Therefore, on the extensive margin, hiring incentives are likely to increase

employment and to decrease unemployment.

        As Online Appendix B shows, our extensive research on enterprise zone legislation

captures the intensity of the program benefits. However, we do not incorporate information on

the intensity of incentives into our main analysis, because this is very hard to do in a systematic,


9
 As documented below, many of the others seem quite minor, and nearly all states offer some benefit we otherwise
grouped in this miscellaneous category.


                                                       7
consistent, and tractable manner. For example, looking at the first two states, the hiring credit

information for California includes the magnitude of the hiring credit, and the financing

incentive for Colorado captures the tax parameters. However, such information is not always

provided, and even when it is, not in a way that makes things directly comparable. (As examples,

in Rhode Island the credit varies with whether the hire is a zone resident, and in Hawaii with the

percent of employees who are low income.) There is thus simply no straightforward way to

assign intensity measures to the credits. Our hope, nonetheless, is that other researchers might

find ways to make use of the information captured in Appendix B to learn more about the effects

of different enterprise zone features, including the strength of incentives. 10

Construction of longer-run enterprise zone dataset

           The second data challenge for this project was to create a long-term classification of

Census tracts (our unit of observation) by enterprise zone status. Our starting point is the tracts

identified as being initially designated as state enterprise zones tracts in the 1990s, using the data

from Ham et al. (2011), which they provided. 11

           Some tracts that Ham et al. (2011) use as controls for their 1980-2000 analysis (also

excluding federally designated tracts in the 1990s) are later designated as state or federal

enterprise zones between 2000-2010. Including these tracts as controls in our longer-run analysis

would attenuate our estimates. To identify the 2000 tracts that became state enterprise zones

between 2000-2010, we did extensive work with agencies in each of the 13 states to generate

geocoded maps of enterprise zone coverage, as best we could. We were able to identify these




10
     One such attempt in relation to hiring credits is described below.
11
     Their data can be downloaded from https://sites.google.com/usc.edu/ayse-imrohoroglu/programs?authuser=0.


                                                         8
more recent state enterprise zone changes for all of Ham et al. (2011)'s 13 states except for

Massachusetts and Wisconsin. We detail our efforts in Online Appendix C. 12

         For federal enterprise zones, Ham et al. (2011) identify the tracts designated as federal

enterprise zones in the mid-1990s. However, two additional waves of federal enterprise zones

occurred in 1999 and 2001 that are not identified in their data. We identify all tracts enacted as

federal enterprise zones in any of the three waves, which extend through 2001, using data from

Busso et al. (2013).

         In our work with state-level agencies to identify the tracts designated as state enterprise

zones in 2000-2010, we identified ­ for three states ­ information on tracts designated in the

prior decade (the 1990s). For these three states, we identified some tract designations that

conflicted with the designations in the 1990s identified in the Ham et al. data. Moreover, Ham et

al. provide no documentation of the underlying source material for their tract designations, such

as original maps or underlying sources that they used to determine treatment status. 13 Thus, for

the three states where we have more reliable information ­ California, Illinois, and Ohio ­ we

use the designations we obtained from the state-level agencies, rather than the Ham et al.

coding. 14,15 We impose the same sample restrictions as Ham et al. (2011) by dropping partially




12
   Our goal was to avoid contaminated controls in the form of tracts designated as enterprise zones in the 2000s.
Some tracts lost their designation in the 2000s, although it is hard to pin down the timing, as explained in Online
Appendix C. However, given that we are estimating the longer-run effects of zones established in the 1990s, the
ending of a tract's designation as an enterprise zone in the 2000s is not problematic, although clearly it could be of
interest to distinguish between tracts designated in the 1990s that remained enterprise zones in the 2000s, and those
that no longer did.
13
   We requested this information from the authors, and they said they did not have it and hence could not provide it.
(They only offered the name of a consultant we could pay to, apparently, recover the zone maps they used. But even
then it was not clear the source material was available.)
14
   We attempted to gather this information from all of the states in our NCDB sample, but historical data were no
longer available for other states.
15
   This made the biggest difference for Ohio, where we found hundreds of additional tracts designated as enterprise
zones. For California there were an additional 140 tracts. Still, the results were qualitatively similar using HSIS's
coding (results available upon request), which would not be surprising if ­ as most of our evidence suggests ­ the
true effects of enterprise zones are close to zero.


                                                          9
treated tracts where fewer than 50% of the tract's area is covered by an enterprise zone, dropping

tracts designated as first round federal enterprise zones, and dropping any tracts enacted as

enterprise zones during the 1980s. 16

Data on outcomes by tract

         We use the Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB) to measure outcomes in treated and

control tracts, for the period 1980-2010. Census tract geography changes over time, but the

NCDB provides consistent tract definitions over time. 17 We make year 2000 tracts our preferred

geography because this directly maps into the enterprise zone geography used in Ham et al.

(2011). The 1980-2000 NCDB is available in terms of 2000 tracts, but the 2010 NCDB, which

we need to study longer-term effects of enterprise zones established in the 1990s, is only

available in 2010 tract geography. We utilize a program called "Backwards LTDB," provided

through the Longitudinal Tract Data Base, to map the 2010 NCDB data into 2000 tracts. 18

         We make several sample restrictions to the NCDB data. First, we drop tracts with zero

population counts in 1980. This occurs, according to our best understanding, because of redrawn

tract boundaries in terms of 2000 geography. It turns out that Illinois had relatively few tracts

designated as enterprise zones, and all of them are dropped due to this restriction; thus, Illinois is

not included in our empirical analysis. Second, we only keep data for the 13 states in Ham et al.

(2011)'s analysis. Third, we remove one tract that appears in the 1980-2000 NCDB but does not


16
   For some states where we determine enterprise zone designation in the 2000s or, in the case of the three states for
which we determine enterprise zone designation in the 1990s, we have to draw enterprise zone boundaries in
ArcGIS by referencing physical maps. Because this is done by hand, there are some cases where we may
unintentionally overlap an enterprise zone boundary with the boundary of a tract that does not have an enterprise
zone. Therefore, we code tracts with less than 1% of overlap with an enterprise zone as controls to account for this
error.
17
   The perception of researchers that the NCDB matches tracts well is reflected in the extensive ­ indeed, nearly
exclusive ­ use of the NCDB data in research that matches tracts over time to study enterprise zones, other local
programs, and different questions entirely. See, e.g., Oakley and Tsao (2006, 2007) and Meltzer (2012) on enterprise
zones, and Cameron and McConnaha (2006), Card et al. (2008), Easterly (2009), and Logan and Zhang (2010) on a
range of other topics.
18
   See https://s4.ad.brown.edu/projects/diversity/researcher/LTDB2.htm.


                                                         10
appear in the 2010 NCDB after processing by the Backwards LTDB program. Fourth, we drop

tracts that have missing values for any of the five outcomes in any year of the NCDB. We do this

to ensure that our estimation is always done for the same sample, regardless of the outcome.

       In all cases, we study effects on the five outcomes that Ham et al. study: the

unemployment rate; the poverty rate; the fraction of households with wage and salary income;

average wage and salary income; and the level of employment.

Analysis samples

       In most cases, we report results for three different samples. We first use all the possible

data. We then drop the data from Massachusetts and Wisconsin. We do this because, as

explained above, we were unable to obtain information on changes in the enterprise zone

designation of tracts in these states during the 2000s. Hence, we are unsure of whether some

tracts in these states became designated as enterprise zones. Finally, we also limit the set of

control tracts, excluding those that were later designated as state enterprise zones in the 2000s (or

as federal zones in 1999-2001). This is our cleanest estimation because it avoids contaminated

controls, so we emphasize results for this sample, but we also show some results for the other

samples. Table 1 shows the numbers of control and treated tracts by state, as well as information

on the tracts that are contaminated controls, and those on which we do not have information for

the 2000s (i.e., Massachusetts and Wisconsin).

Methods and Results

       Our analysis proceeds in a number of steps, and we explain these sequentially, after first

describing the methods we use.

Empirical approach

       Our estimation framework, at its core, follows the broad strategy used by Ham et al.

(2011), albeit with important differences that ­ the evidence indicates ­ give more reliable


                                                 11
results. We begin with a shorter-run analysis that parallels their analysis, and then turn to our

longer-run analyses, and the analysis of program heterogeneity in both the shorter- and longer

run. But the key identification strategy can be explained in the context of our initial, shorter-run

analysis.

         Ham et al. study zones created between 1990 and 2000. They compute the difference in

outcomes between 1990 and 2000 for tracts where zones were created, which we denote Ycs1T,

where Y is the dependent variable of interest, the c subscript denotes Census tracts, the s

subscript denotes states, the 1 subscript denotes that the difference is for the post-treatment

period, and the T superscript denotes that this difference is computed for treated tracts. They

subtract from this the pre-treatment difference ­ between 1980 and 1990 ­ for the same tracts,

Ycs0T.

         Two of the sets of control tracts that Ham et al. use are the nearest tract to each treated

tracts, and the average over all contiguous tracts. 19 In either case, there is a control "tract"

matched to each treated tract ­ a single tract in the case of the nearest tract controls, and an

average tract in the case of the contiguous tract controls (averaging across the set of contiguous

tracts); the nearest or contiguous tracts are in the same state as the treated tracts. In either

approach, they construct a difference-in-difference for the control tract matched to each treated

tract c, Ycs1C - Ycs0C. To estimate a common effect of state enterprise zones using these two

types of controls, they form the triple-difference (DDD) as the difference between the two

double-differences, and estimate a simple regression of this DDD on an intercept (using random

county effects), as in:



19
  They also implement an estimator using all potential control tracts in the state that are also not designated as
federal zones, in a somewhat different framework. However, this is less comparable to our propensity score strategy
so we do not discuss it further. And it has the same problems as the other controls Ham et al. use (Neumark and
Young, 2019).


                                                        12
         {Ycs1T - Ycs0T} - {Ycs1C - Ycs0C} =  + cs .                                                            (1)

         This DDD estimator identifies the effect of enterprise zone designation from the change

in the dependent variable in treated tracts from 1990 to 2000 minus the change from 1980 to

1990, relative to the same difference-in-difference in control tracts.

         However, as highlighted in Neumark and Young (2019), simply using nearby or

contiguous tracts as controls does nothing to ensure that there are common pre-trends in the

treated and control tracts. 20 And, indeed, the 1980 to 1990 trends are often strongly different in

the treated and control tracts; there is strong statistical evidence against the equality of these

trends from 1980 to 1990 for both state and federal enterprise zones, and ­ even more strikingly

­ the trends are sometimes in opposite directions. The analysis is also applied to what might be

considered more natural controls ­ tracts that applied for enterprise zone status but were rejected.

This type of analysis can be used in the context of federal Empowerment Zones and Enterprise

Communities. While the deviations in prior trends were not as marked using this approach, the

prior trends were sometimes significantly different.

         To better match the pre-treatment trends in outcomes between the treated and control

tracts, we employ a data-driven approach to select control tracts, using propensity score

methods. 21 Using this approach, we match treatment and control tracts so as to minimize the

differences in pre-treatment outcomes in terms of levels and changes for the outcomes we

study. 22 For each program, we match a single control tract to each treated tract by matching on


20
   Another potential problem with using nearby or contiguous control tracts is that there may be negative spillovers
that, if present, create a bias towards finding positive effects in treated tracts. Hanson and Rohlin (2013) find
evidence of this effect, and hence bias, in estimating the effects of federal Empowerment Zones on employment and
on establishment counts.
21
   An alternative approach to estimating the effects of enterprise zones, applicable to some settings, is to exploit
discontinuities in area characteristics (such as tract poverty rates) that make areas eligible or ineligible (e.g.,
Billings, 2009; Freedman, 2012, 2013).
22
   We do not restrict potential control tracts to be in the same state as the treated tract, as tracts in other states can
potentially provide better controls. This is not that unusual in evaluating the effects of local policies. For example, in
a recent paper, Allegretto et al. (2018) estimate the effects of city minimum wages by matching on control counties


                                                           13
the 1980 and 1990 levels for all five outcomes (i.e., we match on a total of 10 covariates);

matching on levels in both years effectively matches on changes as well. 23 Our estimator is based

on a comparison of the double-difference (the 1990 to 2000 change minus the 1980 to 1990

change) between each treated tract and its matched control tract, and hence we estimate the

average treatment effect on the treated (ATT). 24,25

         A standard procedure to verify the effectiveness of the propensity score matching

procedure is to compare pre-treatment means between treated tracts and controls selected using

the matching, with the most relevant means in our case being pre-treatment changes in the

outcomes. In Neumark and Young (2019), we show that the propensity score matching

procedure does a good job of matching 1980 to 1990 changes. For example, the prior change in

the unemployment rate from 1980 to 1990 in enterprise zone tracts is 1.4 percentage points,

compared with about 1.3 percentage points in the matched controls, resulting in a small and

insignificant difference of -0.146. For the samples used in the current paper (described below),




in other states. The rationale for this approach is that other urban areas in other states may provide better
counterfactuals because their experiences and conditions are similar, and the differences between treatment and
control tracts within a state could more likely reflect the endogenous selection of treatment tracts. That said,
matching approaches are inherently backward-looking, and one potential criticism of using controls from other
states is that effects could be confounded by other state policies adopted post-treatment. We are not aware of other
significant policies impacting disadvantaged urban areas that changed in our sample period, and indeed other ­ non-
policy ­ shocks may be more common to these areas across states. In addition, when we attempted to find controls
only within states, we often failed to find good matches.
23
   Matching on the 1980 to 1990 change and the level for one year would yield identical results. We reasoned that
matching on levels, and not only changes, would provide better controls than just matching on changes. This is the
procedure used in Neumark and Young (2019).
24
   Propensity score matching was performed using "teffects psmatch" command in Stata 13. Controls used for
matching were the 1980 levels and 1990 levels for the unemployment rate, poverty rate, average wage and salary
income, fraction with wage and salary income, and count of employed persons (i.e., our outcomes). The propensity
score is estimated using a probit model, and we selected the option "atet" to estimate the average treatment effect on
the treated.
25
   Interestingly, there is virtually no attention to pre-trends in the U.S. enterprise zone literature. O'Keefe (2004),
Greenbaum and Engberg (2004), Elvery (2009), and Busso et al. (2013) all match on levels at a single point in time
(as do, e.g., Gobillon et al. (2012) in research on French enterprise zones). We have only found one study, by
Bondonio and Engberg (2000), that studies effects of enterprise zones on employment growth matching on
employment growth in prior periods, paralleling what we do here. (They find a negative but insignificant effect of
past growth on zone designation.)


                                                          14
for each of our five outcomes, we never reject the equality of pre-treatment parallel trends using

propensity score matched controls, even at the 10% level (see Online Appendix Table D1).

        Our strategy for estimating longer-run effects of state enterprise zones ­ while still

treating these programs as homogeneous ­ is a simple extension of our shorter-run analysis. In

particular, we maintain exactly the same matched control tracts, since these are based on 1980 to

1990 changes, but redefine our outcome variable as the 1990 to 2010 (instead of to 2000)

changes in outcomes.

        For both the shorter-run and longer-run analyses, we estimate models imposing

homogeneous effects across states. We then also estimate models with separate effects by state.

These are independently interesting, but also a crucial input into our analysis of the effects of

different enterprise zone benefits. For our analysis of program heterogeneity, we use a two-step

estimation strategy. We take the state-specific estimates of the effects of enterprise zones, for

both shorter-run and longer-run effects (first step), and then regress these estimates on dummy

variables for the different enterprise zone benefit categories (second step). In the second step of

the estimation, we weight by the number of treated tracts in that state. In a regression framework,

one could instead estimate a single model with interactions between the enterprise zone dummy

variable and dummy variables for enterprise zone benefit categories. However, this cannot be

extended in a straightforward manner to the propensity score framework. We did, though,

estimate this type of regression model using only the controls selected by the propensity score

matching. This yields the same estimates but different (and incorrect) standard errors, because

this estimation does not take into account the uncertainty associated with propensity scores being

estimated instead of known. 26


26
 See the discussion of the estimator at https://www.ssc.wisc.edu/sscc/pubs/stata_psmatch.htm, which is based on
Abadie and Imbens (2016).


                                                       15
Shorter-run estimation of the effects of state enterprise zones

        We begin with shorter-run estimation of the effects of state enterprise zones. The results

are reported in Table 2. The table has three panels. Panel 1 uses all the possible data. Panel 2

drops the data from Massachusetts and Wisconsin. And Panel 3 excludes from the control tracts

those that were later designated as state enterprise zones in the 2000s (or as federal zones in

1999-2001) ­ our cleanest estimation.

        The evidence in Table 2 (which essentially replicates our earlier work) generally shows

little consistent evidence of beneficial effects of enterprise zones on the outcomes we study. The

two exceptions are a decline in the unemployment rate of about one percentage point, and a

small increase in the fraction of households with wage and salary income (by 0.5 to 1 percentage

point). For the other outcomes, the evidence is not generally in the direction of beneficial effects

of enterprise zones; two of the point estimates for poverty are positive, and those for average

wage and salary income, and employment, are all negative (and strongly significant in Panel 3).

On the one hand, the evidence of an approximate one percentage point decline in the

unemployment rate across the three panels of Table 2 points to some labor market gains. But the

absence of evidence of an employment increase or poverty decline leads us to interpret any

evidence of gains (even limited to jobs) as ambiguous at best.

        We also estimated the models for the same five dependent variables by state. We show,

in Table 3, the estimates corresponding to Panel 3 of Table 2 ­ the most restrictive but cleanest

sample. 27 There is a smattering of significant effects estimated in Table 3. This is more the case

for some states than others. Furthermore, where there is statistically significant evidence, more of

it points to evidence of harmful rather than beneficial effects. Examples of adverse effects


27
  The results were similar for the samples corresponding to Panels 1 and 2 of Table 2. (Results available upon
request.)


                                                        16
include: the effect on poverty in California; the effects on average income and employment in

Ohio; the effects on poverty and average income in Rhode Island; and the effects on the

unemployment rate, poverty, average income, and employment in New York.

       On the other hand, there is some statistically significant evidence in the opposite (i.e.,

beneficial) direction: in California raising the fraction with wage and salary income; in Colorado

raising employment; and in Ohio reducing the unemployment rate and poverty rate and

increasing the fraction with wage and salary income.

       This conflicting evidence by state, coupled with similar conflicting evidence on

enterprise zone effects when estimating homogeneous effects for all states, reinforces the

conclusion from most of the literature that it is hard to find compelling evidence of beneficial

effects of state enterprise zones. One obvious question posed by the differences in estimates

across states, however, is whether the differences are accounted for by variation in state

enterprise zone features. However, before considering evidence on this question, we first turn to

longer-run estimates.

Longer-run estimation of the effects of state enterprise zones

       Turning to the longer-run analysis, the results imposing homogeneous effects across

states are reported in Table 4, for all three samples, in Panels 1-3. The longer-run effects are

uniformly negative, with every single estimate in Table 4 pointing to adverse effects ­ raising

unemployment and poverty rates, and lowering the fraction with wage and salary income,

average income, and employment. And many of these estimates are statistically significant.

Thus, there is no evidence of positive effects of state enterprise zone programs in the longer run,

and indeed the evidence points in the opposite direction.

       Finally, Panel 4 reports estimates, based on the sample in Panel 3, where we drop from

the treatment group enterprise zone tracts that we confirmed as "de-designated" as enterprise


                                                 17
zone tracts in the 2000s. 28 There are two ways to think about this issue. One is that we might

expect to find more positive longer-run effects when we drop from the longer-run analysis tracts

where enterprise zone incentives were eliminated. Alternatively, we might be particularly

interested in the difference in results for tracts that remained enterprise zones and tracts that were

de-designated, because perhaps the strongest policy argument for enterprise zones is that they

can change economic conditions in ways that create some self-sustaining benefits. In general, the

results are little changed from Panel 3, with estimated adverse effects for all of the outcomes, and

roughly similar magnitudes. Overall, then, there is no clear evidence that effects were very

different in de-designated tracts.

         Table 5 reports the longer-run estimates by state, paralleling Table 3. Again, we show the

estimates corresponding to Panel 3 of Table 4. 29 Compared to the shorter-run estimates in Table

3, there are fewer significant estimates of longer-run effects. Furthermore, there are only two

estimates in the table indicating a positive effect: raising average wage and salary income in

Colorado, and reducing the poverty rate in Oregon. In contrast, there are 11 statistically

significant estimates pointing to a worsening of outcomes. These are mainly for average wage

and salary income and the level of employment. 30 Thus, the longer-run estimates do even more

to indicate that state enterprise zones did not generate beneficial effects. Still, there is some state

variation pointing to at least a couple instances of positive effects. We next turn to explore

heterogeneity in state enterprise zone programs.




28
   We assume that if we do not have data showing a tract continuing to be designated as an enterprise zone in the
2000s, then it was de-designated. Given our uncertainty about developments in Massachusetts and Wisconsin, this
analysis is best done excluding these two states. And we restrict the analysis to the control tracts considered in Panel
3 because, as argued above, these provide our cleanest evidence.
29
   The results were similar for the samples corresponding to the other panels in Table 4. (Results available upon
request.)
30
   The negative effect on average wage and salary income is never mirrored in a positive effect on the fraction with
wage and salary income, which if it occurred could indicate lower earners entering the labor market.


                                                          18
Heterogenous effects: types of incentives

        We next reconsider the evidence on both shorter-run and longer-run effects of state

enterprise zone programs by focusing on the heterogeneity in the types of benefits offered across

states. Table 6 gives a summary version of Appendix Table A1 that shows the classification of

the states in our sample based on the four features of state enterprise zones we study, including

the four miscellaneous local property tax incentives we consider within the miscellaneous

category. 31

        The detailed breakdown of enterprise zone benefits by state in Appendix Table A1

indicates that there is considerable heterogeneity across states in terms of how many different

kinds of benefits are incorporated into the state's program. Both the number and types of benefits

could be partly endogenous with respect to how disadvantaged the targeted tracts are. For

example, states may be more aggressive in adopting a wider array of benefits when they are

targeting relatively worse-performing areas with their enterprise zone program. Our

identification strategy that matches on the pre-treatment trends in outcomes between the treated

and control tracts is of course intended to address this issue, ensuring ­ in this case ­ that we are

not comparing tracts targeted by enterprise zone programs with many benefits to (as in our

example) control tracts that are not performing as poorly.

        We begin ­ for the shorter-run analysis ­ with the state-specific shorter-run (1990-2000)

estimates like those in Table 3 ­ although we use the estimates not just from Table 3, but also

from corresponding estimates for the other two samples shown (not reported). As shown in Table

6, all of the states included in the analysis provide investment credits as part of their enterprise

zone programs. Hence, the effect of investment credits is subsumed in the intercept for the


31
  There was no stronger evidence of EZ effectiveness when we included all of the miscellaneous benefits in a
broader category (results available upon request).


                                                       19
models we estimate (and hence, in this case, the estimated intercept coefficient should be

interpreted as the effect of enterprise zones with only this feature). In addition, when we drop

Massachusetts and Wisconsin, all of the remaining 10 states also include hiring credits, since

only one state (Massachusetts) does not have hiring credits. So, when we use just the 10 states,

hiring credits, too, are subsumed in the intercept, which unfortunately ­ with the cleanest sample

­ leaves us only with reliable, independent information on financing credits and miscellaneous

local property tax incentives. Below, though, we turn to other evidence on the effects of specific

features of hiring credits.

        The results for the four features of enterprise zone incentives summarized in Table 6 are

reported in Table 7. By and large, the key finding is that we find relatively few significant effects

of enterprise zone features. And when we do, the effects are mixed regarding whether program

benefits improve labor market outcomes. For example, the effects of financing incentives,

according to these results, are adverse for the fraction of households with wage and salary

income (Panel 2) and average household income (Panel 3). There is a positive estimated impact

of miscellaneous local property tax incentives in Panel 3 only. Panel 3 suggests beneficial effects

of investment and hiring credits in terms of reducing unemployment and poverty, but also an

adverse effect lowering average incomes. 32

        In Table 8, we present similar analyses, in this case using the state-specific longer-run

estimates from Table 5 (and corresponding estimates for the other two samples, which, again, are

not reported). There is, if anything, more consistent evidence of adverse effects, as every



32
  Online Appendix Table D2 reports estimates for the same specifications and samples, but unweighted. Note that
some coefficients are identified for only one state, in which case the weighting does not affect the estimated
coefficient. Note also that some estimates are much more precise, owing to the weighting substantially reducing the
influence of some states. Overall, the evidence is again in contradictory directions, and without weighting some of
the estimates seem implausibly large (in both directions). Thus, we read this analysis, too, as failing to provide
consistent evidence of beneficial effects of particular enterprise zone features.


                                                        20
significant coefficient estimate is in this direction except for the estimated effect of

miscellaneous local property tax incentives on employment in Panel 1. 33,34

Heterogenous effects: hiring credits

         Finally, as discussed above, we could not learn much about whether enterprise zone

programs offering hiring credits are beneficial because most states offer these benefits ­ and all

states in our cleaner sample excluding Massachusetts and Wisconsin offer these benefits.

However, there are differences in the nature of hiring credits across states, which we now

explore. The differences in hiring credits are summarized in Table 9. Note that (see Appendix

Table A2), we collapse two features pertaining to where eligible workers must live to indicate

whether, for the most part, credits are available only for workers who live in the enterprise zone.

         The results are reported in Tables 10 and 11, for the shorter-run and the longer-run,

respectively, using our three alternative analysis samples. 35 Paralleling our earlier findings, there

is little consistent evidence that any kind of enterprise zone hiring credit delivers beneficial

effects. In Table 10, for the shorter-run estimates, there are three statistically significant

estimates indicative of a beneficial effect (all in Panel 1) ­ for the effect of a flat credit per new

employee on the unemployment rate, and the effects of any hiring credit on average income and

employment. But there are also significant estimates in the opposite direction.




33
   Online Appendix Table D3 reports estimates for the same specifications and samples, but unweighted. The same
comments regarding Online Appendix Table D2 apply. In this table, evidence on investment credits is generally
much weaker, although the adverse effects still persist for two outcomes in Panel 3. There is evidence of significant
positive effects of miscellaneous local property tax incentives in Panel 1, but these disappear in Panels 2 and 3.
Again, there is no consistent evidence of beneficial effects of particular enterprise zone benefits.
34
   With respect to the earlier discussion of the intensity of program benefits, we did try to classify the intensity of the
key EZ benefit ­ hiring credits ­ as weak or strong. We then reran our models for program heterogeneity (Tables 7
and 8 below) breaking the hiring credit variable into these two policies. These re-estimations did not provide any
additional evidence that hiring credits help. In particular, there is no evidence of positive impacts of strong hiring
credits. See Online Appendix E.
35
   The results for the estimates without weighting are reported in Online Appendix Tables D4 and D5. The findings
are qualitatively similar.


                                                            21
       We might have expected that credits with live-in requirements would be most likely to

deliver benefits to local residents, but there is no evidence of this in Table 10. There are a couple

of estimates in the opposite direction (for employment in Panel 1, and the fraction with wage and

salary income in Panel 2). And in the longer-run estimates, in Table 11, there is again mixed

evidence in general, and for live-in requirements, only evidence of an adverse effect (on

employment, in Panel 1).

       Overall, when we look at program heterogeneity, the estimates are often much less

precise, which is not surprising since the evidence is based on subsets of states. For example,

comparing the uniform shorter-run effects in Table 2 with the heterogeneous effects in Table 7,

the standard errors on specific program features are larger. Moreover, the estimates are

sometimes remarkably imprecise; see, e.g., the estimated effects of miscellaneous credits on all

outcomes, and of hiring credits in Panel 1. The same is generally true of the longer-run effects.

These findings suggest that it is hard, at least in the data we used, to pin down the effects of

different enterprise zone program features.

Conclusions

       Our analysis in this paper sought to explore two questions regarding the effectiveness of

state enterprise zones: Is there stronger evidence of beneficial effects of enterprise zones in the

longer-run, when the programs may have more chance to jump-start economic activity? And is

there evidence that some particular state enterprise zone features deliver some of the intended

benefits of these programs, despite the absence of overall beneficial effects of state enterprise

zone programs? Unfortunately, neither looking at state enterprise zone programs through a

longer-term lens, nor through the lens of program heterogeneity, leads to much if any consistent

indication of beneficial effects of state enterprise zone programs.




                                                 22
       Overall, we think this evidence should be interpreted cautiously. The data provide limited

capacity to test for program heterogeneity, as there are not that many state programs to study,

and hence not a great deal of program variation. In addition, there could be richer dynamics

associated with longer-run effects that our decadal analysis with Census data do not capture.

Moreover, there could be other sources of variation that are relevant, such as unmeasured initial

economic (or other) conditions in the areas designated as enterprise zones.

       Nonetheless, our evidence as it stands buttresses the generally negative assessments of

the effects of enterprise zones. One reaction, then, is to view this paper as one more "nail in the

coffin" of enterprise zones, and to conclude that we need to look for alternative place-based

policies, perhaps at a more aggregate labor market level (as argued by Bartik, forthcoming), or

simply rely on people-based policies that offer benefits, credits, etc., based on individual or

family characteristics rather than location characteristics. However, Neumark (2018) also argues

that it may be possible to draw on lessons from research on enterprise zones, hiring credits,

alternative policies, and labor market networks, to develop more effective enterprise zones. The

key features of these would include: aggressive job subsidies; building skills for private sector

employment; revitalization of targeted areas; local hiring; and partnerships with local non-

profits, employers, and community groups. If one believes we still need to try to target policies

to local economic development at the neighborhood level, then there is a strong case for both

abandoning enterprise zones as we have done them in the past, and considering radically

different alternatives that could be more effective.




                                                 23
                                           References

Abadie, A., & Imbens, G.W. (2016). Matching on the estimated propensity score. Econometrica,

       84, 781-807.

Sylvia, A., Godoey, A., Nadler, C., & Reich, M. (2018). The new wave of local minimum wage

       policies: Evidence from Six Cities. Center on Wage and Employment Dynamics Policy

       Report, Institute for Research on Labor and Employment, UC Berkeley.

Bartik, T..J. Smart place-based policies can improve local labor markets. Forthcoming in Journal

       of Policy Analysis and Management.

Billings, S. (2009). Do enterprise zones work? An analysis at the borders. Public Finance

       Review, 37, 68-93.

Boarnet, M.G., & Bogart, W.T. (1996). Enterprise zones and employment: Evidence from New

       Jersey. Journal of Urban Economics, 40, 198-215.

Bondonio, D., & Engberg, J. (2000). Enterprise zones and local employment: Evidence from the

       states' programs. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 30, 519-549.

Burnes, D. (2012). An empirical analysis of the capitalization of enterprise zone tax incentives

       into commercial property values. Unpublished manuscript.

Busso, M., Gregory, J., & Kline, P. (2013). Assessing the incidence and efficiency of a

       prominent place based policy. American Economic Review, 103, 897-947.

Cameron, T.A., & McConnaha, I.T. (2006). Evidence of environmental migration. Land

       Economics, 82, 273-290.

Card, D., Mas, A., & Rothstein, J. (2008). Tipping and the dynamics of segregation. Quarterly

       Journal of Economics, 123, 177-218.

Dowall, D.E. (1996). An evaluation of California's enterprise zone programs. Economic
       Development Quarterly, 10, 352-368.

Easterly, W. (2009). Empirics of strategic interdependence: The case of the racial tipping point.

       B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 9(1): Article 25.

Elvery, J. (2009). The impact of enterprise zones on residential employment: An evaluation of

       the enterprise zone programs of California and Florida. Economic Development

       Quarterly, 23, 44-59.

Freedman, M. (2012). Teaching new markets old tricks: The effects of subsidized investment on

       low-income neighborhoods. Journal of Public Economics, 96, 1000-1014.

Freedman, M. (2013). Targeted business incentives and local labor markets. Journal of Human

       Resources, 48, 311-344.

Gobillon, L., Magnac, T., & Selod, H. (2012). Do unemployed workers benefit from enterprise

       zones: The French experience. Journal of Public Economics, 96, 881-892.

Greenbaum, R., & Engberg, J.B. (2004). The impact of state enterprise zones on urban

       manufacturing establishments. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 23, 315-339.

Ham, J., Swenson, C., mrohorolu, A., & Song, H. (2011). Government programs can improve

       local labor markets: Evidence from state enterprise Zones, federal Empowerment Zones

       and federal Enterprise Communities. Journal of Public Economics, 95, pp. 779-797.

Hanson, A., & Rohlin, S. (2013). Do spatially targeted redevelopment programs spillover?

       Regional Science and Urban Economics, 43, pp. 86-100.

Kline, P., & Moretti, E. (2014). Local economic development, agglomeration economies, and the

       big push: 100 years of evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority. Quarterly Journal

       of Economics, 129, 275-331.

Kolko, J., & Neumark, D. (2010). Do some enterprise zones create jobs? Journal of Policy
       Analysis and Management, 29, 5-38.

Landers, J. (2006). Why don't enterprise zones work? Estimates of the extent that EZ benefits are

       capitalized into property values. Journal of Regional Analysis and Policy, 36, 1-16.

Logan, J.R., & Zhang, C. (2010). Global neighborhoods: New pathways to diversity and

       separation. American Journal of Sociology, 115, 1069-1109.

Meltzer, R. (2012). Understanding business improvement district formation: An analysis of

       neighborhoods and boundaries. Journal of Urban Economics, 71, 66-78.

Neumark, D. (2018). Rebuilding Communities Job Subsidies. In J. Shambaugh & R. Nunn

       (Eds.), Place-Based Policies for Shared Economic Growth (pp. 71-121). Washington,

       DC: Brookings Institution).

Neumark, D., & Grijalva, D. (2017). The employment effects of state hiring credits. ILR Review,

       70, 1111-1145.

Neumark, D., & Kolko, J. (2010). Do enterprise zones create jobs? Evidence from California's

       enterprise zone program. Journal of Urban Economics, 68, 1-19.

Neumark, D., & Simpson, H. (2015). Place-based policies. In G. Duranton, V. Henderson, & W.

       Strange (Eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Vol. 5 (1197-1287).

       Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Neumark, D., & Young, T. Enterprise zones, poverty, and labor market outcomes: Resolving

       conflicting evidence. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 78.

Oakley, D., & Tsao, H.-S. (2007). Socioeconomic gains and spillover effects of geographically

       targeted initiatives to combat economic distress: An examination of Chicago's

       Empowerment Zone. Cities, 24, 43-59.

Oakley, D., & Tsao, H.-S. (2006). A new way of revitalizing distressed urban communities?
       Assessing the impact of the federal Empowerment Zone program. Journal of Urban

       Affairs, 28, 443-471.

O'Keefe, S.(2004). Job creation in California's enterprise zones: A comparison using a

       propensity score matching model. Journal of Urban Economics, 55, pp. 131-150.

Papke, Leslie. 1994. Tax policy and urban development: Evidence from the Indiana enterprise

       zone program. Journal of Public Economics, 54, 37-49.

Reynolds, C.L., & Rohlin, S. (2015). The effects of location-based tax policies on the

       distribution of household income: Evidence from the federal Empowerment Zone

       program. Journal of Urban Economics, 88, 1-15.

Swenson, C. (2008). Characteristics of State Enterprise Zone Programs.

Wilder, M., & Rubin, B. (1996). Rhetoric versus reality: a review of studies on state enterprise

       zone programs. Journal of the American Planning Association, 62, 472-492.
Table 1. Treated and control tracts for alternative analysis samples
                    Enterprise Zone in 2000 -
                             NCDB                           Enterprise Zone in 2000 - limited controls
                                                                        Contaminated 2000-2010
                                                                            controls       EZ data
                                                                         (either fed or      not
                 Control     Treated      Total    Control     Treated     state EZ)      available       Total
California        6,004         325      6,329       5,243       325          761             0           6,329
Colorado           823          14        837         551         14          272             0            837
Florida           2,753         67       2,820       2,380        67          373             0           2,820
Hawaii             255           9        264         198          9           57             0            264
Illinois          2,270          0       2,270       2,077         0          193             0           2,270
Massachusetts      699          567      1,266         0           0            0           1,266         1,266
Nebraska           219           3        222         210          3            9             0            222
New York          4,158         115      4,273       3,476       115          682             0           4,273
Ohio              1,155         981      2,136        510        981          645             0           2,136
Oregon             478          48        526         401         48           77             0            526
Rhode Island       194          27        221         156         27           38             0            221
Virginia          1,179         29       1,208        978         29          201             0           1,208
Wisconsin          698          25        723          0           0            0            723           723
Total            20,885        2,210     23,095     16,180      1,618        3,308          1,989        23,095
Source: Authors' computations.
Table 2. Shorter-run estimates of the effect of enterprise zones using propensity score matched controls (1990-
2000)
                                                                                 Average
                                                                                household
                                                     Fraction of households     wage and
               Unemployment                           with wage and salary    salary income
                   rate (%)      Poverty rate (%)          income (%)            ($2000)        Employment
                                          Panel 1. No limits on controls
EZ                -1.003***           0.0121                  0.565*              -539.4*           -20.39
                    (0.243)           (0.318)                 (0.335)             (322.4)          (12.64)

N (EZ)              23,095             23,095                 23,095                23,095             23,095
                    (2,210)            (2,210)                (2,210)               (2,210)            (2,210)

                                          Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI
EZ                -0.842***            -0.102                0.501*                 -606.6             -29.15*
                    (0.217)            (0.424)               (0.289)                (468.2)            (16.01)

N (EZ)              21,106             21,106                 21,106                21,106
                    (1,618)            (1,618)                (1,618)               (1,618)            21,106
                                                                                                       (1,618)
                                           Panel 3. Only limited controls
EZ                -1.066***             0.400                1.009***             -1,445***            -24.83
                    (0.343)            (0.503)                 (0.383)              (444.9)            (16.01)

N (EZ)              17,798             17,798                 17,798                17,798             17,798
                    (1,618)            (1,618)                (1,618)               (1,618)            (1,618)

Notes: Each cell is an estimate of the average shorter-run (1990-2000) effect of enterprise zones from a separate
propensity score matched probit model that matches treatment to control tracts using ten covariates: 1980 and 1990
tract-level average unemployment rate, poverty rate, fraction of households with wage and salary income, average
wage and salary income, and employment. The estimates presented are average treatment effects on the treated. The
control tracts are not restricted to the same state as the treated tracts. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors' computations.
Table 3. Shorter-run state-specific estimates of the effect of enterprise zones - only limited controls (1990-
2000)
                                                                                       Average
                                                         Fraction of households    household wage
                       Unemployment      Poverty rate     with wage and salary        and salary
                          rate (%)           (%)               income (%)          income ($2000)       Employment
EZ×California               -0.241         2.851**               1.992*                 -752.2             -17.13
                           (0.275)         (1.142)               (1.117)               (1,033)            (44.87)
N (EZ)                  16,505 (325)     16,505 (325)         16,505 (325)           16,505 (325)       16,505 (325)

EZ×Colorado                 -2.285           -4.609              0.461                  3,544            61.21***
                           (2.435)          (6.694)             (6.070)                (4,864)            (20.92)
N (EZ)                   16,194 (14)      16,194 (14)         16,194 (14)            16,194 (14)        16,194 (14)

EZ×Florida                  -2.869          0.0775               2.709                  -411.3             -191.2
                           (3.066)          (5.492)             (3.284)                (1,946)            (153.8)
N (EZ)                   16,247 (67)      16,247 (67)         16,247 (67)            16,247 (67)        16,247 (67)

EZ×Hawaii                   1.128            -1.005              2.073                 -183.0              312.8
                           (3.922)          (8.171)             (7.612)               (5,502)             (376.4)
N (EZ)                    16,189 (9)       16,189 (9)          16,189 (9)            16,189 (9)          16,189 (9)

EZ×Nebraska                 -4.568           -1.883              2.044                 7,383             -453.3***
                           (10.48)          (11.47)             (16.52)               (11,300)             (125.4)
N (EZ)                    16,183 (3)       16,183 (3)          16,183 (3)            16,183 (3)          16,183 (3)

EZ×New York                1.687**        4.411***               -0.767              -4,351***           -165.5***
                           (0.747)         (1.548)              (1.604)                (1,350)             (57.27)
N (EZ)                   16,295 (115)    16,295 (115)         16,295 (115)          16,295 (115)        16,295 (115)

EZ×Ohio                   -2.094***       -1.997***              0.646*              -1,882***            -37.91*
                            (0.353)         (0.437)             (0.345)                (597.2)            (22.04)
N (EZ)                   17,161 (981)    17,161 (981)         17,161 (981)          17,161 (981)        17,161 (981)

EZ×Oregon                   -1.359           -3.492              -2.004                 417.8              103.4
                           (1.565)          (2.510)             (4.320)                (2,081)            (79.78)
N (EZ)                   16,228 (48)      16,228 (48)         16,228 (48)            16,228 (48)        16,228 (48)

EZ×Rhode Island             -0.235          3.934*               -0.954               -9,734***            -216.7
                           (1.609)          (2.180)             (3.641)                 (2,154)           (132.0)
N (EZ)                   16,207 (27)      16,207 (27)         16,207 (27)            16,207 (27)        16,207 (27)

EZ×Virginia                 0.870            1.463               -0.667                 -2,035             -122.0
                           (1.109)          (3.992)             (4.248)                (1,597)            (136.7)
N (EZ)                   16,209 (29)        16,209              16,209                 16,209             16,209
Notes: Each cell is an estimate of the average shorter-run (1990-2000) effect of enterprise zones from a separate
propensity score matched probit model that estimates the effect of enterprise zones in one state using potential
controls from all states. (The only exception is for Ohio, where we encountered convergence problems with
probit estimation, and hence used a logit model instead; the probit converged, but only with a slacker tolerance.)
The propensity score matched model matches on ten outcomes: 1980 and 1990 outcomes in unemployment rate,
poverty rate, fraction of households with wage and salary income, average wage and salary income, and
employment. The estimates presented are average treatment effects on the treated. The control tracts are not
restricted to the same state as the treated tracts. All estimates in this table exclude tracts in Massachusetts and
Wisconsin, and all control tracts that were designated as either state or federal enterprise zones in the 2000s.
Source: Authors' computations.
Table 4. Longer-run estimates of the effect of enterprise zones using propensity score matched controls
(1990-2010)
                                                                                 Average
                                                                               household
                                                           Fraction of          wage and
                 Unemployment       Poverty rate     households with wage    salary income
                     rate (%)            (%)         and salary income (%)       ($2000)       Employment
                                         Panel 1. No limits on controls
EZ                  0.850***          1.604***               -0.447             -3,758***        -123.7***
                        (0.269)            (0.372)               (0.364)               (682.1)             (21.67)

N (EZ)               23,095 (2,210)    23,095 (2,210)        23,095 (2,210)         23,095 (2,210)      23,095 (2,210)
                                           Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI
EZ                      0.644**           1.215**                -0.632*              -4,085***           -106.4***
                        (0.306)           (0.494)                (0.363)                (820.4)             (23.70)

N (EZ)              21,106 (1,618)     21,106 (1,618)       21,106 (1,618)          21,106 (1,618)     21,106 (1,618)
                                            Panel 3. Only limited controls
EZ                     1.577***           2.490***                -0.323              -6,347***           -120.8***
                        (0.304)            (0.538)               (0.404)                (954.2)             (24.34)

N (EZ)             17,798 (1,618)     17,798 (1,618)       17,798 (1,618)         17,798 (1,618)    17,798 (1,618)
               Panel 4. Only limited controls, dropping enterprise zone tracts de-designated in 2000s
EZ                     1.436***           2.303***              -1.314***             -5,099***           -181.2***
                        (0.271)            (0.576)                (0.465)               (968.9)             (28.44)

N (EZ)               17,696 (1,516)       17,696 (1,516)        17,696 (1,516)          17,696 (1,516)    17,696 (1,516)
Notes: Each cell is an estimate of the average longer-run (1990-2010) effect of enterprise zones from a separate
propensity score matched probit model that matches treatment to control tracts using ten covariates: 1980 and 1990
tract-level average unemployment rate, poverty rate, fraction of households with wage and salary income, average
wage and salary income, and employment. The estimates presented are average treatment effects on the treated. The
control tracts are not restricted to the same state as the treated tracts. In Panel 4, we assume that if we do not have
data showing a tract continuing to be designated as an enterprise zone in the 2000s, then it was de-designated. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors' computations.
Table 5. Longer-run state-specific estimates of the effect of enterprise zones - only limited controls (1990-2010)
                                                                                            Average
                                                               Fraction of households      household
                             Unemployment       Poverty rate    with wage and salary    wage and salary
                                rate (%)            (%)              income (%)         income ($2000)    Employment
EZ×California                     -0.103           1.346                1.754                -1,404          -65.56
                                 (0.243)          (1.399)              (1.249)              (2,224)         (67.49)
N (EZ)                        16,505 (325)      16,505 (325)        16,505 (325)          16,505 (325)    16,505 (325)

EZ×Colorado                       0.514             0.920              5.249               4,639***          -35.58
                                 (2.320)           (10.56)            (7.949)               (1,316)         (131.3)
N (EZ)                         16,194 (14)       16,194 (14)        16,194 (14)           16,194 (14)     16,194 (14)

EZ×Florida                        2.554             -2.808             2.223                 2,810           -50.22
                                 (2.799)           (6.553)            (3.338)               (3,878)         (193.9)
N (EZ)                         16,247 (67)       16,247 (67)        16,247 (67)           16,247 (67)     16,247 (67)

EZ×Hawaii                         -2.102           -2.324             3.485                 -13,219          -122.3
                                 (4.201)          (9.192)            (10.23)               (26,533)         (362.7)
N (EZ)                          16,189 (9)       16,189 (9)         16,189 (9)            16,189 (9)       16,189 (9)

EZ×Nebraska                       -5.518           -1.635             12.45                 -8,502         -1,229***
                                 (11.25)          (15.75)            (14.87)               (14,154)          (279.2)
N (EZ)                          16,183 (3)       16,183 (3)         16,183 (3)            16,183 (3)       16,183 (3)

EZ×New York                       -2.139           3.602*             2.610               -6,560***          -100.4
                                 (1.415)          (1.938)            (1.932)                (1,932)         (76.61)
N (EZ)                         16,295 (115)     16,295 (115)       16,295 (115)          16,295 (115)     16,295 (115)

EZ×Ohio                         1.501***         2.068***           -1.952***             -8,847***        -202.4***
                                 (0.423)          (0.466)             (0.540)               (1,232)          (36.09)
N (EZ)                         17,161 (981)     17,161 (981)       17,161 (981)          17,161 (981)     17,161 (981)

EZ×Oregon                         -2.433           -4.816*             -1.228                -3,547          149.1
                                 (1.665)           (2.663)            (3.715)               (5,375)         (118.3)
N (EZ)                         16,228 (48)       16,228 (48)        16,228 (48)           16,228 (48)     16,228 (48)

EZ×Rhode Island                   -1.972            -0.557             1.620               -14,208**         -146.4
                                 (1.865)           (2.485)            (4.206)                (5,657)        (181.1)
N (EZ)                         16,207 (27)       16,207 (27)        16,207 (27)           16,207 (27)     16,207 (27)

EZ×Virginia                       1.124             5.129              -1.584              -8,593**        -358.0**
                                 (1.969)           (3.598)            (4.748)               (3,852)         (169.7)
N (EZ)                         16,209 (29)       16,209 (29)        16,209 (29)           16,209 (29)     16,209 (29)
Notes: Each cell is an estimate of the average longer-run (1990-2010) effect of enterprise zones from a separate
propensity score matched model that match treatment to control tracts using ten covariates: 1980 and 1990 outcomes
in unemployment rate, poverty rate, fraction of households with wage and salary income, average wage and salary
income, and employment. The estimates presented are average treatment effects on the treated. The control tracts are
not restricted to the same state as the treated tracts. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors' computations.
 Table 6. Enterprise zone broad benefit categories by state
                                                                                        State
                     Benefit                      CA   CO     FL   HI   IL   MA   NE   NY OH    OR   RI   VA   WI   Total
 1. Financing                                      X    X     X         X               X            X               6
 2. Tax credit for investments or operations      X     X     X    X    X    X    X    X   X    X    X    X    X     13
 3. Miscellaneous local property tax incentives   X     X     X    X    X              X                             6
 4. Hiring Incentives                             X     X     X    X    X         X    X   X    X    X    X    X     12
Notes: See Online Appendix B for details.
Source: Authors' coding.
Table 7. Shorter-run estimates of heterogeneous effects of enterprise zone benefits
                                                                                                                                  Average
                                                                                                   Fraction of households household wage
                                                           Unemployment                             with wage and salary         and salary
                                                                rate (%)       Poverty rate (%)          income (%)           income ($2000) Employment
                                                            Panel 1. No limits on controls (N =12)
Constant (includes investment credits (12))                      -1.411              1.236                  -1.929               -2,777***          -92.72*
                                                                 (0.901)            (0.796)                (1.080)                 (565.8)          (48.19)
Financing (5)                                                     1.072              0.917                  -2.658                   2,433           -220.4
                                                                 (3.617)            (3.195)                (4.336)                 (2,271)          (193.4)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                   0.379              3.028                   1.511                  -2,319            240.7
                                                                 (3.648)            (3.222)                (4.374)                 (2,290)          (195.1)
Hiring credits (11)                                              -0.591            -2.592**                  2.235                 1,955**            70.79
                                                                 (1.110)            (0.981)                (1.331)                 (697.3)          (59.39)
                                                           Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI (N =10)
Constant (includes investment and hiring credits (10))         -1.490***          -1.912***               1.752***                 -1,421*           -10.30
                                                                 (0.420)            (0.534)                (0.402)                 (705.7)          (38.60)
Financing (5)                                                    -0.886              4.443                 -4.214*                  -2,163           -273.0
                                                                 (2.316)            (2.939)                (2.212)                 (3,888)          (212.6)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                   0.796             -0.339                   3.655                   2,254            219.3
                                                                 (2.335)            (2.964)                (2.231)                 (3,921)          (214.4)
                                                            Panel 3. Only limited controls (N =10)
Constant (includes investment and hiring credits (10))         -1.967***          -1.956***                  0.489                -1,798**           -33.73
                                                                 (0.417)            (0.522)                (0.393)                 (560.1)          (26.18)
Financing (5)                                                     0.975              5.335                  -1.244                 -6,275*           -232.4
                                                                 (2.296)            (2.877)                (2.164)                 (3,086)          (144.2)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                   0.823             -0.712                   2.179                  6,599*            198.5
                                                                 (2.315)            (2.901)                (2.182)                 (3,112)          (145.4)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific shorter-run (1990-2000) estimates in Table 3 (and
corresponding estimates for the other samples) are regressed against indicators for different enterprise zone benefits. Each second-stage estimate is
weighted by the number of treated tracts in that state. All states included in Panel 1 provide investment credits, so the effects of investment credits are
subsumed in the constant. All states included in Panels 2 and 3 provide investment and hiring credits, so the effects of investment and hiring credits are
subsumed in the constant. Number in parentheses next to each benefit category refers to the number of states that provide that benefit. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors' computations.
Table 8. Longer-run estimates of heterogeneous effects of enterprise zone benefits
                                                                                                                                 Average
                                                                                                  Fraction of households household wage
                                                               Unemployment Poverty rate           with wage and salary         and salary
                                                                   rate (%)            (%)              income (%)           income ($2000) Employment
                                                           Panel 1. No limits on controls (N =12)
Constant (includes investment credits (12))                         0.0624           1.584*                -1.420                -5,549**          -146.4**
                                                                    (0.687)          (0.840)               (1.058)                (1,680)           (56.43)
Financing (5)                                                       -0.398           -4.330                 0.540                 -6,393            -439.2*
                                                                    (2.758)          (3.371)               (4.246)                (6,743)           (226.5)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                     -0.565            3.221                 1.144                 10,420            622.2**
                                                                    (2.782)          (3.400)               (4.283)                (6,801)           (228.4)
Hiring credits (11)                                                  0.333            0.162                -0.603                 -677.8             -44.11
                                                                    (0.847)          (1.035)               (1.304)                (2,070)           (69.55)
                                                          Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI (N =10)
Constant (includes investment credits (10))                        1.181**            1.413                -0.477               -5,725***          -144.5**
                                                                    (0.465)          (0.834)               (0.322)                (1,148)           (59.44)
Financing (5)                                                       -2.861           -0.224                -0.856                 -4,461             -240.5
                                                                    (2.559)          (4.595)               (1.772)                (6,325)           (327.5)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                     -0.137           -1.774                3.538*                  6,410              350.6
                                                                    (2.581)          (4.634)               (1.787)                (6,378)           (330.2)
                                                           Panel 3. Only limited controls (N =10)
Constant (includes investment credits (10))                        1.260**           1.792*              -1.838***              -8,705***         -193.6***
                                                                    (0.514)          (0.777)               (0.368)                (1,025)           (36.34)
Financing (5)                                                       -1.964           -0.875                 2.262                 -1,335              48.40
                                                                    (2.833)          (4.279)               (2.025)                (5,649)           (200.2)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                      0.444            0.305                 1.735                  7,987              74.73
                                                                    (2.857)          (4.315)               (2.042)                (5,696)           (201.9)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific shorter-run (1990-2000) estimates in Table 5 (and
corresponding estimates for the other samples) are regressed against indicators for different enterprise zone benefits. Each second-stage estimate is
weighted by the number of treated tracts in that state. All states included in Panel 1 provide investment credits, so the effects of investment credits are
subsumed in the constant. All states included in Panels 2 and 3 provide investment and hiring credits, so the effects of investment and hiring credits are
subsumed in the constant. Number in parentheses next to each benefit category refers to the number of states that provide that benefit. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors' computations.
 Table 9. Hiring credit differences across states
                                                                                               State
                  Hiring credit                       CA    CO    FL   HI   IL   MA     NE    NY OH       OR    RI   VA    WI        Total
 Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit                X    X                     X      X                X    X                6
 Credit based on wages                                 X          X                            X                X           X          5
 Flat credit per new employee                                X    X          X           X     X                                       5
 Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption                        X                          X      X          X                 4
Notes: A credit based on wages provides a tax credit for businesses who employ eligible employees equal to some portion (varies by state) of the
total wage bill paid to those employees.
Source: Authors' coding. See Online Appendix B.
 Table 10. Shorter-run estimates of heterogeneous enterprise zone hiring credits, weighted by frequency of treated tracts
                                                       Unemployment rate      Poverty rate     Fraction of households with    Average household wage
                                                             (%)                   (%)         wage and salary income (%)    and salary income ($2000)    Employment
                                                                Panel 1. No limits on controls (N =12)
 Constant                                                  -1.411*                1.236                  -1.929*                 -2,777***               -92.72**
                                                           (0.692)              (0.958)                   (0.907)                  (354.0)                (30.38)
 Any hiring credit (11)                                     0.0428               -5.932                    4.538                 8,521***                 550.9**
                                                           (4.324)              (5.982)                   (5.666)                  (2,212)                (189.8)
 Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)           2.595                 1.024                    -5.248                   -126.1               -336.5**
                                                           (2.258)              (3.124)                   (2.959)                  (1,155)                (99.09)
 Credit based on wages (4)                                  1.809                 6.401                    -2.252                 -5,512**                -424.5*
                                                           (4.180)              (5.782)                   (5.477)                  (2,138)                (183.4)
 Flat credit per new employee (4)                          -5.800*                0.695                    1.997                   -2,735*                 210.4
                                                           (2.571)              (3.556)                   (3.368)                  (1,315)                (112.8)
 Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)        -0.723                3.391                    -2.098                 -6,584**               -469.4**
                                                           (4.296)              (5.943)                   (5.630)                  (2,197)                (188.5)
                                                               Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI (N =10)
 Constant (includes any hiring credit (10))                 -1.777               -1.187                    2.903                     1,976                408.8
                                                           (3.454)              (3.738)                   (1.760)                  (4,497)               (249.5)
 Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)           2.448                 1.953                 -4.060***                   -4,735                -223.7
                                                           (1.827)              (1.977)                   (0.931)                  (2,379)               (131.9)
 Credit based on wages (4)                                  0.313                 3.955                    -0.829                   -1,966                -410.3
                                                           (3.377)              (3.655)                   (1.721)                  (4,398)               (243.9)
 Flat credit per new employee (4)                           -3.250               -3.334                    1.600                     1,205                18.90
                                                           (2.079)              (2.250)                   (1.059)                  (2,707)               (150.2)
 Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)        0.241                -0.809                    -1.009                   -3,251                -411.6
                                                           (3.476)              (3.762)                   (1.771)                  (4,527)               (251.1)
                                                                Panel 3. Only limited controls (N =10)
 Constant (includes any hiring credit (10))                 -3.056               -3.056                    -4.191                    2.148                6,016
                                                           (3.878)              (3.878)                   (3.676)                  (3.481)               (5,137)
 Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)           1.543                 1.543                    2.377                    -2.020                -4,359
                                                           (2.051)              (2.051)                   (1.944)                  (1.841)               (2,717)
 Credit based on wages (4)                                  2.698                 2.698                    6.943                    -0.227                -7,122
                                                           (3.792)              (3.792)                   (3.595)                  (3.404)               (5,023)
 Flat credit per new employee (4)                           -1.175               -1.175                    -2.313                    0.612                2,565
                                                           (2.335)              (2.335)                   (2.213)                  (2.096)               (3,093)
 Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)        1.062                 1.062                    2.165                    -1.591                -7,665
                                                           (3.903)              (3.903)                   (3.700)                  (3.504)               (5,171)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific estimates in Table 3 (first stage) are regressed against indicators
for different enterprise zone benefits (outlined in Table 9 and described in more detail in Appendix Table A1 and A2). Each second stage estimate is weighted by
the number of treated tracts in that state. The overall effect of hiring credits is not estimable in Panels 2 and 3 because Massachusetts was the only state to not
provide hiring credits, and Massachusetts is dropped from these analyses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors' computations.
Table 11. Longer-run estimates of heterogeneous enterprise zone hiring credits, weighted by frequency of treated tracts
                                                         Unemployment        Poverty rate     Fraction of households with    Average household wage
                                                            rate (%)              (%)        wage and salary income (%)     and salary income ($2000)   Employment
                                                                 Panel 1. No limits on controls (N=12)
Constant                                                     0.0624             1.584*                   -1.420                     -5,549**             -146.4**
                                                             (0.599)            (0.722)                 (1.164)                      (1,954)              (57.46)
Any hiring credit (11)                                        1.096            -9.369*                    4.701                       14,717               375.1
                                                             (3.742)            (4.513)                 (7.275)                     (12,208)              (358.9)
Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)              -0.417             -2.868                  -2.225                       -5,518             -497.9**
                                                             (1.954)            (2.357)                 (3.799)                      (6,375)              (187.4)
Credit based on wages (4)                                     -0.729             7.974                   -3.603                      -11,072               -287.3
                                                             (3.617)            (4.363)                 (7.032)                     (11,801)              (347.0)
Flat credit per new employee (4)                              -2.327             4.571                    1.947                        2,479              580.3**
                                                             (2.224)            (2.683)                 (4.325)                      (7,257)              (213.4)
Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)           -0.745            9.707*                   -5.266                      -15,156               -400.7
                                                             (3.718)            (4.484)                 (7.228)                     (12,129)              (356.6)
                                                                Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI (N=10)
Constant (includes any hiring credit (10))                    -0.702             -4.401                   0.566                        2,679               377.2
                                                             (3.218)            (6.536)                 (3.522)                     (10,252)              (593.1)
Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)              -0.615            0.0613                   -1.907                       -3,660               -146.8
                                                             (1.702)            (3.457)                 (1.863)                      (5,423)              (313.7)
Credit based on wages (4)                                     -0.289             5.189                    1.409                       -4,915               -387.3
                                                             (3.146)            (6.391)                 (3.444)                     (10,025)              (579.9)
Flat credit per new employee (4)                              -1.716             -3.233                   2.441                       -1,289               26.36
                                                             (1.937)            (3.935)                 (2.120)                      (6,172)              (357.0)
Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)           1.930              5.812                   -0.969                       -8,275               -516.4
                                                             (3.238)            (6.578)                 (3.545)                     (10,319)              (596.9)
                                                                 Panel 3. Only limited controls (N=10)
Constant (includes any hiring credit (10))                    -0.312             -0.312                   0.356                      5.790*                3,503
                                                             (5.020)            (5.020)                 (7.734)                      (2.381)             (10,247)
Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)              -0.964             -0.964                   0.921                      0.0895                -5,982
                                                             (2.655)            (2.655)                 (4.091)                      (1.259)              (5,420)
Credit based on wages (4)                                     0.139              0.139                    0.773                       -4.053               -5,430
                                                             (4.909)            (4.909)                 (7.563)                      (2.328)             (10,020)
Flat credit per new employee (4)                              0.725              0.725                   -0.809                        0.641               4,798
                                                             (3.022)            (3.022)                 (4.656)                      (1.433)              (6,169)
Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)           1.621              1.621                    1.423                     -7.655**              -11,979
                                                             (5.053)            (5.053)                 (7.784)                      (2.396)             (10,313)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific estimates in Table 5 (first stage) are regressed against
indicators for different enterprise zone benefits (outlined in Table 9 and described in more detail in Appendix Table A1 and A2). Each second stage estimate is
weighted by the number of treated tracts in that state. The overall effect of hiring credits is not estimable in Panels 2 and 3 because Massachusetts was the only
state to not provide hiring credits, and Massachusetts is dropped from these analyses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Source: Authors' computations.
Appendix A: Summary of Detailed Enterprise Zone Benefits
Appendix Table A1. Enterprise zone broad benefit categories by state
                                                                                                       State
                             Benefit                                CA   CO   FL   HI   IL   MA   NE      NY   OH   OR   RI   VA   WI   Total
1. Financing                                                        X    X    X         X                  X             X               6
     Lender interest deduction                                      X                                                                    1
     Interest free loans                                                      X                                                          1
     Corporation for providing loans                                                    X                X                               2
     Stock investment incentive                                                                          X                               1
     Incentives for providing loans                                                                                      X               1
     Tax deduction for contributions                                     X              X                X               X               4
2. Tax Credit for Investments or Operations                         X    X    X    X    X    X    X      X     X    X    X    X    X     13
     Credit contingent on private investment (sales and use tax)                                  X                                      1
     General excise tax credit                                                     X                                                     1
     Credit for opening new or expanding existing business                    X    X                                          X          3
     Resident Business Owner Tax Deduction                                                                               X               1
     Research and Experimental Activities tax credit                     X                                                               1
     Credit for qualified research expenses                                                                                        X     1
     Investment in land not included in determining issued or                                                  X                         1
     outstanding stock
     Property tax credit or exemption (total value)                           X              X           X     X    X    X               6
     Property tax credit or exemption (added value from                  X    X         X    X           X     X    X         X    X     9
     renovation/expansion)
     Property tax exemption for hotels                                                                              X                    1
     Site Preparation                                                                                               X                    1
     Tax credit for construction materials                                    X                          X                         X     3
     Environmental remediation tax credit                                                                      X                   X     2
     Investment in tangible personal property not included in                                                  X                         1
     determining issued or outstanding stock
     Machinery and equipment sales and use or property tax          X    X    X         X    X                 X    X    X               8
     exemption
     Tax exemption for all items purchased to conduct business                                                                X    X     2
     Utility Tax Credit/Incentive                                                                        X                               1
3. Miscellaneous                                                    X    X    X    X    X                X     X    X    X    X    X     11
     Local property tax related (included)
     (Local) Real property tax incentive (total)                         X    X    X                     X                               4
     (Local) Real property tax incentive (ad valorem for increase   X         X         X                                                3
     in value)
     (Local) Taxable tangible property (sales and use tax)               X                                                               1
     incentives
     (Local) Tax increment funds                                    X                                                                    1
     Others (not included)
     "Optional" services or assistance authorized by municipal                                                 X                         1
     corporation
     Net Operating Loss Computation and Loss Limitations            X                                                                    1
     Regulatory relief                                                        X                                                          1
     Technology infrastructure investment tax credit (rural              X                                                               1
     internet)
     Sale/lease of public real property for business use                           X    X                           X         X          4
     Property tax exemption for leased government                                                                   X                    1
     buildings/structures
     Credit for paying employee insurance premiums                       X         X                                                     2
     Job training/school tax credit or reimbursement                     X              X                      X                         3
     Day care                                                            X    X                                X                   X     4
     Employee tax credit                                            X                                                    X         X     3
     (Local) Occupational licenses/regulatory relief                X         X    X                                          X          4
     (Local) Bonds/loans                                            X         X                                                          2
     (Local) Job/referral placement                                 X                                                                    1
     (Local) Energy tax exemption/credit                                      X         X                                                2
4. Hiring Incentives                                                X    X    X    X    X         X      X     X    X    X    X    X     12
     Credit based on wages                                          X         X                          X               X         X     5
     Flat credit per new employee                                        X    X         X         X      X                               5
     Payroll or unemployment tax exemption                                         X                           X    X         X          4
5. Live-in Requirements                                                  X    X                   X      X               X    X          6
     Limited benefits for non-enterprise zone residents                                           X      X               X    X          4
     Only enterprise zone residents qualify for benefit purposes         X    X                                                          2
Appendix Table A2. Details of enterprise zone live-in requirements
                        Live in        Benefits subject to
                   requirement for          employee
       State           benefits?            residence                  Related legislation and additional details
California                No                   None          Statues of 1984, Section 7082 (i)(1)-(2). There is a
                                                             requirement that residents belong to a high-density
                                                             unemployment area.
Colorado                  Yes              Hiring credit     1987 c. 310 p.1470-1472: Section 39-30-105

Florida                     Yes             Hiring credit     1995 section 220.181. There is also a 20% employee resident
                                                              requirement for businesses to receive a business property
                                                              credit
Hawaii                      No                 None           1995 Act 91, p. 136-139 Section 5. Section 209E-9: For a
                                                              business to qualify for credits, 40% or more of their
                                                              employees must be low income, but there is no requirement
                                                              that they must reside in the enterprise zone.
Illinois                    No                 None           Public Act 86-203 201(g)

Massachusetts               No                 None           1993 Chapter 19 Section 3E (5)(b)(v): enterprise zone project
                                                              proposals are supposed to have a "reasonable chance of
                                                              increasing employment opportunities for residents of the
                                                              project ETA [Economic Targeted Area]..." but there is no
                                                              actual requirement set forth.
Nebraska               Yes/Limited          Hiring credit     1999 77-27-188(3)(a)-(b) Employers operating in enterprise
                                                              zones can still claim hiring credits for non-enterprise zone
                                                              residents, however the amount is reduced ($3,000 for each
                                                              non-resident hired versus $5,000 for each resident hired)
New York               Yes/Limited          Hiring credit     1993, c. 708 Sect 8,9: Until legislation enacted in 1993, there
                                                              were requirements that qualified employees reside within a
                                                              certain distance to the zone depending on the density of the
                                                              population. After modification to this language in 1993, it
                                                              appears there were no longer residency requirements.
Ohio                        No                 None           1993/1994 Section 5709.64(A)(2)(e): There is a requirement
                                                              that 25% of newly hired employees must meet one of several
                                                              conditions; one way to qualify is if the employee resided for
                                                              at least 6 months in the county containing the enterprise zone.
Oregon                      No              Property tax      Oregon Laws 1995 Section 8. ORS 285.605: After 1995, the
                                             exemption        enterprise zone residency requirements were removed. Prior
                                                              to 1995, to comply with the hiring requirements (285.605),
                                                              50% of all new zone employees hired had to be residents of
                                                              enterprise zones.
Rhode Island           Yes/Limited          Hiring credit     1999 Ch. 177 Section 1, 42-64.3-6: Tax credit equal to 50%
                                                              of total wages paid to new hires if not enterprise zone
                                                              residents. Credit increases to 75% for employees who are
                                                              enterprise zone residents.
Virginia               Yes/Limited              All           1995 c. 517 Section 59.1-279: Businesses qualified to receive
                                                              enterprise zone tax credits must have 40% of their employees
                                                              have had incomes below 80% of the median income prior to
                                                              employment at the enterprise zone firm, or be residents of an
                                                              enterprise zone
Wisconsin                   No                  No            Tax form Schedule EC just says that employees must be
                                                              residents of Wisconsin.
         Online Appendices for: Heterogeneous Effects of State Enterprise Zone Programs
                               in the Shorter Run and Longer Run

                  Online Appendix B. Details of State Enterprise Zone Incentives

       This appendix documents the features of state enterprise zone programs. Appendix Tables A1 and

A2 in the main text summarize our coding.

                                                  California
   1. Local incentives
      i) Occupational licenses/regulatory relief
           (1) Business Incentive/Regulatory Relief: Mostly modest development assistance. E.g.
               streamlined permit assistance, expedited permits, one-stop application and issuance etc.
               (a) 1986 ­
               (b) Source: Dowall (1996)
           (2) Fee/Tax incentives
      ii) Real property tax incentive (ad valorem for increase in value)
           (1) Tax increment funds: Tax incentives for funds
               (a) 1986 -
               (b) Source: Dowall (1996)
      iii) Bonds/loans
           (1) Assistance with Financing of Capital Equipment and Buildings: Allows interest (less
               expenses) to be deducted by lender with no ownership or equity interest in the business.
               Also, block grants, and revenue bonds are available in some areas.
               (a) 1986 ­
               (b) Source: Dowall (1996)
      iv) Job/referral placement
           (1) Job Referral/Placement: This is a program service and incentive and according to Dowel
               et al. (1994), this was the most effective employment enhancing local benefit. As of
               1993, this benefit was available in LA (Central city, Pacoima, and Watts), Sacramento:
               Northgate, San Diego: Barrio Logan, and West Sacramento.
               (a) 1986 ­
               (b) Source: Dowall (1996)

   2. Financing
      i) Lender interest deduction
          (1) Net Interest Deduction: Allows interest (less expenses) to be deducted by lender with no
              ownership or equity interest in business.
              (a) 1986 ­
              (b) Source: Dowall (1996).
   3. Hiring credit
      i) Tax credit based on wage bill
          (1) Wage credit is 10-50% of wages paid to enterprise zone employees (declines by
              employee tenure).
              (a) 1986 ­
              (b) Source: Dowall (1996) and tax form CA3850z.
   4. Misc.
      i) Net operating loss computation and loss limitations
          (1) Net Operating Loss Deduction: Allows interest (less expenses) to be deducted by lender
              with no ownership or equity interest in business.


                                                  B.i
               (a) 1986 ­
               (b) Source: Dowall (1996) and tax form CA3850z
       ii) Employee income tax credit
           (1) Employees working in zone may claim credit against income tax on wages earned in
               zone.
               (a) 1986 ­
               (b) Source: Dowall (1996) and tax form CA3850z
    5. Tangible personal property
       i) Machinery and equipment sales and use or property tax exemption
           (1) Business expense deductions: Deduction cost of a portion of depreciable business
               property (like machinery) for exclusive use in a zone. Max deduction: $10,000 (20,000
               for program areas).
               (a) 1986 ­
               (b) Source: Dowall (1996) and tax form CA3850z
           (2) Sales and use tax credit: Can be claimed on machinery used that manufactures, processes,
               combines or fabricates; or produces renewable energy or control air or water pollution.
               Individuals can claim up to $1 mil annually; corporations can claim up to $20 mil
               annually.
               (a) 1986 -
               (b) Source: Dowall (1996) and tax form CA3850z.

                                                Colorado

1) Investment in employees and benefits
   1. Credit for paying employee insurance premiums
   2. Credit or refund for tax paid on insurance premiums to the same extent that the taxpayer would
       qualify for a credit or refund against income tax.
           (1) 1996 ­
           (2) Source: S.B. 96-193 section 39-30-107.6
   3. Job training/school tax credit or reimbursement
       i) Taxpayers are allowed to claim a credit of 10% of their total investment in a qualified job-
           training program. "Qualified job training program" means a structured training or basic
           education program conducted on-site or off-site by the taxpayer or another entity to improve
           the job skills of employees who are employed by the taxpayer. These employees must be
           working predominately within an enterprise zone. (On the job training is not a qualified job-
           training program. Expenses incurred in training employees leased by the taxpayer do not
           qualify for the credit. Total investment means: (1) Land, building, real property improvement,
           leasehold improvement, or space lease costs and the cost of any capital equipment purchased
           or leased by the taxpayer and used entirely within an enterprise zone primarily for qualified
           job training program purposes or to make a training site accessible to the extent such
           investments or costs do not qualify for the enterprise zone investment tax credit; and (2)
           Expenses for a qualified job training program, whether incurred within or outside of an
           enterprise zone, including expensed equipment, supplies, training staff wages or fees, training
           contract costs, temporary space rental, travel expenses, and other expense costs of qualified
           job training programs for employees working predominantly within an enterprise zone.
           (Wages of employees being trained are not includible expenses.)
           (1) 1996 ­
           (2) Carryover of up to 12 years
           (3) Source: S.B. 96-193 section 39-30-104 (4); Income 31 Enterprise Zone Qualified Job
                Training Program Investment Credit tax form
   4. Day care


                                                   B.ii
         i)  This is part of the Tax deduction for contributions (39-30-105.6).
             (1) 1990-1993
             (2) Source 39-30-105.6
2)   Local incentives
     1. Real property tax incentive (total)
         i) Property tax relief: County/municipality/city may negotiate with the taxpayer who qualified
             for the hiring credit (39-30-105) for an amount equal to but not more than the property taxes
             levied against the taxpayer.
             (1) 1987 ­
             (2) Source: Chapter 310 section 39-30-107.5 (1) of the 1987 legislative session
             (3) Exemption cannot be more than the current property tax liability and the tax liability for
                  the same property for the preceding year in which the enterprise zone is approved.
     2. Taxable tangible property (sales and use tax) incentives
         i) Refund for purchases: County/municipality/city may negotiate with taxpayer who qualified
             for the hiring credit (39-30-105) a refund for the purchase of equipment, machinery, machine
             tools, or supplies used in the business.
             (1) 1987 ­
             (2) Source: Chapter 310 section 39-30-107.5 (2) of the 1987 legislative session.
3)   Financing
     1. Tax deduction for contributions
         i) 50% (this is reduced to 25% as of 1/1/96) of deduction from income tax of the amount
             contributed for the purpose of implementing the economic development plan for the
             enterprise zone to the person or agency that has been designated the enterprise zone
             administrator. Credit cannot exceed $100,000 or the total amount of the income tax imposed
             on the taxpayer. In-kind contributions shall not exceed 50% of the total credit claimed. To
             qualify for the credit, the contribution must be used for purposes that are directly related to
             job creation, job preservation, or assistance programs for homeless persons.
             (1) 1989 -
             (2) 5-year carryover
             (3) Source: Chapter 341 section 39-30-103.5 of the 1989 legislative session; FYI Income 23
                  Tax Credit for Contributions to Enterprise Zone Administrators, Programs, Projects, or
                  Organizations tax form.
4)   Hiring credit
     1. Flat credit for each new employee
         i) New employee credit: Credit against income tax of $500 for each new employee for a
             business that is new and located in an enterprise zone for at least one year. Beginning in
             1987, a credit is available for each new employee, for the first 2 years, who is insured under a
             health insurance plan or program provided through the employer, equal to $200. The
             employer must contribute 50% or more of the total cost of a health insurance plan or
             program. Also in 1987, an additional $500 credit is available for employers who add jobs and
             add value through manufacturing or processing of agricultural commodities. Beginning in
             1989, existing facilities can qualify if they expand the business by increasing employment by
             10 or more new employees compared to the year prior to the expansion
             (1) 1986 ­
             (2) 5-year carryover beginning on or after January 1, 2003
             (3) Source: Chapter 310 section 39-30-105 of the 1987 legislative session; Income 10
                  Enterprise Zone New Business Facility Employee Credits tax form.
5)   Research tax credits
     1. Research and experimental activities tax credit
         i) Credit against income tax for 3% of the amount expended for research and experimental
             activities over what the average expenditures are for the firm from the previous year. In any


                                                    B.iii
            one year the amount of the allowable credit for deduction is 25% of the total amount of the
            credit with the balance being carried forward to the next year. Carryover is allowed until the
            total amount is used. Business must make expenditures in research and experimental
            activities (section 174)
            (1) 1988 ­ 1992
            (2) Source: Chapter 288 section 39-30-105.5 of the 1988 legislative session; FYI Income 22
                Research and Development Income Tax Credit for Enterprise Zones tax form.
6) Misc.
   1. Technology infrastructure investment tax credit (rural internet)
      i) Income tax credit equal to 10% of the amount of total investment made in technology
           infrastructure required to provide Internet access in rural technology enterprise zones. Credit
           can only be claimed for specific capital investments in technology infrastructure that will
           qualify as specified by the public utilities commission (39-32-104(1)(d)).
           (1) 10 year carryover
           (2) 1989 -
           (3) Source: 39-32-105; FYI Income 36 Rural Technology Enterprise Zone Credit tax form.
7) Real property (land or buildings)
   1. Property tax credit or exemption (added value from renovation/expansion)
      i) Rehabilitated building credit: A credit equal to 25% of aggregate qualified expenditures or
           $50,000, whichever is less, is available for rehabilitating a building for commercial use.
           Buildings must be at least 20 years old and have been unoccupied for at least 2 years. The
           credit limit is $50,000 per building.
           (1) 1989 ­
           (2) 5-year carryover
           (3) Source: Chapter 341 section 39-30-105.6 of the 1989 legislative session; Income 24
                Vacant Commercial Building Rehabilitation Credit for Enterprise Zones tax form.
8) Tangible personal property
   1. Machinery and equipment sales and use or property tax exemption
      i) Sales and use tax: Purchase of machinery or machine tools by a person engaged in
           manufacturing is exempt from sales and use tax. Purchase of machinery or machine tools by a
           person engaged in manufacturing is exempt from sales and use tax. Beginning in 1989, the
           credit also applies to materials used for construction or repair of machinery or machine tools.
           Beginning in 1990, there is a special provision for licensed air carriers to receive benefits for
           sale, storage, use or consumption of any machinery, tools or equipment (must employ more
           than 2000 people). Also in 1991, definition of manufacturing is expanded to include refining,
           blasting, exploring, mining, and mined land reclamation, quarrying for, processing and
           beneficiation or otherwise extracting from the earth or from waste or stockpiles or from pits
           of banks any natural resource. Beginning in 1988, purchases must exceed $500. Purchases in
           a single year cannot exceed $10 million (this restriction is removed in 1987 under 39-30-106)
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Source: Chapter 248 section 39-30-106 of the 1986 legislative session.
      ii) Credit against tax: Any person in an enterprise zone is allowed a credit against the property
           tax equal to 30% for property used exclusively in an enterprise zone. Credit is 3x the amount
           of the investment tax credit allowed by 39-22-507.5, which is 10%. As of 1/1/97 the credit is
           3% of the total qualified investment.
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Source: Chapter 248 section 39-30-104 of the 1986 legislative session.




                                                   B.iv
                                                 Florida

1. Investment in employees and benefits
   i. Day care
        i) Exemption for Licensed Child Care Facility: Any real estate used and owned by a childcare
           facility, as defined in 402.302, that operates within an enterprise zone is exempt from
           taxation.
           (1) 1999 -
           (2) Source: Section 196.095
2. Local Incentives
   i. Occupational licenses/regulatory relief
        i) Regulatory Relief: Beginning with the 1984 legislation, local municipalities could elect to
           partially exempt businesses in enterprise zones of occupational license tax at a rate of 50%.
           Each state agency rule adopted after January 1, 1987, where applicable, shall provide
           encouragements and incentives which will increase rehabilitation, renovation, restoration,
           improvement or new construction of housing and which will increase the economic viability
           and profitability of business and commerce located within enterprise zones. Each agency
           shall take necessary steps to waive, modify or otherwise minimize the adverse effects of such
           rules upon rehabilitation, renovation, restoration, improvement or new construction of
           housing or upon the economic viability and profitability of business and commerce.
           (1) 1984-1993
           (2) Source: Chapter 84-356 Section 205.054; Chapter 91-262 Section 290.0135
   ii. Real property tax incentive (total)
        i) Economic Development Ad Valorem Tax Exemption: Allows referendums to be voted on
           that will allow for ad valorem tax exemption for new businesses and expansions of existing
           businesses located in enterprise zones. Upon majority vote in favor of such authority, the
           board of county commissioners or the governing authority of any municipality, at its
           discretion, by ordinance may exempt from ad valorem taxation 100% of the assessed value of
           all improvements to real property made by or for the use of a new business and all tangible
           personal property of such new business, or 100% of the assessed value of all added
           improvements to real property made to facilitate the expansion of an existing business and of
           the net increase in all tangible personal property acquired to facilitate such expansion of the
           existing business. In the case of a referendum, the exemptions are limited solely to new
           businesses and expansions of existing businesses, which are located in an enterprise zone.
           (1) 1982-1993
           (2) Source: Chapter 82-119 Section 162.007 (2) (a)
   iii. Real property tax increment financing
           (1) Tax Increment Financing: Pursuant to part III of Chapter 163. This is the Community
                Redevelopment Act 36. The act allows a CRA to annually capture and spend a portion of
                the incremental increase in ad valorem tax revenues resulting from redevelopment.
           (2) 1982-1993
           (3) Source: Chapter 82-119 Section 162.007 (2) (c)
   iv. Bonds/loans
        i) Industrial Revenue Bonds: Allows the use of industrial revenue bonds pursuant to the Florida
           Industrial Development Financing Act.
           (1) 1982 ­ 1993
           (2) Source: Chapter 82-119 Section 162.007 (2) (b)
   v. Energy tax exemption/credit

36
  More available here:
https://www.floridabar.org/divcom/jn/jnjournal01.nsf/Author/1CE0373378668370852573050058A3D5


                                                   B.v
        i)  Public Service Tax: A municipality may by ordinance exempt not less than 50% of the tax
            imposed on purchasers of electrical energy who are determined to be eligible for the
            exemption provided in s. 212.08(12), which says that a qualified business operating in an
            enterprise zone that has passed a local ordinance pursuant to 166.231(8) (i.e. this law) is
            exempt from electrical energy tax for a period of 5 years from the first billing period after the
            department has authorized an exemption.
            (1) 1984 ­ 1993
            (2) There is a recapture provision in 212.08(12)(c)
            (3) Source: Chapter 84-356 Section 166.231(8) and Chapter 84-356 Section 212.08(12)(a)
3. Financing
   i. Interest free loans
       i) Community Development Corporation Support and Assistance Program: Allows for the
            development of community development corporations that can offer assistance to businesses
            who operate in enterprise zones. Includes issuing interest free loans to be repaid within 15
            years (288.608(6)). Terminating a project requires repayment of the loan
            (1) 1982 ­
            (2) Chapter 82-119 ss. 288.601 ­ 288.609.
4. Hiring credit
   i. Tax credit based on wage bill
       i) Economic Revitalization Jobs Creation Incentive Credit/Enterprise Zone Jobs Credit: The tax
            credit is computed as a percentage of the actual monthly wages of new employees ranging
            from 5-25%. From 1982 to 1987, the tax credit is equal to 25%. From 1988-1994, the credit is
            lowered to 15%. Beginning in 1995, the credit is lowered to 10% of the actual monthly wages
            paid in this state to each new employee. However, if no less than 20 percent of the employees
            of the business are residents of an enterprise zone, excluding temporary and part-time
            employees, the credit shall be calculated as 15% for a period of up to 12 consecutive months.
            Then, in 1996, the credit is computed as follows: 10% of the monthly wages paid to each new
            employee with wages less than $1,500 a month. If no less than 20% of the employees are
            residents of the enterprise zone, the credit is computed as 15% of the monthly wages paid to
            each new employee; OR 5% of the first $1,500 of actual monthly ages to each new employee
            whose wages exceed $1,500; OR 15% of the first $1,500 of actual monthly wages for each
            new employee who is a WAGES program participant
            (1) 1982 ­
            (2) Carryover of 5 years allowed beginning in 1995.
            (3) Source: Chapter 82-119 section 220.181.
5. Income tax credit for operating in enterprise zone
   i. Credit for opening new or expanding existing business
       i) Economic Revitalization Tax Incentive Credit: From 1982-1984 there are several ways to
            qualify for this credit. The first way to qualify is to establish 5 or more new full-time
            employees of whom the majority of new employees must be residents of an enterprise zone.
            The second way to qualify is as a new or rebuilt business, with the majority of all employees
            being residents of an enterprise zone. From 1984 ­ 1993 qualifications change slightly. In
            each year during the 10-year period for which the credit is available, no fewer than 5 more
            employees than in the year preceding the initial granting of the credit. For a new, expanded,
            or rebuilt business, no less than 20 percent of its employees are residents of an enterprise
            zone, excluding temporary employees. There is a $50,000 max credit allowed for every year
            this credit was available. Note that after 1984 these benefits existed for other areas as well
            (not just enterprise zones): blighted area, neighborhood strategy area, neighborhood housing
            service area, and historic preservation district.
       ii) 1982 ­
       iii) Carryover of 5-years


                                                    B.vi
        iv) Source: Chapter 82-119 section 220.182
   ii. Energy tax exemption
        i) Electrical Energy Used in an Enterprise Zone: From 1984 ­ 1993, charges for electrical
            energy used by a qualified business in an enterprise zone in a municipality that has enacted an
            ordinance pursuant to s. 166.231(8) [This is the local credit] shall be exempt from state tax
            for 5 years from when the exemption has been authorized. Beginning in 1994, the sales tax
            exemption is 50% for municipal utility taxes for electricity used by a business in an enterprise
            zone. However, if no less than 20% of the employees are residents of the enterprise zone
            excluding part-time and temporary employees, the exemption is 100%.
            (1) 1984 ­
            (2) Source: Chapter 84-356 section 212.08(12)(a) and Chapter 94-136 section 212.08(15)(1)
6. Misc.
   i. Regulatory relief
        i) Regulatory Relief: Each state agency rule adopted after 1/1/87 where applicable, shall
            provide encouragements and incentives which will increase rehabilitation, renovation,
            restoration, improvement or new construction of housing and which will increase the
            economic viability and profitability of business and commerce located within enterprise
            zones. Each agency shall take necessary steps to waive, modify or otherwise minimize the
            adverse effects of such rules upon rehabilitation, renovation, restoration, improvement or new
            construction of housing or upon the economic viability and profitability of business and
            commerce.
            (1) 1987 ­
            (2) Source: Chapter 84-256 section 290.013(1)
7. Real property (land and buildings)
   i. Property tax credit or exemption (total value)
        i) Business property used in an enterprise zone: Business property purchased for use by
            businesses located in an enterprise zone, which is subsequently used in an enterprise zone,
            shall be exempt from sales and use tax if not less than 20% of employees are residents of the
            zone. Exemption is inured through previously paid taxes. The 20% employee requirement is
            eliminated starting in 1995.
            (1) 1984 ­
            (2) Source: Chapter 84-356 section 212.08(5)(g); Chapter 94-136 section 212.08(5)(h)
   ii. Property tax credit or exemption (added from value from renovation/expansion)
        i) Enterprise Zone Property Tax Credit: Ad valorem tax credit equal to 96 percent of property
            taxes levied for operating purposes against the corporate or franchise tax. Credit computed
            annually as ad valorem tax paid in this state resulting from assessments on additional real or
            tangible personal property acquired to facilitate the expansion of an existing business; or the
            ad valorem taxes paid in this state resulting from assessments on property replaced or
            restored. Qualified businesses are those that establish a new business or expand an existing
            business. Includes pollution and waste control facilities, or any part thereof and including one
            or more buildings or other structures, machinery, fixtures, and equipment. Amount of credit
            taken in any one year cannot exceed $25,000 or if no less than 20 percent of employees,
            excluding temporary employees, are residents of an enterprise zone, the amount cannot
            exceed $50,000.
            (1) 1995 ­
            (2) Carryover for 5 years
            (3) Source: Chapter 94-136 Section 220.182
   iii. Tax credit for construction materials
        i) Building materials used in the rehabilitation of real property located in an enterprise zone:
            Building materials used in the rehabilitation of real property located in an enterprise zone



                                                   B.vii
           shall be exempt from sales and use tax. Building materials must be used for the rehabilitation
           of real property in the enterprise zone and credits are inured through previously paid taxes.
      ii) 1984 ­
      iii) Source: Chapter 84-356 section 212.08(5)(f); Chapter 94-136 section 212.08(5)(g)
8. Tangible personal property
   i. Machinery and equipment sales and use or property tax exemption
      i) Business equipment used in enterprise zone: See Enterprise Zone Property Tax Credit for
           details. It allows exemptions for machinery.
      ii) 1995 ­
      iii) Carryover for 5 years
      iv) Source: Chapter 94-136 Section 220.182

                                                   Hawaii

1. Investment in employee benefits
   i. Credit for paying employee insurance premiums
       i) State general excise tax exemption: Except for the general excise tax, the credit will count
           against unemployment taxes, and income tax and shall be 80% of the tax due for the first tax
           year, 70% for the second, 60% for the third, 50% for the forth, 40% for the fifth, 30% for the
           sixth, and 20% for the seventh. No carryover.
           (1) 1986 -
           (2) Source: S.B. No. 2095-86 Act 78, section 10
2. Local incentives
   i. Occupational licenses/regulatory relief
       i) Reduction of permit fees and user fees: There are several regulatory relief type benefits that
           could be offered on a local level. This list is not comprehensive but is inclusive. In addition to
           reducing permit fees, and user fees, local agencies can also specially zone districts, reform the
           permit process, exempt businesses from local ordinances and provide other non-
           aforementioned public incentives proposed in the locality's application. Localities must
           provide incentives in order for their enterprise zone application to be considered.
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Source: S.B. No. 2095-86 Act 78 section 12.
   ii. Real property tax incentive (total)
       i) Reduction of real property taxes: This is the only non-regulatory type benefit mentioned in
           the list of local benefits that localities can provide. Every locality must select local benefits as
           part of their enterprise zone application.
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Source: S.B. No. 2095-86 Act 78 section 12.
3. Hiring credit
   i. Payroll or unemployment tax exemption
       i) State business tax credit: A credit equal to 80% of the unemployment tax paid during the first
           year, 70% of the taxes in the second year, 60% in the third year, 50% in the fourth year, 40%
           in the fifth year, 30% in the sixth year and 20% in the seventh year of operation. The
           unemployment tax is small though ­ about 1-2% of total taxable wages.
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Source: S.B. No. 2095-86 Act 78 section 10 (c)-(d). Department of Business, Economic
                Development and Tourism Research and Economic Analysis Division Report (2007)
4. Income tax credit for operating in enterprise zone
   i. General excise tax credit
       i) State general excise tax exemption: A qualified business (starting in 1989 this means a
           business in an enterprise zone engaged in manufacturing, the wholesale sale of tangible


                                                    B.viii
           personal property or a service business or calling) is exempt from general excise taxes on the
           gross proceeds from all items sold in the enterprise zone. Exemption shall extend for not
           longer than 7 years. In 1989 the exemption is restricted to include only those sold from the
           manufacture of tangible personal property, the wholesale of tangible personal property, or the
           engaging in the service business or calling. In 1997, exemptions from the use tax for
           purchases by a qualified business are included. Additionally, the gross proceeds received by a
           contractor shall be exempt from the general excise tax for construction.
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Source: S.B. No. 2095-86 Act 78, section 11; H.B. No. 1879 Section 209E-2(2)
   ii. Credit for opening new or expanding business
       i) State business tax credit: Except for the general excise tax, the credit will count against
           unemployment taxes, and income tax and shall be 80% of the tax due for the first tax year,
           70% for the second, 60% for the third, 50% for the forth, 40% for the fifth, 30% for the sixth,
           and 20% for the seventh. No carryover.
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Source: S.B. No. 2095-86 Act 78, section 10
5. Public property
   i. Sale/lease of public real property for business use
       i) Sale or lease of public land: The state and any agency of a political subdivision that own any
           land within the enterprise zone may make available for sale or lease all land not designated or
           targeted for some public use, with the condition it be developed.
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Source: S.B. No. 2095-86 Act 78 section 6.

                                                     Illinois

1. Investment in employees and benefits
   i. Job training/school tax credit or reimbursement
       i) Training Expense Credit: 1.6% credit against income tax for educational or vocational
           training in semi-technical or technical fields or semi-skilled or skilled fields. Credit also
           available for high impact businesses 37 located in federally designated trade zones 38 or sub
           zones.
           (1) 1987 ­
           (2) 5-year carryover.
           (3) Source: Public Act 85-1182 sub-section (j) of section 201
2. Local incentives
   i. Real property tax incentive (ad valorem for increase in value)
       i) Real Property Tax Abatement: Any taxing district can vote to order the county clerk to abate
           any portion of taxes on real property or any class thereof in enterprise zone. Eligible property
           includes new improvements that have been constructed after this act.
           (1) 1983 ­
           (2) Source: Public Act 82-1019 Section 162e
   ii. Energy tax exemption/credit
       i) Utility Tax Exemption: Any municipality that includes an Enterprise Zone area may put up a
           vote to its corporate authorities to exempt taxes on receipts of public utilities received from
           business in Enterprise Zones for up to 20 years. Also, businesses are exempted from
           additional charges added to utility bills as a pass-on of municipal and state utility taxes. In

37
   High impact businesses are approved based on an application process and must be designated in federal Foreign
Trade Zones or other approved Zones (Public Act 84-769 Section 1 subsection 5.5).
38
   Foreign-trade zones are geographic areas adjacent to a port of entry to the United States.


                                                      B.ix
           1986, this is expanded to include exemptions for charges from telecommunication carriers;
           the department of commerce and community affairs determines the percentage of charges
           exempted. In 1986, this is expanded to include public utility tax exemptions for businesses in
           federally designated Foreign Trade Zone or Sub-Zones and designated high impact
           businesses.
           (1) 1985 ­
           (2) Source: Public Act 84-166
3. Financing
   i. Corporation for providing loans
       i) Industrial Grants and Loans: Expands the "Illinois Industrial Development Authority Act" to
           include Enterprise Zones as areas that the Authority can make direct loans for projects. May
           issue bonds, notes or other debts for developing, constructing, acquiring or improving
           industrial projects by businesses in Enterprise Zones. The Illinois Industrial Development
           Authority Act was enacted in 1979 ­ it is just expanded to include Enterprise Zones.
           (1) 1983 ­
           (2) Source: Act 82-1019 Section 12.
   ii. Tax deduction for contributions
       i) State Income Tax Deduction for Contributions: A business entity may receive a deduction
           against income subject to state taxes for a contribution to a designated zone organization if
           the project for which the contribution is made has been specifically approved by the
           designating municipality or county and by the department. Designated zone organization
           must submit application for project to be approved for the contribution. The project must
           enhance the enterprise zone by creating permanent jobs, physically improving housing stock,
           stimulating neighborhood business activity, or by preventing crime.
           (1) 1983 ­
           (2) Source: Act 82-1019 Section 11.
4. Hiring credit
   i. Flat credit for each new employee
       i) Jobs Tax Credit: Credit against income tax of $500 for each eligible employee hired during
           the taxable year. In 1986 this is expanded to include high impact businesses and businesses
           that operate in federally designated foreign trade zones or sub-zones. Qualifications: must
           hire 5 or more eligible employees; total firm employment must increase by 5 or more
           employees beyond the total employed in previous year; eligible employees must be employed
           180 consecutive days. An eligible employee is a dislocated worker, hired after enterprise zone
           was designated, employed in enterprise zone, and full-time employee working 30 or more
           hours per week. Available at least until 2002 based on the document "Enterprise Zone
           Incentives", but appears to be repealed sometime thereafter because it does not appear in
           "Illinois enterprise zone Program Benefits" which is undated.
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Carryover of 5 years
           (3) Source: Public Act 84-166 Section 4 amending Sec. 201(h)(6)(i) of the Illinois Income
                Tax Act
5. Public property
   i. Sale/lease of public real property for business use
       i) Sale of Publicly Owned Real Property in an Enterprise Zone: The state, county or
           municipality containing an enterprise zone that owns any unused structures or vacant land
           may either (A) sell such structures or vacant land at public auction or other methods, (B)
           establish an urban homestead program whereby individual residences are sold for no more
           than $100 with the requirement that the new owner live there for 7 years and agrees to
           renovations, or (C) establish an urban shopstead program similar to (B) but for a Zone
           organization


                                                  B.x
           (1) 1983 -
           (2) Source: Act 82-1019 Section 10.
6. Real property (land and buildings)
   i. Property tax credit or exemption (added from renovation/expansion)
      i) Property Investment Credit: Amends the Ch. 120 section 201 of the Illinois Income Tax Act
           to allow for a credit of 0.5% on the basis for qualified property 39. Credit is only available in
           the taxable year in which the qualified property is placed in service. In 1985, the credit is
           extended to high impact businesses 40. In 1993 qualified property is expanded to include signs
           that are real property but not to include land, or improvements to real property that are not a
           structural component of a building such as landscaping, sewer lines, local access roads,
           fencing, parking lots and other appurtenances.
           (1) 1982 ­
           (2) No carryover for first few years but in 1985 there is a 5-year carryover as long as the
                investment created a minimum of 2000 full time jobs and is located in enterprise zone.
           (3) Recapture provision: If the property is moved outside of the enterprise zone within 48
                months of being placed in service, the business would have to pay back the credit.
           (4) Source: Public Act 82-1019 section 13
7. Tangible personal property
   i. Machinery and equipment sales and use or property tax exemption
      i) Sale of Building Materials Incorporated into Enterprise Zone Real Estate: This is a supply
           side benefit in that it is only available for retailers selling building materials to enterprise
           zone businesses. Each retailer who operates in an enterprise zone who makes a sale of
           building materials to be incorporated into real estate in such enterprise zone by remodeling,
           rehabilitation or new construction may file claims for credit or refund to recover the amount
           of tax paid under this act and the "municipal retailers occupation tax act" or the "county
           retailers occupation tax act." Beginning in 1985, sales of building materials to High Impact
           Businesses are eligible for retailers to file a claim for credit or refund to recover the taxes
           paid.
           (1) 1983 -
           (2) Source: Act 82-1019 Section 5k
      ii) Manufacturing Property Tax Exemption: All tangible personal property used or consumed
           within an enterprise zone for manufacturing or assembly of tangible personal property for
           wholesale or retail sale or lease is exempted from tax. Includes repair and replacement parts
           for machinery and equipment used primarily in the process of manufacturing or assembling
           tangible personal property for wholesale or retail sale, or lease, and equipment,
           manufacturing fuels, material and supplies for maintenance, repair or operation of such
           manufacturing or assembling machinery or equipment. Also, tangible personal property for
           pollution control facilities in enterprise zones are exempt. Beginning in 1988, high impact
           businesses qualify for this exemption. Requirement that the business must make investments
           that cause the creation or retention of a minimum of 200 full-time jobs.
           (1) 1985 ­


39
   Qualified property includes new or used tangible property, including buildings and structural components of
buildings. Property can only qualify if it has not been used in Illinois before.
40
   A business is considered a high impact business if their application is accepted by the department for business that
operate in federally designated Foreign Trade Zone or Zones subject to the business expecting to cause a substantial
increase in per capita income, reverse loss or out migration of jobs, decrease unemployment, decrease number of
people living in poverty. Beginning in 1988, high impact businesses no longer need to be located in federally
designated foreign trade zones or subzones. They do however have to invest a minimum of $150,000,000 which will
place in service qualified property and create 1,000 full time jobs in an enterprise zone or $30,000,000 investment in
qualified property and retain at least 1,500 full time jobs.


                                                         B.xi
             (2) Source: Act 84-940 Section 7 amending Ch. 120 new par. 440d section 1d-e
        iii) Manufacturing or Equipment Tax Exemption: Tax exemption for machinery or equipment of
             high impact service facilities. Machinery and equipment, new and replacement, shall include
             but not be limited to: motor driven heavy equipment not considered rolling stock which is
             used for the purpose of transporting parcels, machinery or equipment used to maintain and
             provide in-house services, within the confines of the facility, AND automated machinery and
             equipment used for the purposes of transporting parcels within the facility, along with all
             components, parts, pieces, and computer software or hardware contained in the electronic
             control systems related thereto.
             (1) 1988 ­
             (2) Source: Public Act 85-1409 section 6 amending Ch. 120, new par. 440j section 1j.
        iv) Aircraft Maintenance Facility Tax Exemption: Machinery and equipment tax exemption.
             Tangible personal property, used or consumed within an Enterprise Zone by any aircraft
             maintenance facility qualifies for an exemption from machinery and equipment tax. An
             exemption for jet fuel is added in 1997 if the business has waived it's right to the public utility
             exemption. Facility operated by an interstate carrier for hire that is used primarily for the
             maintenance, rebuilding or repair of aircraft, aircraft parts and auxiliary equipment owned or
             leased by that carrier as rolling stock moving in interstate commerce that will make an
             investment of $400mil or more in the Enterprise Zone, will cause creation of at least 5,000
             full time jobs in the Enterprise Zone, located in a county with populations not less than
             150,000 and not more than 2000,00 and that contains 3 Enterprise Zones. As long as these
             three requirements are satisfied, an agreement may be made.
             (1) 1990 ­
             (2) Source: Public Act 86-1490 section 4 amending Ch. 120 new par. 440k section 1k.

                                               Massachusetts

1. Real property (land and buildings)
   i. Property tax credit or exemption (total value)
       i) Special Tax Assessment ­ Real Estate: Four-year declining exemption equal to 100% of a
           parcel's value in the first year 75% in the second, 50% in the third and 25% in the fourth and
           final year.
           (1) 1994 -
           (2) Source: General Laws Ch. 23A section 3E and Information Guideline Release No. 94-
                201 by the Department of Revenue Property Tax Bureau
   ii. Property tax credit or exemption (added value from renovation/expansion)
       i) Tax Increment Financing: Exemption of local property tax for the percentage of increase in a
           parcel's value over its base value in the year before the exemption is granted. Exemption can
           last for up to 20 years and can be as high as 100%.
           (1) 1994 ­
           (2) Source: General Laws Chapter 59 section 5 Clause 51, General Laws Chapter 40 section
                59, and Information Guideline Release No. 94-201 by the Department of Revenue
                Property Tax Bureau
       ii) Renovation Tax Credit: A corporation who renovates an abandoned building in an EOA may
           deduct 10% of the cost of renovation against their income tax. (Section 38O)
           (1) 1994 ­
           (2) Source: Chapter 19 Section 18 amending Chapter 63 section 38O.
2. Tangible personal property
   i. Machinery and equipment sales and use or property tax exemption




                                                    B.xii
        i)   Property Tax Credit: Corporation subject to the corporate excise tax may take a credit of 5%
             of the cost of any property purchased as long as the property is used exclusively for a
             certified project within an EOA
             (1) 1994 ­
             (2) Carryover for unspecified amount of time.
             (3) Source: General Laws Chapter 19 Section 18 amending Chapter 63 section 38N and
                  Information Guideline Release No. 94-201 by the Department of Revenue Property Tax
                  Bureau.

                                                 Nebraska

1. Hiring credit
   i. Flat credit for each new employee
       i) Hiring Tax Credit: The hiring tax credit and investment tax credit are part of the same section
           of Nebraska's enterprise zone legislation. In order to qualify for the hiring credit (or the
           investment tax credit), the employer must increase employment by two new full-time
           employees and make at least a $75,000 investment during the taxable year. The hiring tax
           credit is $4,500 for each new employee if at least 50% of the new employees of the taxpayer
           reside within the boundaries of the enterprise zone OR $4,500 for each new employee
           residing in the enterprise zone and $1,500 for each new employee not residing within the
           enterprise zone if less than 50% of the new employees reside in the Enterprise Zone. Max
           credit of $75,000 including the hiring tax credit and the investment tax credit.
           (1) 1993 ­
           (2) Source: LB 725. Section 16. Amending Section 77-27,188(3)(a-b)
2. Income tax credit for operating in enterprise zone
   i. Credit contingent on private investment (sales and use tax)
       i) Investment Tax Credit: $3,000 credit for each $75,000 of increased investment if at least 50%
           of the new employees of the taxpayer reside within the boundaries of the enterprise zone OR
           $1,000 for each 75,000 of increased investment if less than 50% of the new employees reside
           within the enterprise zone. In order to qualify for this credit, the employer must invest at least
           $75,000 and hire at least two new employees in the year the credit is to be claimed. Max
           credit of $75,000 including the hiring tax credit and the investment tax credit.
           (1) 1993 ­
           (2) Source: LB 725. Section 16. Amending Section 77-27,188(3)(a-b)

                                                New York

1. Local incentives
   i. Real property tax incentive (total)
      i) Real property tax exemption: A municipal corporation may, after a public hearing, pass
           legislation that exempts the taxes on the base amount of a property of 100% for the first 7
           years, and 75%, 50%, and 25% respectively for the 8th 9th and 10th year
           (1) 1994 ­
           (2) Source: Laws of New York, 1993: Chapter 708 Section 40 amending section 485-e of the
                real property tax law by adding sub-division 1-a.
2. Financing
   i. Corporation for providing loans
      i) Economic Development Zone Capital Corporation: A capital corporation may be established
           in each zone for the purpose of raising funds to be used in making investments in, and loans
           to, qualified business firms for the purpose of encouraging the establishment or expansion of



                                                   B.xiii
            businesses and the provision of additional job opportunities. 20 percent of all loans made by
            this corporation must be made to local owned business enterprises
            (1) 1987 ­
            (2) Source: Laws of New York, 1986: Chapter 686 Article 18-B Section 964.
   ii. Stock investment incentive
        i) Economic Development Zone Capital Corporations Credit: Credit amount is equal to 25% of
            the consideration paid for the original issue stock purchased during the taxable year from one
            or more EDZ capital corporations.
            (1) 1987 ­ 1993
            (2) Source: Laws of New York, 1993: Section 24 subdivision 20 of section 210 of the tax
                 law.
   iii. Tax deduction for contributions
        i) Economic Development Zone Capital Corporation Credit: (This amends/replaces the stock
            investment incentive) Changes are made to eligible incentives: credit is equal to 25% of the
            sum of the following investments and contributions made during the taxable year and
            certified by the commissioner of econ development: (1) qualified investments made in, or
            contributions in the form of donations to one or more econ development zone capital
            corporations, (2) qualified investments in certified zone businesses which in the last 12
            months employed 250 or fewer full time employees.
            (1) 1994 ­
            (2) Source: Laws of New York, 1993: Chapter 708 Section 24 amending subdivision 20 of
                 section 210 of the tax law.
3. Hiring credit
   i. Tax credit based on wage bill
        i) Credit against wages for targeted employees: Benefits depend on whether the employee is a
            "targeted employee", i.e. a NY resident who receives enterprise zone wages, is eligible for
            targeted jobs tax credit, benefits under job partnership training act, receives public assistance,
            or in poverty. For targeted employees, the benefit declines with the years in which incentive
            is claimed (1-5 years): 25%, 20%, 15%, 10%, 5%. For regular employees, incentive is (1-5
            years): 12.5%. 10%, 7.5%, 5%, 2.5%.
            (1) 1987 ­ 1993
            (2) Source: Laws of New York, 1986: Chapter 686 Article 18-B section 966
   ii. Flat credit for each new employee
            (1) Credit against wages for targeted employees: The credit equals the sum (1) of the product
                 of $1500 and the average number of full time employees who received EDZ wages for at
                 least half the year, received an hourly wage which was at least 135% of the minimum
                 wage for at least half the year at the employer, AND are targeted employees, and (2) the
                 product of $750 and the average number of full time employees who received EDZ
                 wages for at least half the year. Only applies to workers for one year (the first) for which
                 EDZ wages are paid. Qualifications require at least 20% of the taxpayer's employees who
                 are employed in the jobs created in a zone during the period of its designation are
                 residents of zones or census tracts contiguous with the zone AND the average number of
                 individuals employed full time in the state and EDZ by the tax payer exceeds the average
                 number that the taxpayer had 4 years prior. After 2000, when the Economic Development
                 Zone program becomes the Empire Zones Program, the hiring credit is as high as $3,000
                 per employee if they belong to a special targeted group (persons who have received
                 public assistance in the prior two years, have income below the federal poverty level,
                 qualify for benefits for dislocated workers, or have been honorably discharged from the
                 U.S. Armed Services.)
            (2) Carryover, but unclear for how long
            (3) 1994 ­


                                                   B.xiv
             (4) Source: Laws of New York 1993: Chapter 708 section 28 amending paragraphs 3, 4 and
                 5 of subsection (k) of section 606 of the tax law. Citizens Budget Commission 2008
                 report.
4. Misc.
   i. Utility tax credit/incentive
       i) Utility Cost Reduction and Correlative Tax Credit: Reduction of 3% in the rate charged for
           gas, electricity, steam or water sold, or gas, electric, steam or water service rendered, for
           ultimate consumption or use with an area designated as an economic development zone. Does
           not apply to retail businesses.
           (1) 1987-
           (2) Source: Laws of New York, 1986: Chapter 686 section 6 amends section 186a of the tax
                law section 8.
5. Real property (land and buildings)
   i. Property tax credit or exemption (added value from renovation/expansion)
       i) Real Property Tax Exemption: Real property constructed, altered, installed or improved in an
           enterprise zone is exempt from taxation and special ad valorem levies by any municipal
           corporation as long as the local municipality adopts a law as such. 100% for the first 7 years,
           75% for year 8, 50% for year 9 and 25% for year 10 on the base amount. The base amount is
           the increase in the assessed value of the property post improvement
           (1) 1987 ­ 1993
           (2) Source: Laws of New York, 1986: Chapter 686 Section 5 amending a new section 485-e
                to the real property tax law.
   ii. Property tax credit or exemption (total value)
       i) Tangible Personal Property Tax Credit: Credit of 10% of the cost or other basis for federal
           income tax purposes of tangible personal property, including buildings and structural
           components of buildings. (12-C) says that taxpayer can use 30% of the credit received
           through (12-B) over the 3 years following first receiving credit, as long as the business
           employs at least 101% of the number of employees as the average business in the enterprise
           zone.
           (1) 1987 ­ 1993
           (2) Source: Laws of New York, Ch. 686 section 7 amending section 210 section 12-B.

                                                      Ohio

1. Investment in employees and benefits
   i. Job training/school tax credit or reimbursement
       i) Training program reimbursement: Enterprises that reimburse their new employees for getting
           training will be provided a tax credit of up to $1,000 per employee.
           (1) 1982 ­
           (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.65(a)(5)
   ii. Day care
       i) Day-care reimbursement: Enterprises that reimburse their new employees for childcare
           services are entitled a credit of the reimbursed amount up to $300 for each child.
           (1) 1982 -
           (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.65(A)(4)
2. Hiring credit 41

41
  Contrary to Ham et al. (2011), there is no $300 hiring credit for new employees. A flat credit for each new
employee hired is available beginning in the mid 1990s for enterprise zone businesses that meet stringent employee
requirements described in 1993/1994 S.B. 19 Section 5709.66(A) of up to $1,000 for new employees as described in
1993/1994 S.B. 19 5709.66(B)(2). There is however a $300 credit for employers who subsidize day care (see "Day-


                                                      B.xv
    i.  Payroll or unemployment tax exemption
        i) Payroll tax exemption: Compensation paid to new employees who are hired as a result of the
           project are exempt from the payroll tax.
           (1) 1982 ­
           (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.65(A)(3)
3. Misc.
   i. "Optional" services or assistance authorized by municipal corporations
        i) Optional services or assistance: Provision for a specified number of years, not to exceed 10,
           of any optional services or assistance that the municipal corporation is authorized to provide
           with regard to the project site.
           (1) 1982 ­
           (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.62(c)(3), 5709.63(a)(3) and 5709.63(a)(3)
4. Real property (land and buildings)
   i. Investment in land not included in determining issued or outstanding stock
        i) Land and personal property tax treatment: An investment in land or tangible personal
           property shall not be considered an asset of a corporate enterprise in determining the value of
           its issued or outstanding stock (retail does not qualify)
           (1) 1982 ­
           (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.65(A)(1)
   ii. Environmental remediation credit
        i) Environmental remediation: Businesses who meet the requirements may claim one or more of
           the following incentives: Exemption for up to 10 years of up to 50% of the assessed valuation
           of the real property prior to remediation. Exemption for up to 100% of the increase in the
           assessed valuation of the real property after remediation. Exemption for 10 years of a portion
           up to 100% of the assessed value of tangible personal property first used in the project site as
           a result of the agreement. Provision for a specified number of years, not to exceed 10, of any
           optional services or assistance that the municipal corporation is authorized to provide with
           regard to the project site. Business must spend an amount equal to at least 250% of the true
           value in money of the real property of the facility prior to remediation as determined for the
           purposes of property taxation to establish, expand, renovate, or occupy the remediated facility
           and to hire new employees, or preserve economic opportunities for existing employees at the
           remediated facility
           (1) 1982-
           (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.62(C)(2)
   iii. Property tax credit or exemption (total value)
        i) Real property tax exemption: Exemption for a specified number of years, not to exceed 10, of
           a specified portion up to 100% or 50% depending on the extent of economic difficulty in the
           area (the 87/88 legislation changed this to 100% and then 60% - 75% in 1994 onward for
           central cities in MSAs designated as enterprise zones) of real personal property constituting
           the project site first used in business at the project site as a result of the agreement.
           (1) 1982 ­
           (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.62(c)(2), 5709.63(a)(2) and 5709.63(a)(2)
   iv. Property tax credit or exemption (added value from renovation/expansion)
        i) Land and personal property tax exemption 42: An investment in land or tangible personal
           property shall not be considered an asset of a corporate enterprise in shall be exempt from
           property tax (called property factor) (retail does not qualify)

care reimbursement")
42
   Business must be designated as an enterprise zone. Additionally, the business must satisfy the following
requirements (5709.64(A)): (1) Establish, expand renovate or occupy a facility; (2) Hire new employees to fill
nonretail positions, of whom at least 25% were at least one of the following: unemployed who had resided at least 6


                                                      B.xvi
          (1) 1982 ­
          (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.65(A)(2)
5. Tangible personal property
   i. Investment in tangible property not included in determining issued or outstanding stock
       i) Land and personal property tax treatment: An investment in land or tangible personal
          property shall not be considered an asset of a corporate enterprise in determining the value of
          its issued or outstanding stock (retail does not qualify)
          (1) 1982 ­
          (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.65(A)(1)
   ii. Machinery and equipment sales and use or property tax exemption
       i) Tangible personal property tax credit: Exemption for a specified number of years, not to
          exceed 10, of a specified portion up to 100% or 50% depending on the extent of economic
          difficulty in the area (the 87/88 legislation changed this to 100% and then 60% - 75% in 1994
          onward for central cities in MSAs designated as enterprise zones) of tangible personal
          property first used in business at the project site as a result of the agreement.
          (1) 1982 ­
          (2) Source: 1981 HB 351 section 5709.62(c)(1), 5709.63(a)(1) and 5709.63(a)(1)

                                                      Oregon

1. Hiring Credit
   i. Payroll or unemployment tax exemption
       i) Payroll and employee benefit cost exemption: This is not technically a hiring credit because it
           is not limited to new employees but we categorize it as such because it lowers the average
           (and therefore marginal) employee cost. The credit is equal to 62.5% of a qualified taxpayer's
           payroll and employee benefit costs, including but not limited to worker's compensation
           insurance and payroll taxes for up to 15 years.
           (1) 1997 ­
           (2) Source: Oregon Law 1997 Chapter 835 section 40
2. Public property
   i. Sale/lease of public real property for business use
       i) Public property availability: Any state or municipal property within an enterprise zone that is
           not being used will be made available for lease or purchase to qualified businesses
           (1) 1986 ­
           (2) Source: Oregon Laws 1985 Chapter 807 section 9
   ii. Property tax exemption for leased government buildings/structures
       i) Leased Government structures43: 100% property tax exemption for a new building or
           associated structures owned by a governmental body that is leased to one or more qualified
           business firms.
           (1) 1989 ­
           (2) Source: Oregon Laws 1989 Chapter 1015 Section 18 (2)(f)
3. Real property (land and buildings)
   i. Property tax credit or exemption (total value)



months in the county of the enterprise zone, CETA eligible employees who had resided at least 6 months in the
county, recipients of aid to dependent children, general relief, or unemployment compensation benefits with at least
6 month residence, handicapped persons with at least 6 months residence, residents for at least one year in a zone
located in the county in which the enterprise zone project site is located; (3) Average number of positions increases
year over year; (4) Enterprise has not closed or reduced employment at a place of business in the state for the
primary purpose of establishing, expanding, renovating or occupying a facility.


                                                       B.xvii
         i) New construction tax credit 43 100% property tax exemption of the true cash value of a new
            building or structure with a cost of $25,000 or more.
            (1) 1989 ­
            (2) Source: Oregon Laws 1989 Chapter 1015 section 18 (2)(a).
   ii. Property tax credit or exemption (added value from renovation/expansion)
        i) New construction tax credit: New construction (does not include land) is partially exempt
            from property taxation for up to 5 years immediately following the new construction. 100%
            of the true cash value of the property in the first assessment year, 80% in the second year,
            60% in the third year, 40% in the fourth year, and 20% in the fifth and final year. Property is
            constructed or added to a business by January 1st of the application year. Property is located
            in enterprise zone. If the business becomes unqualified during the 5-year time, it will lose
            exemption AND have to pay back the property tax breaks it received PLUS interest. Only
            available for non-retail business. Property includes only new buildings or structures or
            additions to buildings or structures.
            (1) 1986 ­ 1988
            (2) Source: Oregon Laws 1985 Chapter 807 section 13. Oregon Laws 1987 Chapter 769
                 section 6 amending ORS 284.210(1)
        ii) Building modification or addition credit43: 100% property tax exemption of the increase in
            true cash value that result from the additions or modifications that cost $25,000 or more in
            one calendar year. Note that two or more additions or modifications can be aggregated to
            meet this requirement.
            (1) 1989 ­
            (2) Source: Oregon Laws 1989 Chapter 1015 section 18 (2)(b).
   iii. Property tax exemption for hotels
        i) Hotel property tax exemption: 100% property tax exemption for any property otherwise
            described in this section that is owned or leased and operated by a business firm operating a
            hotel, motel, or destination resort, to the extent that the property is located at the same site as
            the hotel, motel, or destination resort and is used primarily to serve overnight guests of the
            hotel, motel, or destination resort. Property must be primarily used to serve guests; i.e. 50%
            of all receipts must be from paying guests.
            (1) 1989 ­
            (2) Source: Oregon Laws 1989 Chapter 1015 section 18 (2)(g)
   iv. Site preparation
        i) New construction tax exemption for site preparation43: 100% property tax exemption for the
            increase in property value that results from site preparation that was necessary for and
            undertaken within 6 months before qualifying for new construction.
            (1) 1989 -
            (2) Source: Oregon Laws 1989 Chapter 1015 section 18(2)(c)
4. Tangible personal property
   i. Machinery and equipment sales and use or property tax exemption



43
  Total cost of the qualified property must be at least $25,000. Firm must have business operations in the enterprise
zone and use the qualified property in the enterprise zone. More specifically, firms must receive 75% of its annual
gross receipts from within a zone and provide goods, products or services to other businesses through
manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, processing, shipping or storage. If firm is an existing business, must increase
average number of employees by 10% or more year. If it's a new business, must hire one or more employees per
year. Also, the firm must not substantially curtail employment outside zone. An existing business that makes a $25
mil investment in qualified property within an enterprise zone with less than a 10% increase in employment but
without loss of employment also qualifies (if there is loss of employment, the business needs the approval of a
sponsor).


                                                      B.xviii
        i)   New machinery and equipment tax credit43: Real property (does not include land) is partially
             exempt from property taxation for up to 5 years immediately following the new construction.
             100% of the true cash value of the property in the first assessment year, 80% in the second
             year, 60% in the third year, 40% in the fourth year, and 20% in the fifth and final year.
             Beginning in 1989, 100% property tax exemption for any real property machinery or
             equipment whether new, used or reconditioned that is newly purchased, leased or transferred
             into the enterprise zone from outside the county within which the zone is located and installed
             in property owned or leased by a qualified firm.
             (1) 1987 ­
             (2) Source: Oregon Laws 1987 Chapter 769 section 6 amending ORS 284.210(3). Oregon
                 Laws 1989 Chapter 1015 section 18(2)(d)-(e).

                                               Rhode Island

1. Financing
   i. Incentives for providing loans
       i) Interest income credit: Credit of 10% against taxes for interest earned on loans made to
           qualified businesses in the zone. Special provision for interest earned on loans made for the
           rehabilitation of locally certified industrial or commercial property for us in construction,
           expanding or rehabilitation of industrial or commercial real property of 100% provided that
           the loan shall be a minimum of 25% of the basis of the real property and said credit shall not
           be counted against the maximum credit provided by the 10% credit.
           (1) 1991 ­
           (2) Source: January Session, 1991--Chapter 340 Section 42-64.3-8.1
   ii. Tax deduction for contributions
       i) Tax credit for donations: Credit of 20% against taxes for cash donations to public supported
           improvement projects in the zone. To qualify for the credit, the taxpayer must obtain
           certification from the city or town that the project is an endorsed zone capital improvement.
           Maximum credit of $10,000 per year.
           (1) 1991 ­
           (2) Source: January Session, 1991--Chapter 340 Section 42-64.3-7.1
2. Hiring credit
   i. Tax credit based on wage bill
       i) Business tax credits for hiring: During the first 3 years of operation within a zone, the tax
           credit equals 100% of total wages and salaries paid to qualified zone employees in excess of
           payroll paid to such employees in the taxable year prior to the zone designation. Max credit is
           $15,000 per employee. During the 4th and 5th year, the credit is 75% and the cap is $12,000
           per employee. During 6th and 7th year, the credit is 25% and the cap is $5,000 per employee.
           In 1991 this benefit structure is modified such that for the first 5 years the credit is 50% of
           total wages and salaries. The credit increases by 2% for each 1% that the workforce exceeds
           the minimum 25% annual average of workers. Moreover, there is a new requirement that a
           minimum of 25% of the business' work force must be enterprise zone workers. Max credit per
           year is $10,000 per employee. All the credits that existed for years 4-7 are no longer
           available.
           (1) 1982 ­ 1993
           (2) Source: January Session 1982--Chapter 396 Chapter 64.3 section 42-64.3-6. January
                Session 1991--Chapter 340 Section 42-64.3-6.
       ii) Business tax credits for hiring: This credit replaces the previous one. Credit against tax during
           the first 5 years of enterprise zone designation equal to 50% of wages paid to enterprise job
           employees comprising the 5% of new jobs with the wages subject to the credit reduced by
           any direct state or federal wage assistance. Max credit is $10,000 per employee. Starting in


                                                   B.xix
              1997, the 5-year limitation is dropped. In 1998 the following benefit is added: credit against
              tax equal to 75% of wages paid to enterprise job employees who live in the enterprise zone
              comprising the 5% of new jobs with the wages subject to the credit reduced by any direct
              state or federal wage assistance. Max credit is $15,000 per employee. A taxpayer who takes
              this credit is not eligible for resident business owner modification credit (42-64.3-7).
              Limitations for the benefits added in 1997: max credit is $15,000 per employee. A taxpayer
              who takes this credit is not eligible for resident business owner modification credit (42-64.3-
              7).
              (1) Starting in 1999, a 3-year carryover is permitted
              (2) 1994 ­
              (3) Source: January Session, 1994--Chapter 176 Section 42-64.3-6. January Session, 1997--
                   Chapter 68 Section 42.64.3-6. January Session 1999--Chapter 31 Section 42-64.3-6 (6).
3.   Income tax credit for operating in enterprise zone
     i. Resident business owner tax deduction
         i) Resident business owner tax deduction: During the first 3 years of operation within and
              enterprise zone, the business owners who live in the enterprise zone and operate their
              business in an enterprise zone can deduct $50,000 per year from the entire net worth or entire
              net income, whichever is applicable. During the 4th and 5th years of operation the deduction
              is $12,000 per year. In 1991, the benefits change such that now the deduction is treated as a
              modification reducing federal adjusted gross income. Deductions are the same value as
              before. Beginning in 1994, taxpayers that take this credit are not eligible for the business tax
              credit (42-64.3-6)
              (1) 1982 ­
              (2) Source: January Session, 1982--Chapter 396 Chapter 64.3 Section 42-64.3-7. January
                   Session, 1991--Chapter 340 Section 42-64.3-7. January Session, 1994--Chapter 176
                   Section 42-64.3-7.
4.   Misc.
     i. Employee tax credit
         i) Enterprise worker tax exemption: Each enterprise worker who earns or receives in excess of
              90% of his gross income directly from a qualified business located within an enterprise zone
              shall be allowed an additional exemption of the lesser of $5,000 or the amount earned per
              year for a period of 2 taxable years, which may be taken as a deduction from Rhode Island
              gross income. 1991 changes: the exemptions that were previously allowed are no longer.
              They are converted to modifications that reduce federal AGI, as in 42-64.3-7
         ii) 1982 ­ 1993
         iii) Source: January Session, 1982--Chapter 396 Chapter 64.3 Section 42-64.3-8. January
              Session, 1991--Chapter 340 Section 42-64.3-8. Repealed by January Session, 1994--
              Chapter 176 section 2.
5.   Real property (land and buildings)
     i. Property tax credit or exemption (total)
         i) Business property tax exemption: First year, no property taxes shall be levied whatsoever.
              Second year, 20% of total property taxes shall be due. Third year, 40%. Fourth year, 60%.
              Fifth year, 80%. In all subsequent years, 100% of the total property taxes shall be due and
              payable. 1991 changes: removes specifics for exemptions based on time. Just says "real and
              tangible property taxes in enterprise zones for qualified business may be exempted or
              stabilized upon authorization of the city or town council. Nothing in this section shall be
              deemed to permit the exemption or stabilization herein provided for any manufacturing or
              commercial concern locating from one city or town within the state of RI to another."
              (1) 1982 ­
              (2) Source: January Session, 1982--Chapter 396 Chapter 64.3 Section 42-64.3-9.
6.   Tangible personal property


                                                    B.xx
    i.   Machinery and equipment sales and use or property tax exemption
         i) Business property tax exemption: First year, no property taxes shall be levied whatsoever.
            Second year, 20% of total property taxes shall be due. Third year, 40%. Fourth year, 60%.
            Fifth year, 80%. In all subsequent years, 100% of the total property taxes shall be due and
            payable. 1991 changes: removes specifics for exemptions based on time. Just says "real and
            tangible property taxes in enterprise zones for qualified business may be exempted or
            stabilized upon authorization of the city or town council. Nothing in this section shall be
            deemed to permit the exemption or stabilization herein provided for any manufacturing or
            commercial concern locating from one city or town within the state of RI to another." Note
            that this is the same credit as the Real property tax credit or exemption above ­ it applies to
            both real and tangible property.
            (1) 1982 ­
            (2) Source: January Session, 1982--Chapter 396 Chapter 64.3 Section 42-64.3-9.

                                                  Virginia

1. Local incentives
   i. Occupational licenses/regulatory relief
       i) Local incentives: Localities may propose local tax incentives in their applications including
           but not limited to: reduction of permit fees, reduction of user fees, reduction of business,
           professional or occupational license tax, regulatory flexibility such as special zoning districts,
           permit process reform, and exemptions from local ordinances. If a local governing body fails
           to offer any local incentives, the zone designation will terminate. Qualified firms will be
           eligible for public incentives even after zones have expired but no new firms will.
           (1) 1982-
           (2) Source: Acts of Assembly, VA., 1982: Chapter 275 Chapter 22 section 59.1-283.
2. Hiring credit
   i. Payroll or unemployment tax exemption
       i) State unemployment tax credit: Tax credit against the unemployment tax of 80% for the
           unemployment tax in year 1, 60% in year 2, 40% in year 3, and 20% in years 4 and 5. Tax
           credits can only be applied for unemployment tax due on employees employed at qualified
           businesses established in Urban Enterprise Zones. Unemployment taxes averaged about $50-
           115 per year, so this benefit was not very large.
           (1) Carryover of unused credit is allowed for 5-years.
           (2) 1982 - 1983
           (3) Source: Acts of Assembly, VA., 1982: Chapter 22 section 59.1-281. Repealed by Acts of
                Assembly, VA., 1983: Chapter 572 Part 2
3. Income tax credit for operating in enterprise zone
   i. Credit for opening new or expanding existing business
       i) State business income tax credit: Credit against state income tax, franchise tax, gross receipts
           tax, or shares tax of 80% for the first tax year, 60% for the second tax year, 40% for the third
           year, and 20% for the fourth and fifth years. From 1992 ­ 1994 the credit changes such that it
           is 80% for the first year, and 60% for the second through the tenth year. Beginning in 1995
           the amount of the credit and carryover for firms that invest more than $25 million, and create
           100 full time positions will be determined by an agreement between the firm and the
           Department of Housing and Community Development.
           (1) Carryover of unused credit is allowed for 5-years.
           (2) 1982 -
           (3) Source: Acts of Assembly, VA., 1982: Chapter 22 section 59.1-280. Acts of Assembly,
                VA., 1992: Chapter 301 section 59.1-280. Acts of Assembly, VA., 1995 Chapter 792
                section 59.1-280.


                                                   B.xxi
4. Public Property
   i. Sale/lease of public property for business use
      i) Sale of public land: The Commonwealth of Virginia and any local municipalities that own
           land in an Urban Enterprise Zone shall make that land for sale if it is not designated or
           targeted for some public use, as long as it will be developed by the purchaser.
           (1) 1982 ­
           (2) Source: Acts of Assembly, VA., 1982: Chapter 22 section 59.1-276.
5. Real property (land and buildings)
   i. Property tax credit or exemption (added value from renovation/expansion)
      i) Enterprise zone real property investment tax credit: 30 percent of qualifying zone
           improvement spending (rehabilitation, or expansion of a facility or building a new structure)
           can be taken as tax credit. If it is a big project, in excess of 100 million and results in at least
           200 new full time employees, then they can get up to 5 percent instead of the 30 percent.
           (1) 1995 ­
           (2) Source: Acts of Assembly, VA., 1995: Chapter 792 section 59.1-280.1
6. Tangible personal property
   i. Tax exemption for all items purchased to conduct business
      i) State sales tax exemption: Qualified businesses are exempt from the payment of taxes for all
           items purchased for the conduct of its business within the Urban Enterprise Zone.
           (1) 1982 ­
           (2) Source: Acts of Assembly, VA., 1982: Chapter 22 section 59.1-282.

                                                   Wisconsin

1. Investment in employees and benefits
   i. Day care
       i) Development zones day care credit: For any taxable year for which a person is certified to
           receive enterprise zone benefits 44 and begins operations in an enterprise zone, a person may
           credit against taxes for employment related day care expenses up to $1200 for each
           qualifying individual.
           (1) Carryover allowed.
           (2) 1995 ­
           (3) Source: 1995 Wisconsin Act 27 section 3399r creating 71.28(1dd).
2. Hiring credit
   i. Tax credit based on wage bill
       i) Development zones jobs credit: Credit is calculated according to section 51 of the internal
           revenue code. According to section 51 45, the credit is equal to 40% of total qualified wages
           for the first and second year of employment for targeted groups that have high unemployment
           rates or other special employment needs, up to $6,000 and up to $3,000 for qualified summer
           youth employees. There is also a 10% credit for the total wage bill of development zone
           residents (they do not need to be targeted employees) for their wages in their first year of
           employment; max of $6,000. 46
           (1) 1987 ­

44
   1987 Wisconsin Act 328 section 560.765(3) describes the eligibility requirements to receive enterprise zone
benefits. These include things like the taxpayer will make reasonable attempts to hire employees from the targeted
population, and that the taxpayers' economic activity will attract other forms of economic activity.
45
   See: https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/26/51.
46
   Ham et al. (2011) mention that businesses in Wisconsin enterprise zones can claim a 15.8% credit against new
payroll however this is based on 71.28(3w), Wisc Stat., 71.47(3w) Wisc. Stat., and 560.799 Wisc. Stat., which were
not passed until 2005 and therefore do not apply to enterprise zones enacted between 1990-2000.


                                                     B.xxii
            (2) Source: 1987 Wisconsin Act 328 section 10 creating 71.09(12dj), Schedule DC tax form.
3. Research tax credits
   i. Credit for qualified research expenses
        i) Research credit: Credit against taxes equal to 10% of qualified research expenses incurred for
            research conducted in a development zone. Note that there is a research benefit broadly
            provided in the state of 5% -- the credit provided in development zones simply doubles this
            credit.
            (1) Carryover allowed
            (2) 1987 ­
            (3) Source: 1987 Wisconsin Act 328 section 12 amends 71.09 (12r) (a)
        ii) Development zones research credit: Any person may credit against taxes an amount equal to
            5% of the amount obtained by subtracting from the person's qualified research expenses, as
            defined in section 41 entitled "Credit for increasing research activities." Qualified research
            expenses cannot include compensation used in computing the credit under 2dj.
            (1) 15-year carryover
            (2) 1995 ­
            (3) Source: 1995 Wisconsin Act 27 section 14 creating 71.07(2dr).
4. Misc.
   i. Employee tax credit
        i) Working credit: A credit of 10% of wages is available for employees who work and reside in
            development zones for the first year of employment in the zone. Beginning in 1995, this
            credit is available for the first 2 years of employment for residents. Max credit is $600 per
            year.
            (1) 1993 ­
            (2) Source: 1993 Wisconsin Act 16 section 1734 creating 71.07 (2dj) (am) 8m. 1995
                Wisconsin Act 209 section 10 amending 71.07 (2dj) (am) 8m
5. Real property (land or buildings)
   i. Property tax credit or exemption (added value from renovation/expansion)
        i) Development zones location credit: Income tax credit equal to 2.5% of the amount expended
            to acquire, construct, rehabilitate, remodel or repair real property in a development zone.
            (1) Carryover allowed
            (2) 1987 ­
            (3) Source: 1987 Wisconsin Act 328 section 11 creates 71.09 (12dL)
   ii. Tax credit for construction materials
        i) Development zones sales tax credit: Tax credit against sales tax for purchases, leases and
            rentals of eligible property such as construction materials and supplies and other materials
            used to construct, rehabilitate, repair or remodel real property in a development zone and
            investment credit property. No credit available for partnerships and tax-option corporations.
            Cannot also get credit for 12di on same property.
            (1) 1987 ­
            (2) Source: 1987 Wisconsin Act 328 section 12 creating 71.09 (12ds)
   iii. Environmental remediation tax credit
        i) Development zones environmental remediation credit: For any taxable year for which a
            person is certified to receive enterprise zone benefits (44) and begins operations in an
            enterprise zone, the person may claim as a credit against taxes otherwise due under this
            subchapter an amount equal to 7.5% of the amount that the person expends to remove or
            contain environmental pollution, or to restore soil or groundwater that is affected by
            environmental pollution.
            (1) 1995 ­
            (2) Source: 1995 Wisconsin Act 27 section 3377r creating 71.07(2de).
6. Tangible personal property


                                                 B.xxiii
i.   Tax exemption for all items purchased to conduct business
     i) Development zones investment credit: Income tax credit of 2.5% of the amount expended to
         purchase tangible personal property or 1.75% of the amount expended to purchase tangible
         personal property that is expensed under section 179 of the internal revenue code for
         purposes of taxes. No credit available for partnerships and tax-option corporations. Property
         must be used in business operations in the development zone. Subject to recapture provisions
         if the property is moved out of the zone.
         (1) Carryover allowed
         (2) 1987 ­
         (3) Source: 1987 Wisconsin Act 328 section 9 creating 71.09 (12di).




                                              B.xxiv
     Online Appendix C: Classification of Tracts as Enterprise Zones or Controls in the 2000s

         In this appendix, we detail our work to map enterprise zones to tracts from 2000 to 2010. We
study state-level enterprise zones, for which rules and how areas are designated vary by state. As a
consequence, different approaches were needed for different states. In some cases, it was possible to
retrieve information of changes in the evolution zones boundaries over the entire period. In other states,
the information available was available only for is only for one or two years. The states include in the
original Ham et al. (2011) study were California, Colorado, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Massachusetts,
Nebraska, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Rhode Island, Virginia, and Wisconsin. We construct a database that
includes all these states, except for Massachusetts and Wisconsin, for which we could not obtain any
information on enterprise zone boundaries for this decade.

Census tracts

         We downloaded all the Census tracts from the Census website TIGER/Line. We use the 2000
tracts because our period of interest is from 2000 to 2010. The downloaded files are shapefiles:
https://www.census.gov/geo/maps-data/data/tiger-line.html.

Using ArcGIS to map enterprise zones to tracts

        To calculate the area covered by each enterprise zone program across Census tracts, we use the
software ArcGIS Maps. ArcGIS support different types of files; the most important ones are layers (files
that contain only an image projected on a map) and shapefiles (files that contain images, coordinates,
area, perimeter, and a spreadsheet with many characteristics).
        We use shapefiles to measure the area covered by the enterprise zone program and to determine
the geographic overlap with each Census tract. There are three possible situations that arise:
     1) We obtain the shapefiles for the whole period from one state's enterprise zone program, and we
        use it to calculate the area covered by the enterprise zone. (We do not necessarily have a file for
        every year, if we know, for example, there were not changes in the enterprise zone boundaries.)
        States: Colorado, Oregon, Virginia, and Rhode Island.
     2) We obtain the shapefile for one or more years, and we modify the file so that we can take into
        account changes in the boundaries of the enterprise zone in other years based on other
        information like old maps (pdf files, images, or even paper maps). States: Illinois and Ohio.
     3) We have to draw the whole map using a layer as a guide (this is a file that does not contain any
        geographic information; it is just a projected image). States: California.
     4) We obtain a shapefile of one state's enterprise zone program for few years, but we do not have
        any information from other years. We assume that the boundaries did not change in the years for
        which we have no information. States: Florida, Nebraska, Hawaii, and New York.

Modifying shapefiles

        For cases 2 and 3 above, we have to modify shapefiles to reflect changes in the enterprise zone
boundaries over time. For example, parts of Calexico, CA were designated as an enterprise zone in 1986,
and the area was expanded in 2001. However, we only have shapefiles of the area after 2001. Hence we
modify the area so that we can have two shapes of Calexico, one pre-2001 and the other one post-2001:




                                                    C.i
                       Lighter area defines the Calexico enterprise zone pre-2001


Merging shapefiles

       Once we finished editing the enterprise zone shapefile and we are sure that we have all possible
information regarding boundaries and dates of designation, the next step is to calculate the area of each
Census tract that overlaps with an enterprise zone. This is calculated using "Geoprocessing" in ArcGIS.

State-specific information

         We worked with agencies in each state to obtain the required information. Here we provide some
details about the information we received from each state.

California

        California provides maps of enterprise zones on the website:
http://maps.gis.ca.gov/gobiz/dga/default.aspx.

         The program expired in 2014. The information on the website does not allow the user to
download data. Hence, we communicated with the Employment Development Department of California,
and they give us access to the files used in the website.
         The files obtained were layers, not shapefiles. This means that the data did not contain
geolocation codes or any other data; they were only pictures projected on a map. Hence, we had to redraw
all the enterprise zones using these layers as a guide. The redrawing was useful because we created
shapefiles that capture changes in boundaries over time. We used old maps from the enterprise zone
program from the website: http://www.hcd.ca.gov/grants-funding/archive/enterprise-zone.shtml. With
these maps, we were able to build a map database of California that includes changes of the enterprise
zone boundaries on time.




                                                   C.ii
                (a) Layer File                                     (b) Shape File

         To illustrate an example, in the figure above we use the Los Angeles area as an example. The
layer file is shown in panel (a), and in panel (b) we show the shapefile that we drew (green shadow). We
use the layer as a guide to generate the shapefile, but we exclude all the areas that were designated after
2010. Panel (b) excludes part of the blue layers because these areas were designated after 2010.
         Once we redrew all the enterprise zones, we merged the information with Census tracts in
California, and calculated what percentage of each tract overlaps with the enterprise zone each year (as
explained in the previous section). In the case of California, we usually have two points in time, because
the enterprise zone boundaries only change twice since the beginning of the program.

Colorado

        This state only had shapefiles and maps from 2016. However, we communicated with Sonya
Guram, director of the state enterprise zone program, and she told us that there were only two main
changes in enterprise zone boundaries. One change occurred in 2000 and the other in 2016.
        Ms. Guram and her team provided us with the shapefiles updated in 2016 that reflected the new
changes that year, and the shapefiles for just the "new areas" added in 2016. We identified the tracts that
were active between 2000-2015 by subtracting the "new areas" added in 2016 to get the 2000-2015 maps
from the updated 2016 areas.

Florida

         Florida only had data starting from 2015. There are no old maps or any references on old
enterprise zone boundaries or changes available. The state reports data in "FGDL" instead of standard
shapefiles. (The FGDL is a type of file that the state of Florida uses to geolocate information in maps. It is
very similar to a shapefile; this type of file will not open on ArcGIS.) However, we managed to find
shapefiles online: http://mail.geoplan.ufl.edu/pipermail/fgdl-l/2015-September/000094.html.
         Most of the Florida enterprise zones were updated in 2010, but we do not know if the update
included boundary changes or not. We calculate the area covered by the enterprise zone as discussed at
the beginning of this document, but because we do not observe boundary changes over time, we cannot be
certain the areas were constant between 2000-2010. Nonetheless, these are the best data available, and we
have to assume no changes in this period.




                                                    C.iii
Hawaii

        In Hawaii, most of the enterprise zone boundaries were defined in 2000. We obtained a shapefile
from 2015; we were not able to get other shapefiles to calculate changes in the boundaries. The significant
enterprise zone area changes occurred in 2001. These changes were: Koolauloam became an enterprise
zone, new zones were added to the urban Honolulu enterprise zone, and five of the six island zones being
expanded. Other changes occurred in 2004, 2006, 2007 and 2008 and were relatively minor. This
information is all provided at: http://files.hawaii.gov/dbedt/annuals/2015/2015-bdsd-ez.pdf.
        We use the 2015 shapefile and calculate the intersection of the enterprise zones Census tracts to
determine the covered area using the methods described above.

Illinois

         Illinois was a problematic state, because it has a lot of enterprise zones and they do not have all
the information in a central state database. Each enterprise zone is administered individually, and
therefore all maps and files are administered by a different administration for each enterprise zone. The
central (state) enterprise zone administration website has information on the maps, but everything is in
pdf files:
https://www2.illinois.gov/dceo/ExpandRelocate/Incentives/taxassistance/Pages/EnterpriseZone.aspx.
         We wrote to all the local administrations asking for information, and we got some historical files
from Urbana, Chicago, Beardstown, Carmi-White, and Belvidere-Boone. We have changes in boundaries
for these cities, but it was not enough to calculate the enterprise zones for the whole state.
         To overcome this problem, we contact professors from the University of Illinois who have done
research on Illinois enterprise zones. Richard Funderburg responded and shared shapefiles of the
enterprise zone that he used in his research. We modify the shapefiles to capture the changes in
boundaries over time (using the pdf maps). Finally, we merge the enterprise zones and the census tracts to
calculate the covered areas.

Nebraska

        Nebraska has data available from 1992 and 2015. We found data from 1992 online, and we got
the 2015 enterprise zone data from Jacob Knutson, who is in charge of the Nebraska Department of
Economic Development. Mr. Knutson told us there is no data available on boundaries prior to 2015.
Hence, it was impossible to determine how the boundaries change from 1992 to 2015. Thus, we use both
the 1992 dataset and the 2015 data to infer as much as possible about changes between 2000-2010. For
instance, if an enterprise zone covered an area in both 1992 and 2015 (which we observe), then we can
assume that the enterprise covered the area between 2000 and 2010.

New York

         In New York, the program is called "Empire Zones." We found data that was updated in 2017.
Most of the zones were effective between 2006 and 2007. The information from New York City was
downloaded from this website: https://data.cityofnewyork.us/City-Government/Empire-Zones/3aim-ipk8.
         We found the rest of the state enterprise zone areas using Google search codes to find shapefiles
related to the program. The link to the file is:
http://www.nysgis.state.ny.us/gisdata/fileserver/?DSID=895&file=empirezone.zip.

Ohio

        Erick Linder from the Development Services Agency of Ohio claimed that they did not have any
shapefiles. He invited us to Columbus to take pictures of all the old paper maps in their archive. We



                                                   C.iv
visited the Development Service Agency in Columbus, and we created a digital file of all the maps from
2000 to 2010.
         Once we were there, we had access to shapefiles updated in 2015 by Daniel Strasser from the
Development Services Agency that were not available publicly. We use these 2015 shapefiles as a guide
to redraw some of the maps (when needed), and we create a shapefile that contains all the changes in
enterprise zone boundaries. We use this file to calculate the covered area by Census tract and year.
         We use the 2015 shapefile as a baseline. Using information of the digital file with the maps from
2000 to 2010, and the website (https://development.ohio.gov/bs/bs_oezp.htm) with all the dates of
expiration and designation of zones, we modify the 2015 shapefile to have all the changes in boundaries
of the enterprise zone over time.

Oregon

         We contacted Arthur Fish who is the coordinator of the program in Oregon. They only report the
enterprise zone areas at the following online website:
gttp://geo.maps.arcgis.com/apps/View/index.html?appid=e086ca6b2ef04f13a8240fced7bb8cad.
          However, we can only use these maps online. Mr. Fish told us that they did not have shapefiles,
but supplied us with pdfs, and an Excel file with the designation dates of each zone.
         To get the data, we use Google search codes to retrieve Oregon enterprise zone shapefiles. The
link to the shapefile is: http://lib-
arcgis5.library.oregonstate.edu/arcgis/rest/services/osdl/Framework/MapServer/10.
We use the pdfs and the spreadsheet as a guide to modify the shapefile and capture changes in the
boundaries over time. Finally, we combine these data with Census tract data to calculate the covered
areas.

Rhode Island

         Rhode Island publishes shapefiles of their enterprise zones, and they provide information on the
changes in designated areas. The program does not change the boundaries of an existing enterprise zone;
instead, they add new zones (even if they share boundaries), this makes it easy to track changes. The
information about the changes in the zones is here:
https://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=687ed3ad6fc54b89838236e6eaa3f592.
         The shapefiles are located at:
http://www.rigis.org/datasets/5aa96ee738a044a9b95cf8da3fde9045_0.
         We use this information to construct a time series of the changes in the enterprise zones and
merge this with the Census tracts to calculate the covered areas.

Virginia

         We worked with Kyle Flanders, who is the Senior Policy Analyst at the Virginia Department of
Housing and Community Development. He provided a link to the shapefiles with the designation dates:
http://gis.yesvirginia.org/datasets/394e709c529a4ec3bcc644dbd03d91f2_3/data?orderBy=Designation.
         We use this information to create a time series of the enterprise zones from 1998 to 2010. We
merge the data with the Census tracts to calculate the covered areas. However, the database indicates that
sometimes there were changes in the boundaries and we do not know the precise changes, but only what
the boundaries were in 2010. We have data about which enterprise zone was designated in a specific year,
but we do not know the changes in the boundaries that occur after that.




                                                   C.v
                                   Online Appendix D: Sensitivity and Additional Analyses

Appendix Table D1. Testing for pre-trends in state enterprise zone tracts
                                                                             Fraction of                Average
                                                                          households with           household wage
                                     Unemployment rate    Poverty rate    wage and salary              and salary
                                           (%)                (%)           income (%)              income ($ 2000)       Employment
                                                 Panel 1: No limits on controls
Treated tracts: 1980 ­ 1990                0.876               2.960            -1.408                    2,566               115.8
level change

N                                            2,210                  2,210            2,210                2,210                2,210
Difference in 1980 ­ 1990 level              -0.090                -0.020            0.231                139.0                4.234
change between treated and                  [0.549]               [0.093]           [0.196]              [0.583]              [0.525]
PSM


N                                            2,210                2,210              2,210                2,210               2,210
Number of unique NENTZs                      1,943                1,943              1,943                1,943               1,943
                                                        Panel 2: No MA or WI
Treated tracts: 1980 ­ 1990                  0.142                3.908             -2.097                218.5               104.2
level change

N                                            1,618                 1,618             1,618                1,618                1,618
Difference in 1980 ­ 1990 level              -0.046                0.069             0.219                -349.4               15.54
change between treated and                  [0.219]               [0.306]           [0.853]              [1.553]              [1.507]
PSM


N                                            1,618               1,618             1,618                  1,618               1,618
Number of unique NENTZs                      1,380               1,380             1,380                  1,380               1,380
                                                   Panel 3: Limited control sample
Treated tracts: 1980 ­ 1990                  0.142               3.908            -2.097                  218.5               104.2
level change

N                                            1,618                  1,618             1,618               1,618                1,618
Difference in 1980 ­ 1990 level              -0.129                -0.022            -0.288               9.275                4.291
change between treated and                  [0.609]               [0.085]           [0.990]              [0.039]              [0.399]
PSM


N                                             1,618                 1,618            1,618                 1,618                1,618
Number of unique NENTZs                       1,287                 1,287            1,287                 1,287                1,287
Notes: The data used for these estimates come from the Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB). t-statistics, in brackets, are from
a t-test comparing the 1980-1990 changes in the control tracts to the treated tracts are in brackets, and the asterisks identify whether
the changes are statistically different (*** 1%, ** 5%, and * 10%); none are. The propensity score matched controls are identified
by matching treated enterprise zone tracts to control tracts using ten covariates: 1980 levels and 1990 levels for all five outcomes.
The propensity score matched control tracts are the same controls used to produce the estimates in Table 2. For each dataset, we
restrict the sample to tracts with non-missing information for all outcomes and non-zero population counts in 1980 and 1990
according to the NCDB.
Appendix Table D2. Shorter-run estimates of heterogeneous effects of enterprise zone benefits, unweighted
                                                                                                                             Average
                                                                                                                            household
                                                                                                Fraction of households      wage and
                                                              Unemployment Poverty rate          with wage and salary     salary income
                                                                  rate (%)             (%)            income (%)             ($2000)          Employment
                                                            Panel 1. No limits on controls (N=12)
Constant (includes investment credits (12))                        -1.411             1.236              -1.929                -2,777             -92.72
                                                                   (3.308)          (4.129)             (3.814)                (2,342)           (239.9)
Financing (5)                                                      -3.123             0.854               0.128                 1,893             -35.82
                                                                   (2.589)          (3.231)             (2.984)                (1,832)           (187.7)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                     0.352            -0.363              -1.986                -2,513              103.3
                                                                   (2.589)          (3.231)             (2.984)                (1,832)           (187.7)
Hiring credits (11)                                                 2.085            -1.448               0.777                 2,801              13.56
                                                                   (3.600)          (4.493)             (4.150)                (2,547)           (261.0)
                                                           Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI (N=10)
Constant (includes investment and hiring credits (10))           -6.301**           8.278**               1.035                -751.9              119.3
                                                                   (1.841)          (3.215)             (2.083)                (3,405)           (230.0)
Financing (5)                                                    -3.091**             1.123              -2.008                -108.8             -181.1
                                                                   (1.235)          (2.157)             (1.397)                (2,284)           (154.3)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                  7.595***          -8.558**               0.816                -1,997             -24.88
                                                                   (2.059)          (3.595)             (2.329)                (3,806)           (257.2)
                                                           Panel 3. Only limited controls (N = 10)
Constant (includes investment and hiring credits (10))           -4.568**            -1.883               2.044                7,383*           -453.3**
                                                                   (1.733)          (3.127)             (1.683)                (3,856)           (154.6)
Financing (5)                                                      -0.425             2.591               0.676                -1,420             -170.0
                                                                   (1.163)          (2.097)             (1.129)                (2,587)           (103.7)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                    4.205*             0.625              -2.032               -8,304*            517.4**
                                                                   (1.938)          (3.496)             (1.882)                (4,311)           (172.9)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific shorter-run (1990-2000) estimates in Table 3 (and
corresponding estimates for the other two samples) are regressed against indicators for different enterprise zone benefits. All states included in Panel 1
provide investment credits, so the effects of investment credits are subsumed in the constant. All states included in Panels 2 and 3 provide investment
and hiring credits, so the effects of investment and hiring credits are subsumed in the constant. Number in parentheses next to each benefit category
refers to the number of states that provide that benefit. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Appendix Table D3. Longer-run estimates of heterogeneous effects of enterprise zone benefits, unweighted
                                                                                                                              Average
                                                                                                Fraction of households household wage
                                                             Unemployment Poverty rate           with wage and salary        and salary
                                                                 rate (%)            (%)              income (%)         income ($2000) Employment
                                                           Panel 1. No limits on controls (N=12)
Constant (includes investment credits (12))                       0.0624            1.584                -1.420                -5,549            -146.4
                                                                 (1.757)           (3.131)              (5.387)                (6,209)          (281.6)
Financing (5)                                                      0.305           -2.643                 2.102               -10,247*           -360.0
                                                                 (1.375)           (2.450)              (4.215)                (4,858)          (220.4)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                   -1.833            1.205                -3.737              12,360**           524.6**
                                                                 (1.375)           (2.450)              (4.215)                (4,858)          (220.4)
Hiring credits (11)                                               -0.156           -1.693                 1.059                 3,186             8.448
                                                                 (1.912)           (3.406)              (5.860)                (6,755)          (306.4)
                                                           Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI (N=10)
Constant (includes investment and hiring credits (10))            -1.961           -0.365                 0.687                -1,692             164.4
                                                                 (1.712)           (1.803)              (0.720)                (2,309)          (161.9)
Financing (5)                                                     -1.115           -0.531                -1.706                -5,748           -615.0*
                                                                 (2.853)           (3.005)              (1.200)                (3,848)          (269.9)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                    1.243           -2.176               3.145**                 1,184            517.9*
                                                                 (2.853)           (3.005)              (1.200)                (3,848)          (269.9)
                                                           Panel 3. Only limited controls (N = 10)
Constant (includes investment and hiring credits (10))            -1.627           -0.197                 1.944               -9,365**          -389.7*
                                                                 (1.235)           (1.637)              (2.236)                (2,850)          (183.6)
Financing (5)                                                      0.834            1.173                -0.414                 3,128             161.6
                                                                 (2.059)           (2.728)              (3.726)                (4,750)          (306.0)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)                    0.704           -0.594                 1.451                 4,116             185.7
                                                                 (2.059)           (2.728)              (3.726)                (4,750)          (306.0)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific shorter-run (1990-2000) estimates in Table 5 (and
corresponding estimates for the other samples) are regressed against indicators for different enterprise zone benefits. All states included in Panel 1
provide investment credits, so the effects of investment credits are subsumed in the constant. All states included in Panels 2 and 3 provide investment
and hiring credits, so the effects of investment and hiring credits are subsumed in the constant. Number in parentheses next to each benefit category
refers to the number of states that provide that benefit. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Appendix Table D4. Shorter-run estimates of heterogeneous enterprise zone hiring credits, unweighted
                                                                                                                                                        Average
                                                                                                                             Fraction of            household wage
                                                                       Unemployment rate        Poverty rate           households with wage            and salary
                                                                               (%)                   (%)               and salary income (%)        income ($2000)       Employment
                                                                      Panel 1. No limits on controls (N=12)
Constant                                                                     -1.411                 1.236                       -1.929                    -2,777             -92.72
                                                                            (3.664)                (4.109)                     (3.929)                   (1,558)            (173.1)
Any hiring credit (11)                                                        2.554                 -6.261                      4.364                    8,782**             384.5
                                                                            (5.690)                (6.381)                     (6.101)                   (2,419)            (268.8)
Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)                              1.793                 2.849                       -3.960                    170.5             -310.1*
                                                                            (3.079)                (3.452)                     (3.301)                   (1,309)            (145.4)
Credit based on wages (4)                                                    -1.653                 2.767                       -3.348                 -5,819***             -310.9
                                                                            (3.664)                (4.109)                     (3.929)                   (1,558)            (173.1)
Flat credit per new employee (4)                                             -4.566                 2.419                       1.210                     -2,926             227.9
                                                                            (3.924)                (4.401)                     (4.208)                   (1,668)            (185.4)
Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)                          -0.808                 3.698                       -3.275                  -7,277**             -309.9
                                                                            (4.618)                (5.178)                     (4.951)                   (1,963)            (218.2)
                                                                      Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI (N=10)
Constant (includes any hiring credit (10))                                   -3.173                 3.689                       2.777*                    810.3             441.3*
                                                                            (3.186)                (6.115)                      (1.216)                  (4,521)            (182.5)
Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)                              1.230                 1.102                     -4.558***                   -3,989           -345.1**
                                                                            (2.186)                (4.195)                      (0.834)                  (3,101)            (125.2)
Credit based on wages (4)                                                     1.498                 -0.690                       -0.864                   -1,929           -383.7**
                                                                            (2.444)                (4.690)                      (0.932)                  (3,468)            (140.0)
Flat credit per new employee (4)                                             -2.099                 -3.099                      2.456*                    1,940              74.54
                                                                            (2.677)                (5.137)                      (1.021)                  (3,798)            (153.3)
Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)                           4.159                 -4.245                       0.213                    -2,562             -260.6
                                                                            (3.278)                (6.292)                      (1.251)                  (4,652)            (187.8)
                                                                      Panel 3. Only limited controls (N=10)
Constant (includes any hiring credit (10))                                   -3.568                 -3.402                      1.661                     4,844              -20.30
                                                                            (2.574)                (2.487)                     (2.412)                   (3,441)            (257.9)
Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)                              0.989                 2.610                       -1.721                    -4,485             -228.7
                                                                            (1.766)                (1.706)                     (1.654)                   (2,361)            (176.9)
Credit based on wages (4)                                                     2.836               5.490**                       -0.281                  -7,845**             17.70
                                                                            (1.975)                (1.907)                     (1.850)                   (2,639)            (197.8)
Flat credit per new employee (4)                                             -0.848                 -2.453                      1.312                     5,104              52.92
                                                                            (2.163)                (2.089)                     (2.026)                   (2,891)            (216.7)
Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)                           2.957                 1.492                       -1.219                    -4,644             141.5
                                                                            (2.649)                (2.559)                     (2.482)                   (3,541)            (265.4)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific estimates in Table 3 (first stage) are regressed against indicators for different
enterprise zone benefits (outlined in Table 9 and described in more detail in Appendix Table A1 and A2). The overall effect of hiring credits is not estimable in Panels 2 and 3 because
Massachusetts was the only state to not provide hiring credits, and Massachusetts is dropped from these analyses. Note that some point estimates are the same as in Table 10; this
occurs for coefficients identified for only one state, in which case the coefficient estimate is not affected by weighting. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Appendix Table D5. Longer-run estimates of heterogeneous enterprise zone hiring credits, unweighted
                                                                                                                                                       Average household
                                                                     Unemployment                             Fraction of households with             wage and salary income
                                                                        rate (%)         Poverty rate (%)     wage and salary income (%)                     ($2000)                  Employment
                                                                              Panel 1. No limits on controls (N=12)
Any hiring credit (11)                                                    0.920                -7.574                    6.470                                 12,019                      288.3
                                                                         (3.345)              (4.676)                   (7.770)                               (10,202)                    (223.0)
Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)                          0.783                -1.698                    -1.053                                 -9,781                  -582.3***
                                                                         (1.810)              (2.530)                   (4.204)                                (5,519)                    (120.6)
Credit based on wages (4)                                                 -1.467               4.854                     -6.924                                 -9,304                     -275.8
                                                                         (2.154)              (3.011)                   (5.003)                                (6,569)                    (143.6)
Flat credit per new employee (4)                                          -2.086               4.080                     1.287                                   7,813                   735.2***
                                                                         (2.307)              (3.225)                   (5.359)                                (7,036)                    (153.8)
Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)                       -2.123               6.775                     -7.975                                 -3,160                     -81.08
                                                                         (2.714)              (3.795)                   (6.306)                                (8,279)                    (181.0)
Constant (includes any hiring credit (10))                               0.0624                1.584                     -1.420                                 -5,549                     -146.4
                                                                         (2.154)              (3.011)                   (5.003)                                (6,569)                    (143.6)
                                                                             Panel 2. Excluding MA and WI (N=10)
Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)                         0.0623                1.161                    -3.131*                                 -4,813                     -479.5
                                                                         (2.595)              (2.741)                   (1.481)                                (4,418)                    (370.9)
Credit based on wages (4)                                                 2.714                2.723                     1.308                                  -7,469                     -466.4
                                                                         (2.901)              (3.065)                   (1.655)                                (4,940)                    (414.7)
Flat credit per new employee (4)                                          -1.621               -4.883                    3.902*                                  1,775                     168.8
                                                                         (3.178)              (3.357)                   (1.813)                                (5,411)                    (454.2)
Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)                       4.473                1.999                     1.149                                  -4,368                     -299.1
                                                                         (3.892)              (4.112)                   (2.221)                                (6,627)                    (556.3)
Constant                                                                  -4.161               -2.350                    0.742                                   2,938                     642.2
                                                                         (3.782)              (3.996)                   (2.158)                                (6,440)                    (540.6)
                                                                              Panel 3. Only limited controls (N=10)
Live-in requirement to receive hiring credit (5)                          0.534                3.330                     -1.065                                 -5,155                     -212.0
                                                                         (2.639)              (3.369)                   (2.658)                                (6,012)                    (356.9)
Credit based on wages (4)                                                 2.710                0.754                    -6.434*                                  56.82                     557.2
                                                                         (2.951)              (3.766)                   (2.972)                                (6,722)                    (399.0)
Flat credit per new employee (4)                                          0.978                -1.663                    1.262                                   8,508                     136.7
                                                                         (3.233)              (4.126)                   (3.256)                                (7,363)                    (437.1)
Payroll or unemployment insurance tax exemption (4)                       3.403                1.206                    -8.707*                                 -1,978                     476.8
                                                                         (3.959)              (5.053)                   (3.988)                                (9,018)                    (535.3)
Constant (includes any hiring credit (10))                                -4.014               -2.025                    8.654*                                 -5,285                     -557.2
                                                                         (3.848)              (4.911)                   (3.875)                                (8,764)                    (520.3)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific estimates in Table 5 (first stage) are regressed against indicators for different enterprise zone
benefits (outlined in Table 9 and described in more detail in Appendix Table A1 and A2). The overall effect of hiring credits is not estimable in Panels 2 and 3 because Massachusetts was the only
state to not provide hiring credits, and Massachusetts is dropped from these analyses. Note that some point estimates are the same as in Table 10; this occurs for coefficients identified for only one
state, in which case the coefficient estimate is not affected by weighting. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                  Online Appendix E: Coding Intensity of Hiring Credits


Appendix Table E1: Classifying strength of Enterprise Zone hiring credits
         State                                       Benefit                                   Strength
California          Up to $35,000 credit over five years                                        Strong
Colorado            $500-1,000 for new hiring each new employee                                 Weak
Florida             10-15% credit of monthly wages paid to new employees.                       Strong
Hawaii              Credit for unemployment taxes paid by business. The credit is 80% in        Weak
                    the first year and declines 10% each year, through year seven.
                    Unemployment taxes are only about 1-2% of total taxable wages.
Illinois            $500 credit for newly hired employees                                       Weak
Massachusetts       None                                                                         N/A
Nebraska            $4,500 tax credit per employee, but limited to two employees.               Strong
New York            $1,500 per new employee. Can only be claimed for new workers in             Strong
                    their first year of wages in an economic development zone.
                    Employees must also be residents of the zone.
Ohio                Payroll tax exemption for new employees hired as a result of the            Weak
                    project.
Oregon              This is not technically a hiring credit because it is not limited to new    Weak
                    employees but we categorize it as such because it lowers the average
                    (and therefore marginal) employee cost. The credit is equal to 62.5%
                    of a qualified taxpayer's payroll and employee benefit costs, including
                    but not limited to worker's compensation insurance and payroll taxes
                    for up to 15 years.
Rhode Island        Credit equal to 50-75% of wages. Max credit between $10,000-                Strong
                    15,000 per employee.
Virginia            Credit for unemployment taxes paid by business. The credit is 80% in        Weak
                    the first year and declines by 20% each year though year four and
                    remains 20% for year five. No credits available after year five.
                    Unemployment taxes averaged $50-115 per employee per year during
                    the 1990s.
Wisconsin           40% of wages for the first and second year of employment for                Strong
                    targeted groups. 10% credit for non-targeted groups who were
                    residents of the enterprise zone. Max credit of $6,000 per employee.
Online Appendix Table E2. Shorter-run estimates of heterogeneous effects of enterprise zone benefits, classifying hiring credits by strength
                                                           Unemployment rate        Poverty rate     Fraction of households with       Average household wage
                                                                    (%)                 (%)          wage and salary income (%)       and salary income ($2000)        Employment
                                                                       Panel 1. No limits on controls (N =12)
Constant (includes investment credits (12))                       -1.411               1.236                    -1.929                         -2,777***                   -92.72
                                                                 (0.929)              (0.843)                  (1.148)                          (594.6)                   (49.90)
Financing (5)                                                     -1.364              -0.184                    -1.404                           3,495                     -97.47
                                                                 (5.026)              (4.561)                  (6.207)                          (3,216)                   (269.9)
Miscellaneous property local tax incentives (5)                    0.445               3.058                     1.477                           -2,348                    237.4
                                                                 (3.763)              (3.414)                  (4.647)                          (2,408)                   (202.1)
Hiring credits - weak (5)                                         -0.655             -2.621**                    2.268                          1,983**                    74.04
                                                                 (1.149)              (1.042)                  (1.419)                          (735.0)                   (61.69)
Hiring credits - strong (6)                                        1.846              -1.491                     0.981                           892.6                     -52.21
                                                                 (3.560)              (3.230)                  (4.396)                          (2,278)                   (191.2)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific shorter-run (1990-2000) estimates in Table 3 (and corresponding estimates for
the other samples) are regressed against indicators for different enterprise zone benefits. Each second-stage estimate is weighted by the number of treated tracts in that state. All
states included in Panel 1 provide investment credits, so the effects of investment credits are subsumed in the constant. We provide these estimates only for Panel 1 of each table
(Tables 7 and 8 in the paper), which are the full samples of states for which we can estimate the effects of hiring credits and hence, also, separately identify the effects of weak
and strong hiring credits. Number in parentheses next to each benefit category refers to the number of states that provide that benefit. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Online Appendix Table E3. Longer-run estimates of heterogeneous effects of enterprise zone benefits, classifying hiring credits by strength
                                                     Unemployment rate          Poverty      Fraction of households with wage and       Average household wage
                                                              (%)               rate (%)               salary income (%)               and salary income ($2000)        Employment
                                                                        Panel 1. No limits on controls (N =12)
Constant (includes investment credits (12))                 0.0624                1.584                        -1.420                             -5,549**                -146.4**
                                                            (0.734)              (0.893)                      (1.131)                              (1,767)                 (59.38)
Financing (5)                                               -0.673                -5.213                        0.425                               -3,291                  -337.0
                                                            (3.971)              (4.831)                      (6.117)                              (9,556)                 (321.2)
Miscellaneous local property tax incentives (5)             -0.557                3.245                         1.147                              10,336                  619.4**
                                                            (2.973)              (3.617)                      (4.579)                              (7,154)                 (240.5)
Hiring credits - weak (5)                                    0.326                0.139                        -0.606                               -595.7                  -41.40
                                                            (0.907)              (1.104)                      (1.398)                              (2,184)                 (73.40)
Hiring credits - strong (6)                                  0.608                1.046                        -0.488                               -3,781                  -146.3
                                                            (2.812)              (3.421)                      (4.332)                              (6,768)                 (227.5)
Notes: Each column presents estimates from a separate two-stage model where the state-specific shorter-run (1990-2000) estimates in Table 5 (and corresponding estimates for
the other samples) are regressed against indicators for different enterprise zone benefits. Each second-stage estimate is weighted by the number of treated tracts in that state. All
states included in Panel 1 provide investment credits, so the effects of investment credits are subsumed in the constant. We provide these estimates only for Panel 1 of each table
(Tables 7 and 8 in the paper), which are the full samples of states for which we can estimate the effects of hiring credits and hence, also, separately identify the effects of weak
and strong hiring credits. Number in parentheses next to each benefit category refers to the number of states that provide that benefit. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
