                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             FINANCING OUTDOOR RECREATION

                                         H. Spencer Banzhaf
                                           V. Kerry Smith

                                        Working Paper 27541
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27541


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2020




We thank the Property and Environment Research Center (PERC) for generous support of this
research. We also thank Nathan Chan, Cathy Kling, Matt Kotchen, and other participants in a
2019 PERC workshop for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by H. Spencer Banzhaf and V. Kerry Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Financing Outdoor Recreation
H. Spencer Banzhaf and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 27541
July 2020
JEL No. H2,H4,Q2,Q5

                                          ABSTRACT

The National Park Service and other agencies have argued that our recreation lands face a crisis
of deferred maintenance. This paper evaluates two proposals for funding public lands, increasing
gate fees and taxing recreational gear. It analyzes the joint welfare effects of such taxes and the
services supported by the revenue. It shows that when the taxed goods and the public service are
"weak complements," there is a simple sufficient statistic determining whether the joint effect
increases welfare both for consumers and sellers: Namely, the demand for the taxed good
increases. The paper illustrates these results with data for recreational services.


H. Spencer Banzhaf
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302
and NBER
hsbanzhaf@gsu.edu

V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 879801
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu
                                 Financing Outdoor Recreation

                             H. Spencer Banzhaf and V. Kerry Smith

                                            June 2020



1. Introduction

The National Park Service (NPS) has argued that our national parks face a growing crisis be-
cause of their inability to address deferred maintenance needs. By one account, the parks overall
had a backlog of $11.9 billion in FY2018 (CRS 2019a). Likewise, the Bureau of Land Manage-
ment (BLM), Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and Forest Service (FS) report deferred mainte-
nance amounting to $7.5 billion in 2018. Comparison of these estimates to those for earlier years
(in constant dollars) suggests the problem is not new. Indeed, there have been high levels of de-
ferred maintenance for these agencies since at least FY2009. The picture is more mixed at the
state level but there are certainly some states with significant maintenance backlogs.

       There are three main strategies for meeting these revenue needs. The first is to fund pub-
lic lands through general revenues. The second is to raise the needed revenue through entrance
fees, which, conceptually, can be thought of as a tax on trips to the destination. The third strate-
gy is a gear tax, which would raise the revenue through a tax on gear associated with recreation.

       The first strategy, using general revenues, is consistent with the standard emphasis in
public finance focusing on efficiency. Following Ramsey's (1927) classic paper, tax analysis
would begin by asking about revenue needs and then, separately, how to distribute the burden
across an excise tax system based on its efficiency, which in turn depends on how it distorts the
relative demands for each good. From this perspective, dedicated taxes linking revenue from a
particular source to a particular purpose are simply unnecessary constraints on the problem. See
Myles (1995 p. 105) for a textbook treatment and Walls (2013) for a discussion in the context of
funding parks.

       However, this also is largely the status quo approach. Between FY2010 and FY2019,
annual appropriations for NPS operations have ranged between $2.4 and $3.0 billion in 2010 dol-
lars (CRS 2019c). Yet these appropriations have not addressed the maintenance backlog. Alt-


                                                -1-
hough Congress recently authorized about $900m in annual revenues from offshore oil and gas
leases on federal lands, if past practice continues these funds will not be fully expended. 1 It ap-
pears that the appetite to raise taxes on the general public--or to borrow through deficit financ-
ing from future generations--is not sufficient to take care of federal lands.

        Accordingly, in this paper, we evaluate the alternative strategies of entry fees and the
gear tax. Although neither has provided as much funding as general revenues, both strategies
have been used to some extent. In 1996, the US Congress authorized the "Fee Demonstration
Program," in which certain units of the NPS, FS, BLM, and FWS could charge fees to users,
with 80% of the revenues staying in the local unit, thereby incentivizing managers to make the
most efficient use of their funds. Fees are collected at 184 NPS units (46.3% of all units), 3,759
NFS units (13.9%), 430 BLM units with developed recreation (11.9%), and 141 FWS refuges
(25.4%) (CRS 2015). Together, the agencies collected approximately $350m in entrance fees in
2017. 2 For its part, the gear tax would essentially be an extension of the Pittman-Robertson and
Dingell-Johnson Acts, which authorize taxes on hunting and fishing gear to other types of recrea-
tion related equipment. These taxes generate over $1b annually for conservation programs. 3

        Both recreation fees and the gear tax involve collecting revenue from private activities--
trips to public lands and purchases of gear, respectively--that are complements to the services
provided by public lands and, potentially, to the specific services provided by the investments
funded through those revenues. This complementarity has two implications. First, it has impli-
cations for the efficiency of the taxes. Conventional treatments of optimal taxation do not con-
sider how the revenue would be used and in particular whether the revenues support public
goods that are either substitutes or complements to one or more of the private goods being taxed.


1
 For discussion of how the Land and Water Conservation Fund (where funds are accumulated) is used in
practice, see CRS (2019b). As of this draft, Congress is debating permanently funding the LWCF.
2
  Data compiled from NPS (2018), USFS (2017), and CRS (2015). We use 2017 estimates from the 2018
budget requests from the NPS ($257m) and NFS ($65m) respectively, plus an estimate from CRS (2015)
that these two agencies account for 92% of the total. The authorization for charging these fees expires in
September 2020. See Fretwell (1999) and CRS (2015) for overviews of the program.
3
  These laws raise $1.1B per year from an 11% ad valorem tax on guns, bows, and ammunition and a 10%
tax on fishing gear and boat fuel. See Williams (2010) for an overview of these programs and US DOI
(2018a,b) for recent dollar figures. A similar proposal for a gear tax was floated during the Reagan ad-
ministration, when it was sometimes referred to as the "bird seed tax" (Loomis and Olson [1985]).


                                                   -2-
In these cases there is the conventional direct effect of the tax, distorting market signals, and the
feedback effect of the supported good on the demand for the taxed goods. Second, complemen-
tarity relationship suggests that services are being supported by taxing those who benefit from
them. The benefit, or user-pay principle, suggests that those who benefit from a publicly provid-
ed good should be the ones to bear the burden of funding it. 4 Taxing gasoline to fund roads and
property taxes to fund local amenities are examples. Such dedicated tax systems bring the fi-
nancing of public goods comparatively closer to private markets, where users generally pay for
the services because they are the ones who benefit, as with private goods.

        In this paper, after reviewing the economics of bundling and weak complementarity in
Section 2, we analyze (in Section 3) the efficiency and distributional effects of increasing, joint-
ly, a gate fee and enhancing the quality or amount of a public good that is funded by the fee rev-
enues. To simplify the analysis, we first assume trips to public lands are "weak complements" to
the services provided by public lands. This condition means that households have no value for
the planned investments in those public lands unless they make trips to the sites (Mäler 1974,
Smith and Banzhaf 2004). For example, they do not value improvements in trails or stocking
streams with fish unless they come to hike or fish. We show that, under this condition, there is a
sufficient statistic determining whether an increased gate fee, with revenue reinvested in the site,
improves visitors' welfare: Namely, an increase in the number of trips to the site.

        Next, in Section 4, we extend this logic to the gear tax. Like the gate fee, the gear tax can
be thought of as taxing a private good that is a weak complement to public lands: Households do
not value trail maintenance without boots, or value fish stocks without a rod. Unlike the gate fee,
however, the gear tax now involves sellers and a supply price that will respond endogenously to
the tax. Nevertheless, we show that, with weak complementarity and oligopolistic competition,
our test still holds: If the quantity demanded for the gear increases on net from the joint effect of
the tax and the investments it funds, then there is a potential Pareto improvement. More surpris-
ingly, households and firms are better off. That households are better off may not seem surpris-
ing, as this result is similar to the gear tax, and the increased elasticity of the supply side can only

4
  The benefit approach has been a textbook principle in public finance since Musgrave's (1959) discus-
sion. It had its full realization in Lindahl's voluntary exchange logic and the associated individual pricing
of public services.


                                                    -3-
help the demand side.

       That firms are better off may be more surprising. As we discuss in more detail, the basic
intuition for this result comes from the way private and public goods are "bundled" so that the
tax leverages the benefit principle. In general, private markets work because entrepreneurs find a
way to provide valuable services at a price that leaves both sides of the transaction better off. As
Anderson and Leal (2001), Anderson and Parker (2013), and Heal (2000, 2003) discuss, entre-
preneurs can still perform this function for a public good when it is bundled to a private good.
The bundling overcomes the excludability problem. For example, if households do not value
wildlife unless they come to visit it, entrepreneurs can invest in wildlife and recoup their invest-
ment through the increased demand for a hotel or a tour, which are excludable private goods. As
Heal (2003) emphasizes, this logic is most compelling when the entrepreneur is a monopolist, as
then there is no free rider problem in the provision of the services. However, in principle, this
problem could be overcome by working cooperatively (Ostrom 1991). The gear tax simply plays
this coordinating role: If the monopolist would voluntarily make the investment, a group of
firms can be "forced" to do so through the tax, and still be better off.

       Section 5 relaxes some of the modeling assumptions used in our simplest analysis. In
particular, we relax the weak complementarity assumptions and show that our simple test is still
a sufficient (but not necessary) condition for both sides of the market to be better off.

       Section 6 assembles a variety of empirical information needed to use our first order ap-
proximation to develop back-of-the-envelope calculations offering a range of values for the link
between a quality improvement and the welfare neutral price increase. Finally, the last section
draws together research needs and the implications of what we know for addressing the questions
associated with funding park needs in the future.

2. Bundling and Weak Complementarity

Economists often make a sharp distinction between private goods, which can be provided by
markets, and public goods, usually provided by governments. In many cases, however, house-
holds use a "bundle" of public goods and private goods together, to enjoy the services they joint-
ly provide. Outdoor recreation is an example of such bundling. To enjoy a recreation trip, a
household bundles together the publicly provided resource (the scenic vistas and built amenities)
and their time along with some private goods and services, such as transportation and gear

                                                 -4-
(whether generic to many outdoor activities, like outdoor clothing and boots, or specialized
equipment like kayaks, fishing gear, etc.).

        This bundling can be modeled as complementarity between the public and private goods.
Of course, two private goods exhibit complementarity when a lower price for one leads to greater
demand for the other. For bundles of public and private goods, complementarity can be under-
stood as arising when an increase in the availability of a public good leads to an increase in the
demand for the private good and, symmetrically, when a lower price for the private good leads to
a higher marginal willingness to pay for the public good (Madden 1991).

        A particularly important type of complementarity relationship between public and private
goods is known as weak complementarity (Mäler [1974], Smith and Banzhaf [2004]). Weak
complementarity is defined as a situation in which the public good has no value to people unless
they also consume positive levels of the linked private good (the weak complement). For exam-
ple, weak complementarity would hold if people don't care about the ecosystem services at a
park unless they take trips to it. In other settings, people might not care about local school quali-
ty in a neighborhood unless they have housing in the neighborhood; they might not care about
local roads unless they drive on them; etc. But the reverse need not hold. The private good's
value does not have to be exclusively associated with the services of the public good. People can
value spending time watching sports or bowling without using their leisure time by taking trips
to a park.

        Economic measures for changes in the amount of the public good exploiting this connec-
tion are sometimes labeled use values. Thus, weak complementarity rules out non-use values,
i.e., values households have for the investment even if they never use it in any instrumental
sense. 5 This assumption may be problematic for some policy questions, such as the preservation
of unique resources such as Yellowstone or the Grand Canyon, or investments that protect eco-
systems, where non-use values are important. However, for present purposes, our focus is on
funding for deferred maintenance and ongoing operations, not preservation. Though some of
these investments may protect ecosystems, many involve more pedestrian objectives like main-


5
 Consequently, the assumption limits "the extent of the market" to the set of users, even though the set of
people who would value the investment is larger.


                                                    -5-
taining bathrooms, trails, and campsites which are linked to recreation use. In any case, even if
there are nonuse values, we can say that weak complementarity holds for that portion of house-
holds' total value linked to recreation.

       Weak complementarity is useful because it assures that, when there is an investment in a
publicly provided asset, the change in households' Hicksian consumer surplus for their consump-
tion of the private good (that is a weak complement) will be equal to their Hicksian willingness
to pay (WTP) for that investment (Mäler [1974]). Figure 1 depicts the change in consumer sur-
plus for the private weak complement due to this type of investment. It shows the marginal cost
of the private good x (e.g. the travel cost of trips to the park) and two Hicksian demand curves
for an individual. The lower demand curve shows the quantity of the private good (trips) that
would be demanded when income is adjusted to leave the consumer at the same level of utility,
when evaluated at a baseline level of environmental or resource quality, q0. The upper demand
curve shows the corresponding demand at a higher level of environmental quality, q1. (We are
assuming that the public and private goods are ordinary complements as well as weak comple-
ments, with people more likely to participate in recreation when the quality of the recreation ex-
perience is better, so the improvement in environmental quality increases the quantity of recrea-
tion demanded at a given price.)

       Weak complementarity guarantees that the shaded area between these two lines, up to the
level consumed, is the individual's value (or at least the recreational value) of the improvement
in q. Consider now Figure 2, which depicts the marginal cost of providing the public good q
against the marginal social value of a little more q. The shaded area in Figure 2 is the (gross)
value of the improvement in the public good from q0 to q1. Weak complementarity guarantees
that the two shaded areas in the two figures are the same, for each individual. Consequently, the
respective sums across individuals of the two areas are the same, and the aggregate value of the
investment is equivalent to the change in aggregate consumer surplus for the private weak com-
plement.

       A further consequence of this equivalence is that the value of the environmental services
(Figure 2) can actually be captured in the market for the private good (Figure 1), wherever ex-
cludability is possible. For example, to the extent households only have recreation values for
environmental resources, they can be excluded from enjoying them because they can be excluded


                                               -6-
from entering those areas. This bundling creates incentives for private parties to provide envi-
ronmental services (Anderson and Leal [2001], Anderson and Parker [2013], Heal [2000, 2003]).
As we discuss below in Section 4, it similarly creates the possibility that sellers of gear can bene-
fit from a gear tax. When households have non-use values for the quality improvements associ-
ated with investments in a park, they cannot entirely be excluded from enjoying them, making it
more difficult for private parties to capture the full value. Nevertheless, as we discuss in Sec-
tion 5, partial values may be sufficient.

        In practice, environmental values can be captured in private markets because weak com-
plementarity implies there is a hypothetical increase in the price of the linked private good that
exactly compensates for the improvement in the public good, leaving the consumer indifferent to
the combined change (Willig [1978], Smith and Banzhaf [2004)]). Any actual price increases
less than this level would then leave consumers better off. Thus, instead of measuring value
through income adjustments associated with willingness to pay as economists usually do, one
can measure value through price adjustments. However, the "right" price adjustment will differ
for each consumer. 6 Figure 3 reproduces the "fanned" indifference curves from Smith and Ban-
zhaf (2004), which display the way weak complementarity affects the tradeoff between a private
good (x in the diagram) and a numeraire good (Z). The non-market good is q. Three indiffer-
ence curves are displayed. ( 0 ) depicts the baseline situation, with the consumer's optimum at

point B. The dashed indifference curve (1 ) indicates that at a higher level of q (with  0 <
1 ), the consumer obtains higher utility and also purchases more of the private weak complement
at point E. The indifference curve (1 ) depicts the combinations of x and Z that leave utility
unchanged at the initial level when quality increases. The two solid indifference curves intersect
at the vertical axis because at that point  = 0, and weak complementarity implies that q has no
value to the individual without x.

        The figure illustrates that there is a hypothetical increase in the price of the weak com-
plement that would just compensate for the quality improvement and bring the consumer from

6
  Thus, Heal (2003) shows that price discrimination is generally required for a firm to have the full incen-
tive to make the investment. As Kotchen (2013) notes, there is a connection between this framework and
Lindahl (1919 [1958]) pricing, in which each household pays its marginal value for the public good.
Here, that household-specific price for the public good is captured in the market for the weak comple-
ment.


                                                    -7-
(1 ) to 
        (1 ), with equilibrium at point C. This price increase represents the source for the
potential revenue gain to suppliers of the private good from the investment. In addition to giving
them an incentive to provide the investment themselves, it creates the possibility that they can
benefit from it even if their own sales are taxed to provide it, a point we return to in Section 4.

3. The Economics of Gate Fees

In this section, we apply the logic of Figure 3 to the economics of gate fees. In particular, we
show that when trips to public lands are a weak complement to the services provided by the in-
vestment in these lands, then there is a fee increase that, when combined with the investment,
leaves households indifferent. If the actual fee required to fund the investment is lower than this
critical level, households are better off. To a first-order approximation, this criterion is equiva-
lent to observing an increase in the number of trips from the joint effect of the increased fee and
the increased investment funding with the resulting revenue. This equivalence makes the con-
nection empirically tractable.

          We model gate fees as comparable to a tax on trips. Trips are an especially convenient
activity to analyze in this way, because their price is set by distance between a household's home
and the site and by per-mile transportation costs, both of which are plausibly exogenous to the
policy. 7 Thus, we can view trips to the site (which we denote by x) as having perfectly elastic
supply at a pre-tax price of  . The price of a composite of other consumption goods is normal-
ized to 1. Let q be the quality of the park that is visited. Income is fixed and designated by m.
Let  ( ) represent the indirect utility function for a representative household. Finally, assume
that trips are non-rival, so that, if lump sum taxes were available, the optimal gate fee would be
zero. 8


7
 The largest share of the costs of a trip is associated with the opportunity costs of time. Conventional
practice assumes the opportunity cost of time is a fixed fraction of an individual's wage and the labor/ lei-
sure choice is taken as given.
8
  This assumption is largely for simplicity and our results could be generalized to account for such costs.
Rivalry would imply there are opportunity costs for serving additional trips to a site. For example, con-
gestion is a concern in some contexts. Additionally, trips might require additional facilities maintenance.
Unfortunately, data on maintenance is available only at an aggregate level (GAO [2016], Table 2). Using
ten years of data by budget category and fund sources, we found that maintenance for facility operations,
routine services using recreation fees, and for the Federal Lands transportation components were all sig-
nificantly related to visitation levels.


                                                    -8-
         Equation (1) provides the indirect utility function expressed in general terms:

(1)                                      ( ,  , ) = .

Here,  designates the fact that our analysis begins with a baseline level of utility.

         Now consider a policy that jointly imposes an entry fee  and provides a change in quali-
ty  from reinvesting on site the resulting revenue. To a first order approximation, the change
in utility is:

(2)                                        +  .


Dividing both sides by the marginal utility of income  , substituting using Roy's identify for

- / =  , and defining the marginal willingness to pay for  by  =  / , we have:


(3)                                   > 0   < .

This simply says that utility is increasing if and only if the fee paid,  , is less than the value of
the investment,  . This obviously must hold in general, to a first order approximation.

         The assumption of weak complementarity brings additional insight. For any arbitrary
, weak complementarity guarantees that there exists a   such that  = 0 (Willig [1978],
Smith and Banzhaf [2004]). Returning to Equation (2), this is given by:

                                                  
(4)                                          -     .
                                                  


More generally,

                                                       
(5)                              > 0   < -                  .
                                                       


That is, welfare improves if and only if, for any given , the actual fee () is less than the criti-
cal value   .

         Expression (5) can be interpreted more intuitively if we again divide the numerator and
denominator of the right-hand term by the marginal utility of income:


                                                 -9-
                                                             
(6)                                    > 0   < =               .
                                                             

      
As    
         , or the marginal willingness to pay for quality per trip, is a commonly estimated parameter

in travel-cost modeling, this condition is, in principle, empirically verifiable. The condition
gives us a starting point for determining a neutral tax from the perspective of the representative
household. Thus, if  can be produced by the park agency with a gate fee less than   , then the
welfare of the representative visitor is increased by the policy. Although in the context of public
lands we are discussing a kind of public finance mechanism, note the close connection between
this result and the earlier discussion of ecotourism: A market in ecosystem services will succeed
if entrepreneurs can charge a price for a linked private good high enough to cover the costs of
ecosystem improvements but low enough to attract customers.

           However, there is another aspect of this relationship. So far, we have considered simul-
taneous but essentially arbitrary increases in the fee (t) and in the public good, . In practice,
the ability to realize the  depends on the aggregate revenue raised from the fee increase or txN,
where  is the average number of trips per user and N is the number of users. We can use a sim-
ple characterization with  =  / , where  is the price of producing a unit of q. 9

           Substituting this relationship into Expression (6), the policy increases aggregate welfare
if and only if:

(7)                                                  
                                                <     ,
                                                     


9
  So the feasibility of realizing  depends on the tax base, including the trips per household x and the
extent of the market N, and the price of q. Our analysis leading to equation (6) does not discuss the point
                                                      
of evaluation for the partial derivatives leading to . At the travel costs without the added fee,  cor-
                                                      
responds to initial average number of trips per user. With the fee and  the new equilibrium number of
trips will be different. Thus, in principle, there is also the second-order consideration of the feedback ef-
fect of the tax and quality change on the revenue. Our analysis using first-order effects ignores this feed-
back. However, this feedback effect can never overturn our test. If the fee and the reinvested revenue
assessed on the baseline number of trips jointly increase the number of trips (our condition for increased
welfare), then that can only increase the associated , thus further increasing welfare. If, on the other
hand, they decrease the number of trips (our condition for reduced welfare), then that can only decrease
the associated  through the eroded tax base, thus further decreasing welfare. Our sufficient statistic
still holds.


                                                    -10-
or,

(8)                                             < .

This test seems a straightforward application of the Samuelson rule, comparing the supply price
of the public good to the sum of the marginal willingness to pay. This result may be surprising,
as we are not using a lump-sum tax. At first, it may appear that in taking our first-order approx-
imation we have simply assumed away deadweight loss in the market for trips. In fact, the result
stems from the fact that weak complementarity guarantees that prices and marginal willingness
to pay can be compared in the same space. Our approximation merely simplifies things by trans-
lating willingness to pay for quality into a parallel shift in the demand curve for the private good.
With this simplification, the above condition guarantees that there is no (net) deadweight loss in
the private good to worry about, even though we are not using a lump-sum tax. Of course, we
are asking whether a given policy proposal (t, ) is welfare improving, not whether it is opti-
mal. If lump sum taxes were available, the policy would indeed involve deadweight loss relative
to that first-best alternative, as the number of trips would be even higher in that case. 10 Chan and
Kotchen (this issue) evaluate alternative taxation schemes from that perspective.

        Our approach can be illustrated with Figure 1. An increase in q, taken in isolation, in-
creases the inverse demand curve as shown. Our first-order approximation implies the inverse
demand curve shifts up, in parallel, by  /, or the WTP for  per trip. By weak comple-
mentarity, the resulting increase in consumer surplus is equal to the value of an increase in q.
Just as we can depict the value of  in the demand for trips, so we can depict the Hicksian-
equivalent price adjustment or gate fee. The fee would shift the cost of trips up by . If the costs
of a trip increased by the same amount that the demand curve increased, the number of trips
would be unchanged and consumer surplus would be unchanged. This is precisely what would
happen if the fee were   . If the actual fee supporting  were less, welfare would be higher on
net.



10
  This case differs from textbook logic because whereas with the lump sum tax the policy simultaneously
reduces income and increases the public good services, here it changes the price of a weak complement
and increases the public good services. The relative size of second order effects will figure into assessing
the deadweight losses.


                                                    -11-
        Viewing the gate fee as an excise tax on trips, we could also follow the logic often used
to describe the effects of a per unit tax and illustrate its effect by shifting the demand curve down
by  and leaving the supply unchanged. The above analysis suggests, then, that the key question
is whether, on net, the demand curve shifts up or down from the joint effect of the excise tax on
trips and the quality improvement. As a shift up in a demand curve, with fixed supply, is associ-
ated with an increase in trips, we have the following proposition:

        Proposition 1. Under weak complementarity, to a first-order approximation, welfare in-
        creases from a combination of a dedicated gate fee and the associated increase in public
        good services if and only if the quantity demanded implied by the Hicksian demand for
        trips increases on net.

Such a test could be implemented with standard travel cost models, which predict the effect of
costs on trips, if they also can account for the quality change at stake. Our use of the term "asso-
ciated" is intended to highlight the fact that the aggregate revenue raised from the gate fee must
cover the cost of the increase in services.

        Under an additional restriction, known as the Willig (1978) condition, this insight leads
to an extremely simple ex-post empirical test for a welfare improvement. The Willig condition
guarantees that the Marshallian variant of the change in consumer surplus for the private weak
complement, depicted in Figure 1, also is equivalent to the Hicksian consumer surplus in Fig-
ure 2. It is equivalent to restricting the price adjustments discussed above to be invariant to in-
come:

                                              (/)
                                                  = 0.
                                              

(See Bockstael and McConnell [1993] and Smith and Banzhaf [2004, 2007] for additional dis-
cussion.) Under this restriction, we can use a net change in the Marshallian consumer surplus for
the private weak complement as the basis for our assessment--and, hence, observed changes in
the Marshallian demand.

        Proposition 2. Under weak complementarity and the Willig condition, to a first-order
        approximation, welfare increases from a combination of a dedicated gate fee and the as-
        sociated increases in public good services if and only if the Marshallian quantity de-
        manded for trips increases on net.

Thus, ex post, if we observe an increase in trips ceteris paribus, we have an increase in welfare.


                                                -12-
4. The Gear Tax

The previous argument leads naturally to a strategy for analyzing the gear tax. The difference
between the gate fee and the gear tax lies in the fact that (i) we must account for the welfare of
sellers as well as consumers; (ii) we can no longer assume a perfectly elastic supply as we could
in the case of exogenous travel costs, so we must account for market price adjustments; and (iii)
the assumption of complementarity may not be as plausible for some gear in the tax base as for
trips. In this section, we first account for points (i) and (ii), maintaining the assumption of com-
plementarity. In Section 5, we relax that assumption as well.

       In principle, a gear tax can increase welfare for both consumers and sellers, if it results in
a large enough quality improvement in the parks. Figure 4 illustrates the basic argument. It is
similar to Figure 1, but we now have added a supply side that responds to price, instead of fixing
travel costs at an exogenous level. Let D0 represent baseline market demand, as before. Let D
represent the demand curve after it is shifted down by the amount of the excise tax on gear, taken
in isolation. Let D1 represent the ex post demand curve after the revenue is used to improve the
quality of one or more parks; it shows the net increase in demand from the tax and the quality
effects. Here, we show a case where there is a potential Pareto improvement, with demand shift-
ing up on net. As shown in this diagram, both consumer surplus and producer surplus increase.
After the tax and the increase in park quality, as a result of using tax revenue for this purpose, the
equilibrium price increases from 0 to 1 . Consumer surplus increases by ACEB and producer
surplus by 1 0 . Thus, the gear tax can be a strict Pareto improvement, not simply a potential
Pareto improvement.

       Figure 4 captures the basic intuition of our argument, but essentially assumes perfect
competition. Arguably, perfect competition is an unrealistic assumption, as there are many large
purveyors of gear with market power. Market power, in turn, raises the question of whether
equilibrium prices would adjust in a way to lower welfare for one group. In fact, in this sub-
section, we demonstrate that the basic logic continues to hold under Cournot competition.

       Consider the case of J symmetric firms, each with a quadratic cost function for producing
a quantity of gear  :

(9)                                          1
                                      =  +  + 2 .
                                             2
                                                -13-
The firms face a linear inverse market demand curve:

(10)                                       =  - ,

where  is the total quantity of gear produced,  =   =  +   .

       Profits for firm j are:


                                            1
(11)                       -   +     -  -  - 2 .
                                            2
                                         


Maximizing these profits with respect to  , and taking the production of other firms  as given,
the first-order condition for the firm is to set marginal revenue equal to marginal cost, or:


(12)                               - 2 -    =  + 
                                                


Assuming a symmetric equilibrium, then we have  =  , or, for each firm j:

(13)                                 - ( + 1) =  + 

                                                  - 
(14)                                     =               .
                                                + ( + 1)

The total quantity is J times this value, or

                                                ( -  )
(15)                                      =              .
                                                + ( + 1)

Finally, the equilibrium price is given by substituting this equilibrium quantity back into the in-
                       
verse demand function,  =  -   :


                                    
                                                  ( -  )
(16)                                 =  -                   .
                                                  +  ( + 1)

       Consider next the question, how does the gear tax affect this equilibrium? As always, we
can model an excise tax, in isolation, by shifting the demand curve down by an amount , effec-

                                                 -14-
tively replacing  with  -  in the demand curve and in the equilibrium price and quantity.
Since the revenue is used to enhance quality of one or more parks, following our analysis in Sec-
tion 3, we can view this effect, to a first-order approximation, as a parallel shift up in the demand
curve for gear. Denote the net effect of these two parallel shifts as  (the change in the inter-
cept of the demand curve).

           At the margin, the net effect of this tax/quality enhancement on the equilibrium quantity
              
is   =            , or:
              


                                                     
(17)                                       =                .
                                                   + ( + 1)

This term will have the same sign as . Thus, if the net effect is to shift demand up, the equi-
librium quantity demanded and quantity supplied increases in the Cournot model. By the same
                                           
                              
token, the change in price is  =               , or
                                           


                                      
                                                       
(18)                                   = 1 -                   .
                                                     + ( + 1)

And this price change also is the same sign as . 11

           Thus, firms are clearly better off: A shift up in the demand curve leads to higher sales
and higher prices, which increases profits. Thus, even though they bear some of the burden of
the tax per se, firms benefit if the feedback effect of the quality improvement on demand is suffi-
ciently large.

           What about consumers? Consider the Marshallian consumer surplus in this market, CS =
1
2
      ( - )
           . Substituting in the above expressions for   and 
                                                              , we have:

                                                                     2
                      1 ( -  )       ( -  )                   
(19)            =                              = ( -  )2              .
                      2  + ( + 1)    + ( + 1)   2          +  ( + 1)

                                                                               
If we consider how the consumer surplus changes with  (i.e.  =                  
                                                                                   ), we have:

11
     Note that if  =0 we would have 1-J/(J+1) > 0 in brackets; but the term in brackets is increasing in  .


                                                      -15-
                                                    2
                                             
                                 = ( -  )            .
                                           + ( + 1)

Again, this change in consumer surplus is the same sign as  (assuming an interior solution
where the demand curve intersects the supply curve, which occurs where  > ). Thus, con-
sumer surplus also increases if the demand curve increases.

        Moreover, as perfect competition and a single-price monopoly are special cases of
Cournot with J= and J=1, respectively, the result holds in those limiting cases as well.

        Of course, we usually measure consumer welfare with Hicksian surplus, not Marshallian
consumer surplus. Since we are using a first-order approximation in terms of price, we are effec-
tively assuming the price/ quality relationship is not affected by income (and thus we are implic-
itly using the Willig condition, along with weak complementarity in this argument).

        Proposition 3. Under weak complementarity and the Willig condition, and under
        Cournot competition, perfect competition, or monopoly pricing, to a first-order approxi-
        mation, welfare increases for both consumers and sellers from a combination of a dedi-
        cated gear tax and the implied corresponding increase in public good services if and only
        if the Marshallian quantity demanded for gear increases on net.

In sum, the test is the same as that from Section 2: To a first-order approximation, our gauge of
the effects is still given by Expressions (7) or (8):

                                                    
(7)                                            <     ,
                                                    

(8)                                              < .

The demand curve shifts down by  and shifts up by the value of q per unit of gear / times the
change in q that is consistent with the increased revenues or given our simplifying assumptions
/ . So, to a first-order approximation, we still have a gauge of whether  < , for gear
as well as for trips. 12



12
  Of course, whether the test is met is an empirical question. Walls (this issue) argues that the own-price
elasticity of gear is probably quite high, meaning that the quantity demanded is likely to fall. However,
she does not consider the complementarity between gear and the investment funded by the dedicated tax.


                                                   -16-
Reflections on Bundling

       The argument that a public good funded with a dedicated tax can make households better
off is not new. The conclusion that it can make firms better off too may be more surprising. The
potential for this result stems from the bundling made possible by weak complementarity, which
increases the demand for the taxed good. It relies on the strength of the link between the public
good and its weak complement as well as being able to increase the public good services suffi-
ciently, given the extent of the market for that private good. Potentially, this linkage creates in-
centives for entrepreneurs to contribute to the public good by bundling it to private goods (An-
derson [1998], Anderson and Leal [2001], Anderson and Parker [2013], Banzhaf, Fitzgerald, and
Schnier [2013], Chichilnisky and Heal [1998], Heal [2000, 2003]). One prominent example is
ecotourism. When tourists visit a preserve in southern Africa to view (or hunt) elephants and
other wildlife, they cannot obtain that value unless they also consume a linked private good, such
as a guided safari or a stay at a lodge. Furthermore, because they do not enjoy the ecosystem
services unless they also purchase those private goods, they can effectively be excluded from
enjoying the ecosystem as well. Thus the access conditions for the private good define the extent
of the market for the public good as well. Similarly, when the wildlife is better, the demand for
the safaris is higher. Consequently, the safari guide has an incentive to conserve and maintain
elephant habitat. The South African company andBeyond (formerly Cons-Corp) does precisely
this; buying up land from ranchers that is far more valuable as elephant habitat (Anderson
[1998], Heal [2000]).

       In his analysis of such incentives, Heal (2003) identifies three necessary conditions. The
first is weak complementarity. The second is that the private good be sold by a monopolist. This
condition is important because it evades the "free rider" problem in the provision of the public
good. For example, when the outfitter invests in improving the ecosystem services of the park,
as a lone seller it would capture the full benefit of the increased demand for trips to the park, so it
has the full incentive to make the investment. With many sellers, this is no longer true. Each of
them would benefit from an improvement in ecosystem services but would prefer to let the oth-
ers bear the expense of the improvement.

       Heal's third condition is not only that the private good be sold by a monopolist, but that it
be sold by a perfectly price discriminating monopolist. Thus, for goods that sell in varying quan-


                                                 -17-
tities, the seller can offer an "all-or-nothing deal" for a specific quantity that leaves the customer
just indifferent to buying the bundle or not. This third condition completes a syllogism at the
heart of Heal's logic:

     · By weak complementarity, the Hicksian value for an investment in the public good is
       equal to the change in the Hicksian value for the linked private good.

     · Because it is a perfectly discriminating monopolist, the seller can capture the full Hick-
       sian value of the private good.

     · Therefore, the seller captures the full Hicksian value of the investment in the public good.

Thus, in Figure 1, the seller's marginal increase in profits from an improvement in the public
good is the same as the shaded area marked as the social benefit. This area is equivalent to the
area marked in Figure 2. Comparing this area to the cost of the investment, the seller provides
the public good up to the optimal level, q*.

       Our analysis of the gear tax is similar, insofar as the value is potentially created through
investments in natural resources and captured by private sellers of a linked weak complement. It
differs in that, because the seller is not a monopolist, there is the potential for free riding. But
taxes are a standard way to overcome such free-rider problems. In this case, if sellers of gear
would benefit jointly from increased investment in public lands, the gear tax would represent a
kind of compact or coordinating mechanism that assures they participate. An analogy might be
made to commodity checkoff programs, where dairy farmers pay collectively for an ad campaign
("got milk?") that benefits the group.

       This possibility parallels other, more familiar, situations where demand for a private good
is higher because it is taxed, with the revenue ploughed back into a complementary public good.
Vehicles and roads are weak complements: One doesn't value the maintenance of roads unless
one drives a vehicle. Total driving is probably greater because of the gas tax and the road im-
provements it funds (relative to a counter-factual without that transportation funding). Likewise,
housing in a community and its public schools and other local services are weak complements.
Housing demand is surely higher in an area with a property tax than it would be if there were no
tax and no public services. Finally, and closest in theme, the Pittman-Robertson program which
taxes hunting and fishing equipment to support public lands is popular both with industry and
hunters and anglers. They want to be taxed, so long as the revenue is reinvested into maintaining

                                                -18-
the resources they use. In the same way, sellers of gear might benefit from being taxed if the
money is reinvested in the parks and if the complementarity between gear and the services pro-
vided by the investment is strong enough.

5. Relaxing Weak Complementarity

Till now, we have maintained two assumptions about the relationship between the private good
being taxed (trips or gear) and the public good to which the resulting increased revenue is dedi-
cated. The first is weak complementarity. As noted previously, this assumption rules out non-
use values. The assumption is arguably most fitting when the revenue is used for services that
specifically support recreation (trail maintenance, camp sites, etc.). If fees are used to support
habitat or protect water quality at unique sites like Yellowstone or the Grand Canyon, however,
non-use values may need to be considered. Their relevance depends on how the revenue is used.
If the revenue enhances services arguably separate from what underlies nonuse values, then the
omission is less important.

       Weak complementarity may seem less applicable to the case of gear. Even here, though,
we hasten to emphasize that weak complementarity implies only that households have, e.g., no
value for trail maintenance if they don't have hiking boots, not symmetrically that they don't val-
ue the boots without the trail work. In this sense, we suggest the issue is not so much whether
there is weak complementarity. Rather, the issue is whether it is strong enough to assure the
feedback effects on demand for the taxed goods due to the enhancement of the public good will
offset the price increases. In the case of outdoor recreation, several types of gear as well as
transportation all might serve together as a bundle of weak complements to environmental amen-
ities. In this case, an analogous sum of the sequential changes in consumer surplus for all the
weak complements would equal the value for the investment (Bockstael and Kling 1988). The
issue then becomes whether the value in the taxed markets is high enough that it can be captured
by sellers, even if there is no nonuse value.

       A similar issue arises from our first-order approximation, which basically assumed de-
mand curves for the private weak complement shift up vertically. In principle, weak comple-
mentarity only requires that they shift up over some portion of their domain. It is possible that
they could shift up infra-marginally, but not at the margin. Greater public good services may
increase the number of times a recreationist uses the boots or the fly rod and/or increase the val-

                                                -19-
ue of each use, but not the number of pairs of boots or fishing rods. That is, an investment in
public lands increases the consumer surplus for boots, but not necessarily the quantity demanded.
Without non-linear pricing, capturing such value will be challenging.

       If these effects are non-negligible, then some social value is not captured by sellers in the
linked private market. In that case, our result is a sufficient but not necessary condition: If the
demand for the weak complement increases, then there is a Pareto improvement, but the con-
verse is not true. Thus, our approach essentially identifies a lower bound on values.

       One last consideration bears on the ability of firms to capture some of this value, even
non-use value: The desire to make voluntary contributions to public lands. Even some non-use
value may be captured by sellers of a private good if consumers are willing to donate to public
lands and view the higher prices as an indirect mechanism for such donations. For example, or-
ganizations like REI and Patagonia donate revenue to preserving environmental amenities. With
the gear tax, one could imagine stickers on taxed goods proclaiming "t% of every dollar goes to
funding public lands." Kotchen (2005, 2006, 2013) refers to such situations as "mixed public
goods", which bundle an excludable private good (like gear) with a contribution to a public good.
Individuals can be excluded from the private good but not the non-use values for the public
good, which they enjoy whether they buy the linked private good or make the donation or not.
However, if they are partly motivated by the good feelings of making the donation ("warm
glow"), even indirectly by buying a good where some of the revenues are donated, then they can
be excluded from that part of the package. They cannot receive the satisfaction of making a do-
nation unless they actually donate, which is itself a form of weak complementarity (Banzhaf,
Fitzgerald, and Schnier 2013). This argument suggests we now have three effects shifting the
demand curve: The tax shifting it down, the public services shifting it up because the benefit
from using it in recreation activities is higher, and the fact that the purchase represents a donation
also shifting it up. This last effect creates a different "extent of the market"--people who may
not be as concerned about how much their personal recreation experience is enhanced but do
gain nonetheless by knowing they "did their part" to sustain the parks.

6. Empirical Evidence

Despite the extensive economic literature on outdoor recreation, we know surprisingly little
about some of the questions posed in this paper. For sixty years, the workhorse model of recrea-

                                                -20-
tion valuation has been the travel cost model, in which travel costs are meant to simulate the ef-
fect of a gate fee. 13 While well positioned to address some of our questions, to date the travel-
cost literature has focused on consumer surplus, ignoring the revenue actually collected by the
gate fee. It also has tended to focus on questions associated with the valuation of natural ameni-
ties, with less emphasis on how the amenities can be maintained or enhanced with the revenue.

          For the gear tax, the empirical challenges are even greater. The central empirical chal-
lenge we face is developing estimates for how the improvements in park quality would affect the
demand for recreational gear. This effect underlies the shift in demand we described in Figure 4.
Critically, data do not include measures for the activities involved with the gear or the locations
where the gear was used. Thus, making the connection between park quality and gear is diffi-
cult. When park use has been studied in recreation demand studies, the quality features consid-
ered are usually not related to the ones that might be affected by the activities associated with
how parks are maintained. As a result, we selected two sets of estimates for the value of national
parks and adapted them in an approximate way to develop estimates of the value share, which
can be used to implement the logic implied by equation (5).

          With some substitutions, we can rewrite Expression (5) in percentage terms, making it
more useful for use with the available data:

                                                      0 / 
(9)                                          0
                                             
                                                 <   0  /   0
                                                     
                                                                .

This expression gives us a starting point for determining a neutral tax from the perspective of the
                                                         0
representative household. In our setting, we do not know   , so we do not know whether the en-
hancement in the public good can be paid for the revenues raised by the increased gate fees or
gear tax. However, we can still find the critical value   that would be necessary to leave house-
holds indifferent. A proportionate tax of /0
                                            that is less than what is implied by the right side of

equation (9) would improve welfare for a representative household.

          In other words, by comparing the value share for the services associated with park quality
as a fraction of income (  0 /) to the share of income spent on gear (0 /
                                                                        ), we have a


13
     See Phaneuf and Smith (2005) and Lupi, Phaneuf, and von Haefen (2020) for reviews of this literature.


                                                     -21-
gauge of how much the price can increase (due to the tax) for each percentage point increase in
quality. For example, if the value share for park quality is about 1% of income and expenditures
on gear about 2%, then the price increase that would hold willingness to pay constant for a repre-
sentative individual (with simultaneous improvements in park quality) would be half the percent-
age increase in quality. Larger value shares for park quality would allow for larger price in-
creases.

       In this section, we provide some suggestive evidence on the range of price increases for a
given improvement in park quality that would be WTP neutral, as we defined this idea in Sec-
tion 3. Our estimates leverage some diverse sources for estimates of the components of equa-
tion (9). They mix data from different household samples and different time periods. As a re-
sult, they are best viewed a "collage of estimates" that were collected to match up available in-
formation with the task at hand and should be interpreted as illustrative examples of what could
be done once there are better data. If the logic associated with our ratio of shares proves useful,
then implementing it will require a more extensive effort to assemble consistently defined meas-
ure for each of the shares.

       The first parameter we require is the income-share of park quality,   0 /. To estimate
this parameter, we use both revealed preference and stated preference results in the literature.
The results for the revealed preference study we selected (Parsons et al [2018]) are in the top
panel of the Table 1. The first column provides the names for each of the Southwestern Parks
included in this study. The second column provides the estimate reported in the study for the
willingness to pay to avoid removing one of the parks from a set that was visited as a group dur-
ing a vacation trip. Essentially the study assumed each visit was part of a planned trip that in-
cluded visits to multiple sites. The data were collected with on-site surveys in each of the seven
parks considered as part of the study. Initial contacts were made to potential survey respondents
in the parks as they entered during a specific time window, and then these individuals were sent
follow up surveys to collect the specific data used in the analysis. Our results are taken from one
of the models reported in Parsons et. al. (2018), a standard random utility model where the
choice set involved different portfolios of parks to be visited. The model assumes the trip is un-
dertaken and the choice set is among a group of alternative portfolios that each involve a distinct
mix of Southwestern Parks. This process served to define a composite of multiple site choice
alternatives. The costs then correspond to the costs associated with altering the mix of sites, giv-
                                                -22-
en the respondent has already taken the trip.

       The measure we selected for willingness to pay considers a situation where the model is
calculating the amount that would be paid to avoid removing each site, one at a time, from the
portfolio. Our estimate is the average for each site over all possible combinations considered for
the portfolios and for all of the respondents in the sample in 2002$. To arrive at the value share
for each site as part of an annual vacation, we added the incremental willingness to pay as de-
fined in the analysis (given in the second column) for the park to the average trip expenditures
for the vacation from the sample ($822) and compare this estimate to an estimate of the average
respondents' income. The results are shown in the third column of Table 1. These are our esti-
mates of   0 / for each park. Thus the numerator is a measure of the contribution of an indi-
vidual park, as a "quality" indicator for an overall recreation trip that included visiting multiple
parks. We recognize this interpretation is a "stretch." It is required because the revealed prefer-
ence literature does not appear to have better measures for how the maintenance of a park con-
tributes to the quality of a recreation trip composed of visiting Southwestern parks. As a result,
we pose a thought experiment. If quality declines associated with lack of maintenance would
eliminate a park from a recreationist's planned portfolio, how much would that person pay to
support the maintenance?

       The second set of information required for our ratio in equation (9) is the share of income
                        0 /
for recreational gear, (  ). We use two sources to estimate the share. The first is an Out-
door Recreation Association (2017) study. The study uses a pre-existing, large, internet panel to
provide a representative sample and asks about expenditures on recreation equipment and partic-
ipation in thirty-eight activities. Their analysis involved a national survey in 2016 of spending
on recreation gear for each of 38 activities. We selected three non-motorized activity groups to
construct the share measures--camping, hiking, and mountaineering. Camping includes trips
that involve sleeping in a tent or in a lodge; hiking was defined as a day hike; and mountaineer-
ing corresponded to a composite of three activities, backpacking, mountaineering, and rock or ice
climbing. The report did not include household incomes of the respondents. To convert these
values to expenditure shares, we use the 2016 median household income as reported by the St.




                                                -23-
Louis Federal Reserve Bank. 14 These annual shares are given for each of the three activities in
the second row of the table.

          Our estimated expenditure share for wildlife viewing was taken from a different source. 15
We use the 2016 National Survey of Fishing Hunting and Wildlife Associated Recreation. This
survey reports equipment expenditures including both for those involving trips around the home
and away from the home. We consider the total of these expenditures, omitting trip related ex-
penses, for our measure of gear related expenses. Median household income for those undertak-
ing wildlife viewing away from home was used to compute these ratios. These estimates are also
reported in the second row of the table.

          The remaining cells in the top panel of Table 1 can then be interpreted as a matrix, with
each row corresponding to one value of   0 / and each column corresponding to one value of
0 /
  . Each cell in the matrix computes the ratio of the two, as used in equation (9). All the
estimates exceed unity, implying the tax, in percentage terms, can exceed the quality improve-
ment for parks in percentage terms. The analysis does not consider whether the revenue raised
would be sufficient to pay for the increase in quality. We consider these estimated ratios as al-
ternative measures for the scaling factor we defined for computing the willingness to pay neutral
price increase for gear. Each provides an alternative estimate, depending on which of the
Southwest parks and type of gear measures was considered most plausible, as an example that
best fits the logic underlying equation (10). The measures for wildlife viewing are the smallest,
but still imply taxes, in percentage terms, could be 30 to 40 percent larger than the percentage
improvement in park quality. If we consider the activity specific gear measures, where the in-
come shares are smaller, the increases can be as large as 4.5 times the percentage improvement
in quality.

          The second panel in the table repeats the logic with a different source for the measure of
the value share for park quality, the Haefele et. al. (2020) stated preference study for alternative
proposals to address the need for added park funding. This study uses a national sample, not one
based on on-site sampling as was the case for the above revealed preference estimates. The con-
14
     The estimate for median income we used was $58,988 in 2016 dollars. See https://fred.stlouisfed.org.
15
  The report did indicate expenditures on wildlife viewing were elicited but did not report them, presum-
ably because the percentage participation was small.


                                                    -24-
tingent valuation question presents alternative policies to reduce the size of the park system by
selling different amounts of parks, presented in terms of acres or sites sold, as a composite in-
cluding nature based, historic, and water based parks with these terms and the total amounts de-
fined in the survey. The nature-based and water-based groups are presented as lost acres (from
the sales), implying portions of the park acres would be sold off, not necessarily individual parks.
For the historic category of parks, the amount sold is presented as sites sold.

       Three alternative sets of losses, along with an annual income tax increase to avoid the
policy are presented in the first choice question. 16 Each respondent is asked to indicate their
most preferred and their least preferred alternatives. The option of no change in parks is includ-
ed with the largest required tax increase of the three presented to each respondent. Separate
amounts of tax increase were set for the no sales case, ranging from $115 to $600. For the cases
with sales the amounts sold ranged from 20 to 40%. For the maximum case and the amount of
the tax increase was always zero. The middle case was a smaller amount of sales, zero to ten
percent, and smaller tax increases, $15 to $100. Fifteen different combinations varying the per-
centages sold and tax amounts with the restrictions on the tax amount for the largest amount sold
and for the no sale cases imposed. A rank logit estimator was used to estimate the willingness to
pay measures.

       The estimates developed for each policy alternative are based on using the estimated pa-
rameters from the model to compute a marginal willingness to pay and rescaling that measure by
the amount (in acres or sites) for the alternative considered. This "unit value" was then the basis
for the willingness to pay measures reported in the bottom panel in Table 1 for this study. Many
questions could be raised about the implicit assumptions in this somewhat ad hoc benefit transfer
strategy to develop these estimates. Due to the limited number of available estimates, we simply
used their estimates for willingness to pay and median income as another alternative basis for the
measuring the park quality share.

       As expected, given the difference in the object of choice used to measure the numerator
of our willingness to pay neutral scaling factor, these ratios are dramatically larger than those


16
  A second choice question explained as independent was asked about different cutbacks in park pro-
grams.


                                                -25-
based on the Parsons et. al (2018) study of specific Southwestern parks. Neither study ideally
matches our needs. This set of estimates, taken as a whole, provide an approximate range of
what to expect for the willingness-to-pay-neutral scaling factor. Given that the scale of the de-
ferred maintenance and associated park quality is large, small overall improvements in the quali-
ty of the system are the likely result of any new funding source. Nevertheless, these "rough" es-
timates suggest a larger price increase (in percentage terms) would not be inconsistent with a
WTP-neutral effect, provided they actually raised sufficient revenue to support the quality en-
hancements. The implication of this assessment is that, based on the logic outlined in Figure 4,
taxes that, as a percent of gear prices, are larger than the park quality increases in percentage
terms can still increase welfare for both buyers and sellers.

7. Concluding Discussion

Our empirical analysis in Section 6 illustrates how our approach to dedicated taxes can be im-
plemented in practice. However, our experience with it has highlighted how far the otherwise
advanced literature on recreation demand currently is from addressing the questions posed here.
Four areas stand out as needing additional attention. First, better, more detailed data is needed
on the actual projects for which public lands need (or claim to need) funding. We attempted to
obtain park-level maintenance information and were told these data did not exist in convenient
form and would be difficult to develop. Second, while travel and other costs incurred by the user
are well studied, more information is needed on the cost of a user-day on public lands. One of
the first comprehensive analyses of the economics of outdoor recreation by Clawson and
Knetsch (1966) devoted two sections to analysis of the costs, but provided only general descrip-
tions of the economic principles underlying cost analysis without specific attention to the meas-
urement of output and how that impacts the treatment of inputs and costs. The CRS (2019) dis-
cussion of deferred maintenance defines maintenance to "...include a variety of activities intend-
ed to preserve assets in an acceptable condition, including activities such as preventative mainte-
nance and replacement of parts, systems, and components" (p. 1). 17 The average cost per user-
day and how it differs at the margin would be useful for setting optimal fees.



17
  It is our understanding the NPS currently is reforming its methodology for measuring deferred mainte-
nance (personal discussion between Smith and Charles Notzon of the NPS, 10/25/2019).


                                                  -26-
         Third, more consideration should be given to the political economy of fees and taxes.
Policy must address the diverse sources of revenue within an agency and the way that revenue is
shared across individual units. For example, Congressional appropriations for each of the 419
units of the NPS are line items in its overall appropriation. These allocations cannot be altered
by the Secretary of Interior or the Director of the National Park Service. Additional revenue
sources may change those appropriations or the way they are allocated across sites. Gate fees at
least have the potential to be kept local, keeping the finance mechanism closer aligned with the
benefit principle and preserving incentives for managers to run their facilities well. In the case
of gear, such subsidies are more likely, as presumably it would be taxed at a national level and
then distributed. How revenue would be shared and the incentives those sharing rules create
would be crucial for understanding the effects of policy, but our analysis here abstracts from
these questions.

         Finally, despite over 50 years of travel cost modeling, the literature on the economic val-
ue of public lands almost entirely ignores the incremental value of mundane investments in
M&O that are the actual everyday concern of managers. It also ignores questions about revenue.
Instead, it focuses almost exclusively on the consumer surplus for the existence of a site, or per-
haps improvements in water quality or air quality. Benefit studies appear to be driven more by
efforts to illustrate new methods than to obtain measures of trade-offs for specific policy ques-
tions.

         Estimates of marginal values for other types of investments, along with their cost, could
help park managers with specific decisions. We have shown that, when public goods are bun-
dled together to a private weak complement, there is a very simple test for whether a gate fee re-
invested in the public good will increase welfare: Namely, that the demand for the private good
shifts up on net. A similar test implies both consumers and sellers of a private good would bene-
fit from a gear tax.

         Our application took a public-finance perspective on the management of public lands.
However, the same approach could be applied to a marketing perspective for private lands or
monopoly-owned weak complements. Interestingly, weak complementarity has been used in
two distinct literatures which, to our knowledge, have not previously been connected. First, it
has been used in non-market valuation for purposes of benefit-cost analysis (Mäler 1974). Sec-


                                                -27-
ond, it has been used in the analysis of private incentives to provide public goods (Anderson and
Parker 2013, Heal 2003). Our theoretical analysis of the gear tax synthesizes these two perspec-
tives. If there is a way for an analyst to estimate value from market behavior, then there is a way
for entrepreneurs and markets to capture that value. Thus, weak complementarity plays a role in
"bottom-up" (Hayekian) as well as "top-down" (Lange-Lerner) approaches to value.




                                               -28-
References

Anderson, Terry L. 1998. "Viewing Wildlife through Coase-Colored Glasses." In Who Owns
      the Environment?, ed. By Peter J. Hill and Roger Meiners. Lanham, MD: Roman & Lit-
      tlefield, pp. 259-82.

Anderson, Terry L., and Donald R. Leal. 2001. Free Market Environmentalism, 2nd ed. New
      York: Palgrave.

Anderson, Terry L., and Dominic P. Parker. 2013. "Transaction Costs and Environmental Mar-
      kets: The Role of Entrepreneurs." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 7(2):
      259-75.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer, Timothy Fitzgerald, and Kurt Schnier. 2013. "Nonregulatory Approaches
      to the Environment: Coasean and Pigouvian Perspectives." Review of Environmental
      Economics and Policy 7(2): 238-58.

Bockstael, Nancy E., and Catherine L. Kling. 1988. "Valuing Environmental Quality: Weak
       Complementarity with Sets of Goods." American Journal of Agricultural Economics
       70(3): 654-62.

Bockstael, Nancy E., and Kenneth E. McConnell. 1993. "Public Goods as Characteristics of
       Non-Market Commodities." Economic Journal 103: 1244-57.

Chichilnisky, Graciela, and Geoffrey Heal. 1998. "Economic Returns from the Biosphere." Na-
       ture 391: 629-30.

Congressional Research Service (CRS). 2015. "Federal Lands Recreation Enhancement Act:
      Overviews and Issues."

Congressional Research Service (CRS). 2019a. "Deferred Maintenance of Federal Land Man-
      agement Agencies: FY2009-FY2018 Estimates and Issues" updated April30. R43997

Congressional Research Service (CRS). 2019b. "Land and Water Conservation Fund: Appro-
      priations for "Other Purposes" updated May 14. R44121

Congressional Research Service (CRS). 2019c. "National Park Service Appropriations: Ten
      Year Trends" (author Laura B. Comay) updated July 2. R42757.

Fretwell, Holly Lippke. 1999. "Paying to Play: The Fee Demonstration Program." PERC Poli-
       cy Series PS-17.

Haefele, Michelle, John Loomis, and Linda J. Bilmes. 2020. "Total Economic Valuation of the
       National Park Service Units and National Park Service Cooperative Programs." In Valu-
       ing U.S. National Parks and Programs: America's Best Investments, ed. by Linda J.
       Bilmes and John B. Loomis. New York: Earthscan from Routledge, pp 16-44.

Heal, Geoffrey. 2000. Nature and the Marketplace: Capturing the Value of Ecosystem Ser-

                                            -29-
       vices. Washington, DC: Island Press.

Heal, Geoffrey. 2003. "Bundling Biodiversity." Journal of the European Economic Association
       1(2-3): 553-60.

Kotchen, Matthew J. 2005. "Impure Public Goods and the Comparative Statics of Environmen-
      tally Friendly Consumption." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 49:
      281­300.

Kotchen, Matthew J. 2006. "Green Markets and Private Provision of Public Goods." Journal of
      Political Economy 114(4): 816-34.

Kotchen, Matthew J. 2013. "Voluntary- and Information-Based Approaches to Environmental
      Management: A Public Economics Perspective." Review of Environmental Economics
      and Policy 7(2): 276-95.

Lindahl, Erik.1958. "Just Taxation ­A Positive Solution" (English translation). In Classics in the
       Theory of Public Finance, edited by R.A. Musgrave and A.T. Peacock. London: Mac-
       millan.

Loomis, John B., and Rodney W. Olson. 1985. "Potential Federal Funding of State Nongame
      Management Programs: Results of a US Fish and Wildlife Service Study." Transactions
      of the North American Wildlife and Natural Resources Conference 50: 374-82.

Lupi, Frank, Daniel J. Phaneuf, and Roger von Haefen. 2020. "Best Practices in Recreation
       Demand Analysis." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, forthcoming.

Madden, Paul. 1991. "A Generalization of Hicksian q Substitutes and Complements with an
     Application to Demand Rationing." Econometrica 59(5): 1497-1508.

Mäler, Karl Göran. 1974. Environmental Economics: A Theoretical Inquiry. Baltimore: John
       Hopkins University Press for Resources for the Future.

Musgrave, Richard A. 1959. The Theory of Public Finance: A Study in Public Economics. New
      York: McGraw Hill Book Co.

Myles, Gareth D. 1995. Public Economics. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Outdoor Recreation Association. 2017. The Economic Contributions of Outdoor Recreation:
      Technical Report on Study Scope, Methods, and Procedures. Fernandina Beach, FL:
      Southwick Associates, August.

Parsons, George, Chris Leggett, Joseph Herriges, Kevin Boyle, Nancy Bockstael, and Zoe Chen.
       2018. "A Site-Portfolio Model for Multiple-Destination Recreation Trips: Valuing Trips
       to National Parks in the Southwestern USA." Unpublished paper. December.

Phaneuf, Daniel J., and V. Kerry Smith. 2005. "Recreation demand models." In Handbook of
      Environmental Economics, Vol. 2, ed. by Karl-Göran Mäler and Jeffrey R. Vincent.

                                               -30-
       (Elsevier)Pp. 671-761.

Ramsey, Frank P. 1927. "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation." Economic Journal 37:47-
      61.

Smith, V. Kerry, and H. Spencer Banzhaf. 2004. "A Diagrammatic Exposition of Weak Com-
       plementarity and the Willig Condition." American Journal of Agricultural Economics
       86: 455-66.

Smith, V. Kerry, and H. Spencer Banzhaf. 2007. "Quality Adjusted Price Indexes and the Wil-
       lig Condition." Economics Letters 94: 43-48

US Department of the Interior (US DOI). 2018a. "Certificate of Apportionment of
     $797,160,562 of the appropriation for Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration (CFDA
     No. 15.611)..." Memorandum FWS/AWSR/AIM:067398. March 20, 2018.

US Department of the Interior (US DOI). 2018b. "Certificate of Apportionment of
     $351,917,483 of the appropriation for Dingell-Johnson Sport Fish Restoration (CFDA
     No. 15.605)..." Memorandum FWS/AWSR/AIM:067398. March 20, 2018.

U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and U.S. Department of Com-
      merce, U.S. Census Bureau. 2016. 2016 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wild-
      life-Associated Recreation.

U.S. Forest Service. 2017. 2018 Budget Overview. https://www.fs.fed.us/sites/default/files/
      usfs-fy18-budget-overview.pdf.

U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO). 2016. National Park Service: Process Exists
      for Prioritizing Asset Maintenance Decisions, But Evaluation Could Improve Efforts.
      Report to Congressional Requesters, December, GAO-17-136

U.S. National Park Service. 2018. National Park Service Fiscal Year 2018 Budget Justifica-
      tions. https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/upload/FY-2018-NPS-Greenbook.pdf.

Walls, Margaret. 2013. Paying for State Parks: Evaluating Alternative Approaches for the 21st
       Century, Resources for the Future Report, January.

Williams, Steve. 2010. "Wellspring of Wildlife Funding: How Hunter and Angler Dollars Fuel
       Wildlife Conservation." The Wildlife Professional (Fall): 35-38.

Willig, Robert D. 1978. "Incremental Consumer's Surplus and Hedonic Price Adjustment."
       Journal of Economic Theory 17(2): 227-53.




                                            -31-
Table 1. Estimates of the Willingness-to-Pay-Neutral Scaling Factor.

    Study
 Parsons et al   Average
(2018) 2002$     Loss Per                                                         Wildlife
                 User by     Share of   Camping Ex-   Hiking ex-                  Viewing
                  Park       Income      penditures   penditures       Mountain   Expenses
Gear Expendi-
ture Share of
   Income                                 0.0044       0.0030           0.0030     0.0100
 Southwest
    Parks

   Arches          185        0.0136       3.109        4.481           2.359      1.355
    Bryce          174        0.0135       3.075        4.433           2.334      1.340
Canyonlands        150        0.0131       3.001        4.326           2.277      1.308
Grand Canyon       227        0.0142       3.239        4.668           2.458      1.411
 Mesa Verde        165        0.0133       3.047        4.392           2.313      1.328
Petrified For-
      est          141        0.0130       2.973        4.286           2.256      1.296
    Zion           186        0.0136       3.112        4.486           2.362      1.356

 Household        74050                                                            79000
  Income
Haefele, Loomis and Bilmas (2020)
2014$
Avoiding Sale
 of in Nature
Based Nation-     1113        0.0177       4.039        5.822           3.065      1.760
   al Parks
Avoiding Sale
 of in Water       978        0.0155                    5.116           2.693      1.546
Based Nation-                              3.549
   al Parks
 All National     2967        0.0471      10.768       15.520           8.171      4.692
     Parks
  Household       63000                                                            79000
   Income




                                            -32-
Figure 1. Increased Value of the Private Good Caused by Improved Public Good




                                    -33-
Figure 2. Value of the Improvement in the Public Good




                        -34-
Figure 3: Fanned Indifference Curves and Weak Complementarity




 Numeraire




                                       -35-
Figure 4. Joint Effects of Gear Tax and Quality Change.

 Price


         A

         B            1                               Supply




                  0
                                E
     1        
                                      C
    0

                      F




                                                          Quantity




                                          -36-
